The Way of Men
Jack Donovan
The Way of Men is The Way of The Gang
L71
"masculinity is about what men want from each other."
L72
"Established men of wealth and power have always wanted men to believe that being a man was about
duty and obedience, or that manhood could be proved by attaining wealth and power through
established channels. Men of religion and ideology have always wanted men to believe that being a man
was a spiritual or moral endeavor, and that manhood could be proved through various means of selfmastery, self-denial, self-sacrifice or evangelism. Men who have something to sell have always wanted
men to believe that masculinity can be proved or improved by buying it."
L87
"Relieved of moral pretense and stripped of folk costumes, the raw masculinity that all men know in
their gut has to do with being good at being a man within a small, embattled gang of men struggling to
survive."
L88
THOUGHT: Need to survive implies necessary exposure to risk?
The Perimeter
L177 "Some researchers believe that the human brain can only process enough information to maintain
meaningful relationships with 150 or so people at any given time."
L220 "As long as other men maintain separate identities, there is always the chance that they will choose to
put the interests of their own ahead of your interests."
L223 "If you put males together for a short period of time and give them something to compete for, they will
form a team of us vs. them."
L255 "When men evaluate each other as men, they still look for the same virtues that they’d need to keep the
perimeter."
The Tactical Virtues
L264 "To the early Romans, virtus meant manliness, and manliness meant martial valor.[4] Demonstrating
virtus meant showing strength and courage and loyalty to the tribe while attacking or defending against
the enemies of Rome."
L272 "The meaning of the word virtus and the Roman idea of manliness expanded to include values that were
not merely survival virtues, but also civic and moral virtues."
L275 "“Civilized” virtue is about being a good person, a good citizen, a good member of a particular society.
Manly virtues should be virtues directly related to manhood."
L279 "The virtues associated specifically with being a man outline a rugged philosophy of living—a way to be
that is also a strategy for prevailing in dire and dangerous times."
L298 "Strength, Courage, Mastery, and Honor. These are the practical virtues of men who must rely on one
another in a worst-case scenario."
L314 "Men who are exceptionally weak or fearful can’t be counted on. Men who are inept in some important
way must either find a way to compensate—and they will try if they are loyal and honorable, if they
want to help with the hunting and fighting—or find other work to do in the tribe. A man of questionable
loyalty, who doesn’t seem to care what the other men think of him or how their tribe is perceived, will
not be trusted by the hunting and fighting gang."

Strength
L369 "Women can demonstrate strength, but strength is a quality that defines masculinity."
L386 "There is no human culture where men who are weak are considered manlier while women who are
more muscular are considered more womanly"
L393 "if we go back to our primal gang—our band of brothers fighting for survival—the value of strength to
the group increases substantially."
L411 "Humans are unequal in their aptitudes. This is one of the cruel but fundamental truths of human life."
L418 "Strength is the ability to exert one’s will over oneself, over nature and over other people."
L419 THOUGHT: using this definition, strength is very amoral, having no right or wrong bend. The amoral
aspect is important as strength may be used to exert pressure or take advantage of weaker parties who
have no ability to defend or fight back. Does moral control have a role in masculinity?
L421 "The word strength can describe a wide range of abilities and powers without losing its primal meaning
or cachet."
L423 "Getting stronger—increasing strength—means increasing your ability, as an individual, a gang or a
nation, to do as you wish with relative impunity."
L435 "The experience of being male is the experience of having greater strength, and strength must be
exercised and demonstrated to be of any worth. When men will not or cannot exercise their strength or
put it to use, strength is decorative and worthless."
Courage
L441 "Courage is kinetic. Courage initiates movement, action or fortitude. Courage exercises strength."
L444 "I will not claim that all exertions of will are courageous, but all acts which require courage are exertions
of will."
L445 "Courage implies a risk. It implies a potential for failure or the presence of danger. Courage is measured
against danger. The greater the danger, the greater the courage. Running into a burning building beats
telling off your boss. Telling off your boss is more courageous than writing a really mean anonymous
note. Acts without meaningful consequences require little courage."
L455 "a certain amount of courage is the product of a successful track record. Is a man who has never won a
fight more courageous for taking on an experienced fighter—no matter how noble the cause—or is he
simply a fool?"
L493 "A demonstration of the willingness to risk one’s own being for the gang proves loyalty and increases a
man’s value to the gang."
L499 "There is nothing wrong with acknowledging the difficulties others face, but we can also acknowledge,
as Aristotle and the Romans did, that courage in its highest and purest form involves the willful risk of
bodily harm or death for the good of the group. Lesser risks require greater dilutions of courage."
L513 "Before we can have a willingness to take risks for the group—call that “high courage”—we must also
possess some kind of “low courage” that amounts to a comfort with risk-taking."
L523 "Men also use strength to advance their own interests and it is foolish to expect them to make endless
sacrifices without personal gain of some kind, be it material or spiritual."
L558 "Most people will not test someone who is feigning gameness if the actor is convincing enough. Feigning
gameness is a means of asserting one’s will, and people do it all the time even in primitive societies."
L569 "When there is no expectation that you will be “saved” or that most people fear the violent retribution
of the state, it is foolish to provoke a dangerous looking man unless you are prepared to fight him."

L574
L583

L592

"Both men and women can be game, but status for human females has rarely depended on a woman’s
willingness to fight."
"Courage is not only the desire to leap into battle or move up in a hierarchy, it is also about defending
position. Masculine men make it clear that they are to be taken seriously, that they have weight, that
they won’t be pushed around."
"Courage is the will to risk harm in order to benefit oneself or others. In its most basic amoral form,
courage is a willingness or passionate desire to fight or hold ground at any cost (gameness, heart, spirit,
thumos)."

Mastery
L624 "While the job description for men undeniably changes according to time, place and culture, the primal
gang virtue that unifies them all is “being able to carry your own weight.”"
L630 "It is far rarer for women or men to volunteer to support a grown, able-bodied man. It is rarer still for
them to support him without resentment."
L637 "One of the problems with massive welfare states is that they make children or beggars of us all, and as
such are an affront and a barrier to adult masculinity."
L643 "Men have a certain natural comfort with interdependency. Claims of complete independence are
generally bullshit. Few of us have ever survived or would be able to survive on our own for an extended
period of time."
L648 "Becoming an interdependent, rather than completely dependent, member of the group means
mastering a set of useful skills and understanding some useful ideas."
L663 "Mastery is a man’s desire and ability to cultivate and demonstrate proficiency and expertise in technics
that aid in the exertion of will over himself, over nature, over women, and over other men."
L681 "mastered skills and technology provide deciding advantages in fighting, hunting and surviving for
human men."
Honor
L690 "For Hobbes, honor was a form of deference, an acknowledgement of power and influence over other
men."
L700 "Reflexive honor is the primitive desire to hit back when hit, to show that you will stand up for yourself."
L715 "cultural honor is ultimately concerned with being a good man, not being good at being a man."
L718 "Honor is used to indicate almost any sort of general esteem, deference or respect."
L722 "“Honor Diversity” is an interesting slogan, because it essentially means “honor everyone and
everything.” If everyone is honored equally, and everyone’s way of life is honored equally, honor has no
hierarchy, and therefore honor has little value according to the economics of supply and demand.
“Honor diversity” doesn’t mean much more than “be nice.”"
L725 THOUGHT: Supply and demand--In order for something to be valued it must be scarce or in short supply
L729 "American men profess the creed of equality, but if you put a bunch of American men in a room or give
them a job to do, they work out their Lord of the Flies hierarchies in the same way that men always
have. The religion of equality gives way to the reality of meritocracy,"
L732 THOUGHT: conflict between the idea that "we're all in this together" (equality) and the heirarchy that
exists in a meritocratic society. Example: corporate culture that expresses that it's a "family" and when
business gets tough then everyone has to make sacrifices, but those at the top are less likely to suffer as
much as those at ghe bottom

L734
L764
L771
L782
L793
L794
L815
L822
L831

L831
L860

L872
L886

"To honor a man is to acknowledge his accomplishments and recognize that he has attained a higher
status within the group."
"Honor relies on face-to-face connections and the possibility of shame or dishonor in the eyes of other
men."
"Honor is a concern for one’s reputation for strength, courage and mastery within the context of an
honor group comprised primarily of other men."
"Caring about what the men around you think of you is a show of respect, and conversely, not caring
what other men think of you is a sign of disrespect."
"Deficient masculinity is simply a lack of strength, courage or mastery."
"Because masculinity and honor are by nature hierarchical, all men are in some way deficient in
masculinity compared to a higher status man."
"Male groups are hierarchical, so while greater dominance is desirable, a certain amount of submission
is essential to any co-operative group of men."
"Flamboyant dishonor is an openly expressed lack of concern for one’s reputation for strength, courage
and mastery within the context of an honor group comprised primarily of other men."
"Fear of the unknown is what drives anxiety about masculinity. Men who are known within a group also
know where they stand within a group. Do men, in general, feel less masculine in a society where they
do not understand or know their role?"
"This fear is a fear of the unknown."
"By expelling effeminate males from the gang or by shaming them and pushing them to the fringes of a
particular group, the group projects strength and unity. The group demonstrates that “we do not
tolerate unmanly men here.”"
"Honor is a powerful concept because it is connected to every man’s primal need to demonstrate that
he is of value to the group—that he is more of an asset than a liability."
"We care what other men think of us, first and foremost, because men have always depended on each
other to survive."

On Being A Good Man
L911 "Men want to believe that they are right, and that their enemies are wrong. To separate us from them,
men find moral fault in their enemies and create codes of conduct to distinguish themselves as good
men."
L961 "We want our external enemies to be defective and unsympathetic. Many have written about our
tendency to dehumanize our foes. Emasculating them is another aspect of that—it adds insult to injury."
L1003 "A man can fail at the job of being a man, but still be a good person."
L1038 "Civilized religious and secular attempts to show men how to be good men all seem to include these
kinds of checks and balances. These “good man” codes tell men to be manly—but not too manly. They
advocate restraint. Restraint of what? It seems as though in one hand we have morality and in the other
we have something else—a kind of maleness that must be guarded against."
L1061 "It’s dishonest to pretend that men who don’t meet a given set of moral standards are unmanly men.
Men may say that immoral men are not real men, but their behavior—including the public admiration
for the virility of roguish and criminal types—shows that they don’t quite believe this."
L1077 "Men of ideas and men of action have much to learn from each other, and the truly great are men of
both action and abstraction."

L1078 "Being good at being a man is about being willing and able to fulfill the natural role of men in a survival
scenario. Being good at being a man is about showing other men that you are the kind of guy they’d
want on their team if the shit hits the fan. Being good at being a man isn’t a quest for moral perfection,
it’s about fighting to survive."
L1105 "To protect the interests of those who run our civilized, highly regulated world, men and women are
mixed to discourage gang formation. Feminists, pacifists, and members of the privileged classes
recognize that brother-bonded men who are good at being men will always be a threat, but forget that
some of those men are necessary to create and maintain order in the first place."
L1124 "A man who is more concerned with being a good man than being good at being a man makes a very
well-behaved slave."
A Check to Civilization
L1284 "As prosperity and security increase, and the need for men to hunt, struggle and fight decreases, the
male desire to engage in gang activity can be controlled and channeled through simulation,
vicariousness, and intellectualization."
L1286 THOUGHT: simulation, vicariousness, and intellectualization are meant to fulfill the modern void created
by lack of actual fighting or war
L1361 "As opportunities for men to do what they evolved to do decrease, greater emphasis is placed on
simulated, vicarious, and intellectualized channels of masculinity to maintain order and cultural unity."
L1393 "Men are dropping out and disengaging from our slick, easy, safe world. For what may be the first time
in history, the average guy can afford to be careless. Nothing he does really matters, and—what’s
worse—there is a shrinking hope of any future where what he does will matter."
L1396 THOUGHT: This really hit home... In reference to my current employer the lack of belonging to a tribe
and work that creates any sort of challenge has effectively led me to "tune out"
L1414 "Demonstrating your manliness to other men doesn’t mean much if women are doing all of the same
things that men are doing."
L1421 "The introduction of women into a field of competition short-circuits its viability as a substitute for male
gang activity."
L1424 "As a general rule, if you introduce women into the mix, men either shift their focus from impressing
each other to impressing the women, or they lose interest altogether and do just enough to get by."
L1431 "Boys are scolded even for their violent fantasies—for the violent stories they want to hear, the violent
books they want to read, the violent games they want to play."
L1432 THOUGHT: Reference to violence in video games...I remember having to sneak a Duke Nukem
Playstation game past mom
L1441 "The repudiation of violent masculinity is the murder of male identity."
L1460 "The emotional needs of men are not being met by a world that repudiates The Way of Men, but so long
as their material needs are being met, men may choose not to make war against the world."
The Bonobo Masturbation Society
L1475 "Human males evolved to compete for access to females because female reproductive investment is a
valuable prize."
L1546 "Bonobos and chimpanzees are adapted to different environments, and their social structures follow
from what those environments have to offer. Bonobo society favors female interests. Female coalitions
hold sway over politics, and female bonding is more important than male bonding. Males are bonded to

L1588
L1596
L1611

L1622
L1655

L1679

their mothers and don’t know who their fathers are. Females stay together for life. In chimpanzee
society, females are somewhat isolated and stay with their young when they are children, while males
enjoy both rivalry and camaraderie, and stay with their fathers, brothers and male friends for life.
Chimpanzee society favors male interests."
"Our bodies have a tremendous capacity for work when we are conditioned for it. The human body is
made to work hard. When there is no work to do, our physical health deteriorates."
"The goal of civilization seems to be to eliminate work and risk, but the world has changed more than
we have. Our bodies crave work and sex, our minds crave risk and conflict."
"As coalitions of females, pandering politicians and fearful men organize to child-proof our world, to ban
guns and regulate violent sports, men retreat to redoubts of virtual and vicarious masculinity like video
games and fantasy football because it’s all they have left."
"The carefully orchestrated, sanitized, padded, insured and permitted exercise rarely compares to the
fantasy of virile action and meaningful risk."
"Reimaginers of masculinity offer us metaphorical battles to fight, but in the real world the most
meaningful battles will be “fought” between elite bureaucrats and experts and wealthy managers who
believe they know what is best, while the rest of us shuffle off to boring, risk-free jobs to do idiot work
and stare at the clock, waiting to go home and furiously indulge ourselves in whatever form of vicarious
or virtual primitive experience gets us off."
"even so-called white-collar “knowledge work” is “subject to routinization and degradation, proceeding
by the same logic that hit manufacturing a hundred years ago: the cognitive elements of the job are
appropriated from professionals, instantiated in a system or process, and then handed back to a new
class of workers—clerks—who replace the professionals.”"

What is Best in Life?
L1778 "The true “crisis of masculinity” is the ongoing and ever-changing struggle to find an acceptable
compromise between the primal gang masculinity that men have been selected for over the course of
human evolutionary history, and the level of restraint required of men to maintain a desirable level of
order in a given civilization."
L1798 "Modern men are not merely lacking initiation into manhood, as some have suggested, they are lacking
meaningful trials of strength and courage."
L1822 "“Can men change?” is the wrong question. Better questions are: “Why should men change?” and
“What does the average guy get out of the deal?”"
L1829 "Feminists, elite bureaucrats, and wealthy men all have something to gain for themselves by pitching
widespread male passivity. The way of the gang disrupts stable systems, threatens the business interests
(and social status) of the wealthy, and creates danger and uncertainty for women."
L1842 "Civilization comes at a cost of manliness. It comes at a cost of wildness, of risk, of strife. It comes at a
cost of strength, of courage, of mastery."
L1866 "Strength requires an opposing force, courage requires risk, mastery requires hard work, honor requires
accountability to other men."
L1869 "Men must have some work to do that’s worth doing, some sense of meaningful action."
Start the World
L1896 "The Men’s Rights Movement seeks equity with women, and therefore points in the same direction as
feminism."

L1911 "Today’s robber-barons and fat cats are figureheads that captain global enterprises which can basically
function without them. The reigning presidents and CEOs are often as disposable as the workers. They
come and go. There is no “Man.” There is only the profit-driven, hydra-headed legal entity, whose
workers make cost/benefit analyses to increase profit and further their own status and salary, usually
with an eye on producing immediate, short-term results."
L1941 "Men and women alike can be tremendously generous and self-sacrificing, but on an average day we’ll
take care of our own interests first. That’s the Way of People."
L2029 "The new Way of Women depends on prosperity, security, and globalism."
How To Start A Gang
L2122 "Gang - A bonded, hierarchical coalition of males allied to assert their interests against external forces."

