PRAISE FOR THE OBSTACLE IS THE WAY
“A book for the bedside of every future—and current—leader in the
world.”
—ROBERT GREENE, author of The 48 Laws of Power and Mastery
“Ryan brings philosophy out from the classroom and thrusts it back
where it belongs, in our daily lives, helping anyone approaching any
problem address it with equanimity and poise. A kind of user’s
manual for life, you will turn to it time and time again and learn to
tear through any obstacle and resolve any conflict. An absolute
must-read.”
—JIMMY SONI, managing editor of The Huffington Post, author of
Rome’s Last Citizen
“First came Marcus Aurelius, then Frederick the Great . . . and now
there’s you. This surprising book shows you how to craft a life of
wonder by embracing obstacles and challenge.”
—CHRIS GUILLEBEAU, author of The $100 Startup
“In this tight, engaging book, Ryan Holiday shines a bright, powerful
light on the path to living and leading well. By showing us how to
turn failure, obstacles, and plain old everyday frustration to our
advantage, he offers up a host of easy-to-use tactics that each of us
can put to work to follow our dreams. Read it , learn from it, and get
cracking!”
—NANCY F. KOEHN, historian and leadership expert, Harvard Business
School
“My life has been beset with obstacles. It takes practice (and pain) to
surmount them and achieve success. Ryan’s book is a how-to guide
for just that.”
—JAMES ALTUCHER, investor and author of Choose Yourself

“If there’s such a thing as a cargo-pocket handbook for Jedi knights,
this is it. Ryan Holiday’s The Obstacle is the Way decants in
concentrated form the timeless techniques for self-mastery as
employed to world-conquering effect by philosophers and men of
action from Alexander the Great to Marcus Aurelius to Steve Jobs.
Follow these precepts and you will revolutionize your life. As Mr.
Holiday writes, ‘It’s simple, it’s just not easy.’ Read this book!”
—STEVEN PRESSFIELD, author of The War of Art and Gates of Fire
“Beautifully crafted. Anyone who wants to be better should read this.”
—KAMAL RAVIKANT author of Love Yourself Like Your Life Depends On
It and Live Your Truth
“Inspired by Marcus Aurelius and concepts of Stoicism, Ryan
Holiday has written a brilliant and engaging book, well beyond his
years, teaching us how to deal with life’s adversities and to turn
negatives into positives. It is invaluable.”
—HONORABLE FREDERIC BLOCK, judge, U.S. District Court
“Ryan Holiday teaches us how to summon our best selves. Most of
us spend our lives dodging the hard stuff. Holiday exposes the
tragic fallacy of this approach to living and offers us instead the
philosophy of the Stoics, whose timeless lessons lead us out of fear,
difficulty, and paralysis to triumph.”
— SHARON LEBELL, author of The Art of Living

PORTFOLIO / PENGUIN
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) LLC
375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014
USA | Canada | UK | Ireland | Australia | New Zealand | India | South Africa | China
penguin.com
A Penguin Random House Company
First published by Portfolio / Penguin, a member of Penguin Group (USA) LLC, 2014
Copyright © 2014 by Ryan Holiday
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes
free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of
this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing
any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing
Penguin to continue to publish books for every reader.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Holiday, Ryan.
The obstacle is the way : the timeless art of turning trials into triumph / Ryan Holiday.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-101-62059-5
1. Motivation (Psychology) 2. Self-realization. I. Title.
BF503.H65 2014
158—dc23
2013039949
Version_1

CONTENTS

Praise for The Obstacle Is the Way
Title Page
Copyright
Preface
Introduction
PART I: PERCEPTION
THE DISCIPLINE OF PERCEPTION
RECOGNIZE YOUR POWER
STEADY YOUR NERVES
CONTROL YOUR EMOTIONS
PRACTICE OBJECTIVITY
ALTER YOUR PERSPECTIVE
IS IT UP TO YOU?
LIVE IN THE PRESENT MOMENT
THINK DIFFERENTLY
FINDING THE OPPORTUNITY
PREPARE TO ACT
PART II: ACTION
THE DISCIPLINE OF ACTION
GET MOVING
PRACTICE PERSISTENCE
ITERATE
FOLLOW THE PROCESS
DO YOUR JOB, DO IT RIGHT
WHAT’S RIGHT IS WHAT WORKS
IN PRAISE OF THE FLANK ATTACK
USE OBSTACLES AGAINST THEMSELVES

CHANNEL YOUR ENERGY
SEIZE THE OFFENSIVE
PREPARE FOR NONE OF IT TO WORK

PART III: WILL
THE DISCIPLINE OF THE WILL
BUILD YOUR INNER CITADEL
ANTICIPATION (THINKING NEGATIVELY)
THE ART OF ACQUIESCENCE
LOVE EVERYTHING THAT HAPPENS: AMOR FATI
PERSEVERANCE
SOMETHING BIGGER THAN YOURSELF
MEDITATE ON YOUR MORTALITY
PREPARE TO START AGAIN

Final Thoughts: The Obstacle Becomes the Way
Postscript: You’re Now A Philosopher. Congratulations
Acknowledgments
Selected Bibliography
The Stoic Reading List
Reading Recommendations

PREFACE

I

n the year 170, at night in his tent on the front lines of the war in
Germania, Marcus Aurelius, the emperor of the Roman Empire,
sat down to write. Or perhaps it was before dawn at the palace in
Rome. Or he stole a few seconds to himself during the games,
ignoring the carnage on the floor of the Colosseum below. The exact
location is not important. What matters is that this man, known today
as the last of the Five Good Emperors, sat down to write.
Not to an audience or for publication but to himself, for himself.
And what he wrote is undoubtedly one of history’s most effective
formulas for overcoming every negative situation we may encounter
in life. A formula for thriving not just in spite of whatever happens but
because of it.
At that moment, he wrote only a paragraph. Only a little of it was
original. Almost every thought could, in some form or another, be
found in the writings of his mentors and idols. But in a scant eightyfive words Marcus Aurelius so clearly defined and articulated a
timeless idea that he eclipses the great names of those who came
before him: Chrysippus, Zeno, Cleanthes, Ariston, Apollonius, Junius
Rusticus, Epictetus, Seneca, Musonius Rufus.
It is more than enough for us.
Our actions may be impeded . . . but there can be no impeding
our intentions or dispositions. Because we can accommodate
and adapt. The mind adapts and converts to its own purposes
the obstacle to our acting.

And then he concluded with powerful words destined for maxim.
The impediment to action advances action.
What stands in the way becomes the way.
In Marcus’s words is the secret to an art known as turning
obstacles upside down. To act with “a reverse clause,” so there is
always a way out or another route to get to where you need to go.
So that setbacks or problems are always expected and never
permanent. Making certain that what impedes us can empower us.
Coming from this particular man, these were not idle words. In his
own reign of some nineteen years, he would experience nearly
constant war, a horrific plague, possible infidelity, an attempt at the
throne by one of his closest allies, repeated and arduous travel
across the empire—from Asia Minor to Syria, Egypt, Greece, and
Austria—a rapidly depleting treasury, an incompetent and greedy
stepbrother as co-emperor, and on and on and on.
And from what we know, he truly saw each and every one of these
obstacles as an opportunity to practice some virtue: patience,
courage, humility, resourcefulness, reason, justice, and creativity.
The power he held never seemed to go to his head—neither did the
stress or burden. He rarely rose to excess or anger, and never to
hatred or bitterness. As Matthew Arnold, the essayist, remarked in
1863, in Marcus we find a man who held the highest and most
powerful station in the world—and the universal verdict of the people
around him was that he proved himself worthy of it.
It turns out that the wisdom of that short passage from Marcus
Aurelius can be found in others as well, men and women who
followed it like he did. In fact, it is a remarkable constant down
through the ages.
One can trace the thread from those days in the decline and fall of
the Roman Empire to the creative outpouring of the Renaissance to
the breakthroughs of the Enlightenment. It’s seen starkly in the
pioneer spirit of the American West, the perseverance of the Union
cause during the Civil War, and in the bustle of the Industrial
Revolution. It appeared again in the bravery of the leaders of the civil

rights movement and stood tall in the prison camps of Vietnam. And
today it surges in the DNA of the entrepreneurs of Silicon Valley.
This philosophic approach is the driving force of self-made men
and the succor to those in positions with great responsibility or great
trouble. On the battlefield or in the boardroom, across oceans and
many centuries, members of every group, gender, class, cause, and
business have had to confront obstacles and struggle to overcome
them—learning to turn those obstacles upside down.
That struggle is the one constant in all of their lives. Knowingly or
not, each individual was a part of an ancient tradition, employing it to
navigate the timeless terrain of opportunities and difficulties, trial and
triumph.
We are the rightful heirs to this tradition. It’s our birthright.
Whatever we face, we have a choice: Will we be blocked by
obstacles, or will we advance through and over them?
We might not be emperors, but the world is still constantly testing
us. It asks: Are you worthy? Can you get past the things that
inevitably fall in your way? Will you stand up and show us what
you’re made of?
Plenty of people have answered this question in the affirmative.
And a rarer breed still has shown that they not only have what it
takes, but they thrive and rally at every such challenge. That the
challenge makes them better than if they’d never faced the adversity
at all.
Now it’s your turn to see if you’re one of them, if you’ll join their
company.
This book will show you the way.

INTRODUCTION

T

his thing in front of you. This issue. This obstacle—this
frustrating, unfortunate, problematic, unexpected problem
preventing you from doing what you want to do. That thing you dread
or secretly hope will never happen. What if it wasn’t so bad?
What if embedded inside it or inherent in it were certain benefits—
benefits only for you? What would you do? What do you think most
people would do?
Probably what they’ve always done, and what you are doing right
now: nothing.
Let’s be honest: Most of us are paralyzed. Whatever our individual
goals, most of us sit frozen before the many obstacles that lie ahead
of us.
We wish it weren’t true, but it is.
What blocks us is clear. Systemic: decaying institutions, rising
unemployment, skyrocketing costs of education, and technological
disruption. Individual: too short, too old, too scared, too poor, too
stressed, no access, no backers, no confidence. How skilled we are
at cataloging what holds us back!
Every obstacle is unique to each of us. But the responses they
elicit are the same: Fear. Frustration. Confusion. Helplessness.
Depression. Anger.
You know what you want to do but it feels like some invisible
enemy has you boxed in, holding you down with pillows. You try to
get somewhere, but something invariably blocks the path, following
and thwarting each move you make. You have just enough freedom

to feel like you can move; just enough to feel like it’s your fault when
you can’t seem to follow through or build momentum.
We’re dissatisfied with our jobs, our relationships, our place in the
world. We’re trying to get somewhere, but something stands in the
way.
So we do nothing.
We blame our bosses, the economy, our politicians, other people,
or we write ourselves off as failures or our goals as impossible.
When really only one thing is at fault: our attitude and approach.
There have been countless lessons (and books) about achieving
success, but no one ever taught us how to overcome failure, how to
think about obstacles, how to treat and triumph over them, and so
we are stuck. Beset on all sides, many of us are disoriented,
reactive, and torn. We have no idea what to do.
On the other hand, not everyone is paralyzed. We watch in awe
as some seem to turn those very obstacles, which stymie us, into
launching pads for themselves. How do they do that? What’s the
secret?
Even more perplexing, earlier generations faced worse problems
with fewer safety nets and fewer tools. They dealt with the same
obstacles we have today plus the ones they worked so hard to try to
eliminate for their children and others. And yet . . . we’re still stuck.
What do these figures have that we lack? What are we missing?
It’s simple: a method and a framework for understanding,
appreciating, and acting upon the obstacles life throws at us.
John D. Rockefeller had it—for him it was cool headedness and
self-discipline. Demosthenes, the great Athenian orator, had it—for
him it was a relentless drive to improve himself through action and
practice. Abraham Lincoln had it—for him it was humility, endurance,
and compassionate will.
There are other names you’ll see again and again in this book:
Ulysses S. Grant. Thomas Edison. Margaret Thatcher. Samuel
Zemurray. Amelia Earhart. Erwin Rommel. Dwight D. Eisenhower.
Richard Wright. Jack Johnson. Theodore Roosevelt. Steve Jobs.
James Stockdale. Laura Ingalls Wilder. Barack Obama.
Some of these men and women faced unimaginable horrors, from
imprisonment to debilitating illnesses, in addition to day-to-day

frustrations that were no different from ours. They dealt with the
same rivalries, political headwinds, drama, resistance, conservatism,
breakups, stresses, and economic calamities. Or worse.
Subjected to those pressures, these individuals were transformed.
They were transformed along the lines that Andy Grove, former CEO
of Intel, outlined when he described what happens to businesses in
tumultuous times: “Bad companies are destroyed by crisis. Good
companies survive them. Great companies are improved by them.”
Great individuals, like great companies, find a way to transform
weakness into strength. It’s a rather amazing and even touching feat.
They took what should have held them back—what in fact might be
holding you back right this very second—and used it to move
forward.
As it turns out, this is one thing all great men and women of
history have in common. Like oxygen to a fire, obstacles became
fuel for the blaze that was their ambition. Nothing could stop them,
they were (and continue to be) impossible to discourage or contain.
Every impediment only served to make the inferno within them burn
with greater ferocity.
These were people who flipped their obstacles upside down. Who
lived the words of Marcus Aurelius and followed a group which
Cicero called the only “real philosophers”—the ancient Stoics—even
if they’d never read them.* They had the ability to see obstacles for
what they were, the ingenuity to tackle them, and the will to endure a
world mostly beyond their comprehension and control.
Let’s be honest. Most of the time we don’t find ourselves in
horrible situations we must simply endure. Rather, we face some
minor disadvantage or get stuck with some less-than-favorable
conditions. Or we’re trying to do something really hard and find
ourselves outmatched, overstretched, or out of ideas. Well, the same
logic applies. Turn it around. Find some benefit. Use it as fuel.
It’s simple. Simple but, of course, not easy.
This is not a book of gushing, hazy optimism. This is not a book
that tells you to deny when stuff sucks or to turn the other cheek
when you’ve been completely screwed over. There will be no folksy
sayings or cute but utterly ineffectual proverbs.

This is also not an academic study or history of Stoicism. There is
plenty written about Stoicism out there, much of it by some of the
wisest and greatest thinkers who ever lived. There is no need to
rewrite what they have written—go read the originals. No philosophic
writing is more accessible. It feels like it was written last year, not last
millennium.
But I have done my best to collect, understand, and now publish
their lessons and tricks. Ancient philosophy never cared much for
authorship or originality—all writers did their best to translate and
explain the wisdom of the greats as it has been passed down in
books, diaries, songs, poems, and stories. All of these, refined in the
crucible of human experience over thousands of years.
This book will share with you their collective wisdom in order to
help you accomplish the very specific and increasingly urgent goal
we all share: overcoming obstacles. Mental obstacles. Physical
obstacles. Emotional obstacles. Perceived obstacles.
We face them every day and our society is collectively paralyzed
by this. If all this book does is make facing and dismantling such
stumbling blocks a little easier, it will be enough. But my aim is
higher. I want to show you the way to turn every obstacle into an
advantage.
So this will be a book of ruthless pragmatism and stories from
history that illustrate the arts of relentless persistence and
indefatigable ingenuity. It teaches you how to get unstuck, unfucked,
and unleashed. How to turn the many negative situations we
encounter in our lives into positive ones—or at least to snatch
whatever benefit we can from them. To steal good fortune from
misfortune.
It’s not just: How can I think this is not so bad? No, it is how to will
yourself to see that this must be good—an opportunity to gain a new
foothold, move forward, or go in a better direction. Not “be positive”
but learn to be ceaselessly creative and opportunistic.
Not: This is not so bad.
But: I can make this good.
Because it can be done. In fact, it has and is being done. Every
day. That’s the power we will unlock in this book.

The Obstacles That Lie Before Us
There is an old Zen story about a king whose people had grown soft
and entitled. Dissatisfied with this state of affairs, he hoped to teach
them a lesson. His plan was simple: He would place a large boulder
in the middle of the main road, completely blocking entry into the city.
He would then hide nearby and observe their reactions.
How would they respond? Would they band together to remove it?
Or would they get discouraged, quit, and return home?
With growing disappointment, the king watched as subject after
subject came to this impediment and turned away. Or, at best, tried
halfheartedly before giving up. Many openly complained or cursed
the king or fortune or bemoaned the inconvenience, but none
managed to do anything about it.
After several days, a lone peasant came along on his way into
town. He did not turn away. Instead he strained and strained, trying
to push it out of the way. Then an idea came to him: He scrambled
into the nearby woods to find something he could use for leverage.
Finally, he returned with a large branch he had crafted into a lever
and deployed it to dislodge the massive rock from the road.
Beneath the rock were a purse of gold coins and a note from the
king, which said:
“The obstacle in the path becomes the path. Never forget,
within every obstacle is an opportunity to improve our
condition.”
What holds you back?
The Physical? Size. Race. Distance. Disability. Money.
The Mental? Fear. Uncertainty. Inexperience. Prejudice.
Perhaps people don’t take you seriously. Or you think you’re too
old. Or you lack support or enough resources. Maybe laws or
regulations restrict your options. Or your obligations do. Or false
goals and self-doubt.
Whatever it is, here you are. Here we all are.
And . . .
These are obstacles. I get it. No one is denying that.

But run down the list of those who came before you. Athletes who
were too small. Pilots whose eyesight wasn’t good enough.
Dreamers ahead of their time. Members of this race or that.
Dropouts and dyslexics. Bastards, immigrants, nouveaux riches,
sticklers, believers, and dreamers. Or those who came from nothing
or worse, from places where their very existence was threatened on
a daily basis. What happened to them?
Well, far too many gave up. But a few didn’t. They took “twice as
good” as a challenge. They practiced harder. Looked for shortcuts
and weak spots. Discerned allies among strange faces. Got kicked
around a bit. Everything was an obstacle they had to flip.
And so?
Within those obstacles was an opportunity. They seized it. They
did something special because of it. We can learn from them.
Whether we’re having trouble getting a job, fighting against
discrimination, running low on funds, stuck in a bad relationship,
locking horns with some aggressive opponent, have an employee or
student we just can’t seem to reach, or are in the middle of a creative
block, we need to know that there is a way. When we meet with
adversity, we can turn it to advantage, based on their example.
All great victories, be they in politics, business, art, or seduction,
involved resolving vexing problems with a potent cocktail of
creativity, focus, and daring. When you have a goal, obstacles are
actually teaching you how to get where you want to go—carving you
a path. “The Things which hurt,” Benjamin Franklin wrote, “instruct.”
Today, most of our obstacles are internal, not external. Since
World War II we have lived in some of the most prosperous times in
history. There are fewer armies to face, fewer fatal diseases and far
more safety nets. But the world still rarely does exactly what we
want.
Instead of opposing enemies, we have internal tension. We have
professional frustration. We have unmet expectations. We have
learned helplessness. And we still have the same overwhelming
emotions humans have always had: grief, pain, loss.
Many of our problems come from having too much: rapid
technological disruption, junk food, traditions that tell us the way
we’re supposed to live our lives. We’re soft, entitled, and scared of

conflict. Great times are great softeners. Abundance can be its own
obstacle, as many people can attest.
Our generation needs an approach for overcoming obstacles and
thriving amid chaos more than ever. One that will help turn our
problems on their heads, using them as canvases on which to paint
master works. This flexible approach is fit for an entrepreneur or an
artist, a conqueror or a coach, whether you’re a struggling writer or a
sage or a hardworking soccer mom.

The Way Through Them
Objective judgment, now at this very moment.
Unselfish action, now at this very moment.
Willing acceptance—now at this very moment—of all external events.
That’s all you need.
—MARCUS AURELIUS

Overcoming obstacles is a discipline of three critical steps.
It begins with how we look at our specific problems, our attitude or
approach; then the energy and creativity with which we actively
break them down and turn them into opportunities; finally, the
cultivation and maintenance of an inner will that allows us to handle
defeat and difficulty.
It’s three interdependent, interconnected, and fluidly contingent
disciplines: Perception, Action, and the Will.
It’s a simple process (but again, never easy).
We will trace the use of this process by its practitioners throughout
history, business, and literature. As we look at specific examples of
each step from every angle, we’ll learn to inculcate this attitude and
capture its ingenuity—and by doing so discover how to create new
openings wherever a door is shut.
From the stories of the practitioners we’ll learn how to handle
common obstacles—whether we’re locked out or hemmed in, the
kind of obstacles that have impeded people for all time—and how to
apply their general approach to our lives. Because obstacles are not
only to be expected but embraced.
Embraced?

Yes, because these obstacles are actually opportunities to test
ourselves, to try new things, and, ultimately, to triumph.
The Obstacle Is the Way.

PART I

Perception

WHAT IS PERCEPTION? It’s how we see and understand what
occurs around us—and what we decide those events will mean. Our
perceptions can be a source of strength or of great weakness. If we
are emotional, subjective and shortsighted, we only add to our
troubles. To prevent becoming overwhelmed by the world around us,
we must, as the ancients practiced, learn how to limit our passions
and their control over our lives. It takes skill and discipline to bat
away the pests of bad perceptions, to separate reliable signals from
deceptive ones, to filter out prejudice, expectation, and fear. But it’s
worth it, for what’s left is truth. While others are excited or afraid, we
will remain calm and imperturbable. We will see things simply and
straightforwardly, as they truly are—neither good nor bad. This will
be an incredible advantage for us in the fight against obstacles.

THE DISCIPLINE OF PERCEPTION

B

efore he was an oilman, John D. Rockefeller was a bookkeeper
and aspiring investor—a small-time financier in Cleveland, Ohio.
The son of an alcoholic criminal who’d abandoned his family, the
young Rockefeller took his first job in 1855 at the age of sixteen (a
day he celebrated as “Job Day” for the rest of his life). All was well
enough at fifty cents a day.
Then the panic struck. Specifically, the Panic of 1857, a massive
national financial crisis that originated in Ohio and hit Cleveland
particularly hard. As businesses failed and the price of grain
plummeted across the country, westward expansion quickly came to
a halt. The result was a crippling depression that lasted for several
years.
Rockefeller could have gotten scared. Here was the greatest
market depression in history and it hit him just as he was finally
getting the hang of things. He could have pulled out and run like his
father. He could have quit finance altogether for a different career
with less risk. But even as a young man, Rockefeller had sangfroid:
unflappable coolness under pressure. He could keep his head while
he was losing his shirt. Better yet, he kept his head while everyone
else lost theirs.
And so instead of bemoaning this economic upheaval, Rockefeller
eagerly observed the momentous events. Almost perversely, he
chose to look at it all as an opportunity to learn, a baptism in the
market. He quietly saved his money and watched what others did
wrong. He saw the weaknesses in the economy that many took for
granted and how this left them all unprepared for change or shocks.

He internalized an important lesson that would stay with him
forever: The market was inherently unpredictable and often vicious—
only the rational and disciplined mind could hope to profit from it.
Speculation led to disaster, he realized, and he needed to always
ignore the “mad crowd” and its inclinations.
Rockefeller immediately put those insights to use. At twenty-five, a
group of investors offered to invest approximately $500,000 at his
direction if he could find the right oil wells in which to deploy the
money. Grateful for the opportunity, Rockefeller set out to tour the
nearby oil fields. A few days later, he shocked his backers by
returning to Cleveland empty-handed, not having spent or invested a
dollar of the funds. The opportunity didn’t feel right to him at the time,
no matter how excited the rest of the market was—so he refunded
the money and stayed away from drilling.
It was this intense self-discipline and objectivity that allowed
Rockefeller to seize advantage from obstacle after obstacle in his
life, during the Civil War, and the panics of 1873, 1907, and 1929. As
he once put it: He was inclined to see the opportunity in every
disaster. To that we could add: He had the strength to resist
temptation or excitement, no matter how seductive, no matter the
situation.
Within twenty years of that first crisis, Rockefeller would alone
control 90 percent of the oil market. His greedy competitors had
perished. His nervous colleagues had sold their shares and left the
business. His weak-hearted doubters had missed out.
For the rest of his life, the greater the chaos, the calmer
Rockefeller would become, particularly when others around him
were either panicked or mad with greed. He would make much of his
fortune during these market fluctuations—because he could see
while others could not. This insight lives on today in Warren Buffet’s
famous adage to “be fearful when others are greedy and greedy
when others are fearful.” Rockefeller, like all great investors, could
resist impulse in favor of cold, hard common sense.
One critic, in awe of Rockefeller’s empire, described the Standard
Oil trust as a “mythical protean creature” capable of metamorphosing
with every attempt by the competitors or the government to
dismantle it. They meant it as a criticism, but it was actually a

function of Rockefeller’s personality: resilient, adaptable, calm,
brilliant. He could not be rattled—not by economic crisis, not by a
glittery mirage of false opportunities, not by aggressive, bullying
enemies, not even by federal prosecutors (for whom he was a
notoriously difficult witness to cross-examine, never rising to take the
bait or defend himself or get upset).
Was he born this way? No. This was learned behavior. And
Rockefeller got this lesson in discipline somewhere. It began in that
crisis of 1857 in what he called “the school of adversity and stress.”
“Oh, how blessed young men are who have to struggle for a
foundation and beginning in life,” he once said. “I shall never cease
to be grateful for the three and half years of apprenticeship and the
difficulties to be overcome, all along the way.”
Of course, many people experienced the same perilous times as
Rockefeller—they all attended the same school of bad times. But few
reacted as he did. Not many had trained themselves to see
opportunity inside this obstacle, that what befell them was not
unsalvageable misfortune but the gift of education—a chance to
learn from a rare moment in economic history.
You will come across obstacles in life—fair and unfair. And you
will discover, time and time again, that what matters most is not what
these obstacles are but how we see them, how we react to them,
and whether we keep our composure. You will learn that this reaction
determines how successful we will be in overcoming—or possibly
thriving because of—them.
Where one person sees a crisis, another can see opportunity.
Where one is blinded by success, another sees reality with ruthless
objectivity. Where one loses control of emotions, another can remain
calm. Desperation, despair, fear, powerlessness—these reactions
are functions of our perceptions. You must realize: Nothing makes us
feel this way; we choose to give in to such feelings. Or, like
Rockefeller, choose not to.
And it is precisely at this divergence—between how Rockefeller
perceived his environment and how the rest of the world typically
does—that his nearly incomprehensible success was born. His
careful, cautious self-confidence was an incredible form of power. To
perceive what others see as negative, as something to be

approached rationally, clearly, and, most important, as an opportunity
—not as something to fear or bemoan.
Rockefeller is more than just an analogy.
We live in our own Gilded Age. In less than a decade, we’ve
experienced two major economic bubbles, entire industries are
crumbling, lives have been disrupted. What feels like unfairness
abounds. Financial downturns, civil unrest, adversity. People are
afraid and discouraged, angry and upset and gathered in Zuccotti
Park or in communities online. As they should be, right?
Not necessarily.
Outward appearances are deceptive. What’s within them, beneath
them, is what matters.
We can learn to perceive things differently, to cut through the
illusions that others believe or fear. We can stop seeing the
“problems” in front of us as problems. We can learn to focus on what
things really are.
Too often we react emotionally, get despondent, and lose our
perspective. All that does is turn bad things into really bad things.
Unhelpful perceptions can invade our minds—that sacred place of
reason, action and will—and throw off our compass.
Our brains evolved for an environment very different from the one
we currently inhabit. As a result, we carry all kinds of biological
baggage. Humans are still primed to detect threats and dangers that
no longer exist—think of the cold sweat when you’re stressed about
money, or the fight-or-flight response that kicks in when your boss
yells at you. Our safety is not truly at risk here—there is little danger
that we will starve or that violence will break out—though it certainly
feels that way sometimes.
We have a choice about how we respond to this situation (or any
situation, for that matter). We can be blindly led by these primal
feelings or we can understand them and learn to filter them.
Discipline in perception lets you clearly see the advantage and the
proper course of action in every situation—without the pestilence of
panic or fear.
Rockefeller understood this well and threw off the fetters of bad,
destructive perceptions. He honed the ability to control and channel
and understand these signals. It was like a superpower; because

most people can’t access this part of themselves, they are slaves to
impulses and instincts they have never questioned.
We can see disaster rationally. Or rather, like Rockefeller, we can
see opportunity in every disaster, and transform that negative
situation into an education, a skill set, or a fortune. Seen properly,
everything that happens—be it an economic crash or a personal
tragedy—is a chance to move forward. Even if it is on a bearing that
we did not anticipate.
There are a few things to keep in mind when faced with a
seemingly insurmountable obstacle. We must try:
To be objective
To control emotions and keep an even keel
To choose to see the good in a situation
To steady our nerves
To ignore what disturbs or limits others
To place things in perspective
To revert to the present moment
To focus on what can be controlled
This is how you see the opportunity within the obstacle. It does
not happen on its own. It is a process—one that results from selfdiscipline and logic.
And that logic is available to you. You just need to deploy it.

RECOGNIZE YOUR POWER

Choose not to be harmed—and you won’t feel harmed. Don’t feel
harmed—and you haven’t been.
—MARCUS AURELIUS

R

ubin “Hurricane” Carter, a top contender for the middleweight
title, at the height of his boxing career in the mid-1960s, was
wrongly accused of a horrific crime he did not commit: triple
homicide. He went on trial, and a biased, bogus verdict followed:
three life sentences.
It was a dizzying fall from the heights of success and fame. Carter
reported to prison in an expensive, tailored suit, wearing a $5,000
diamond ring and a gold watch. And so, waiting in line to be entered
into the general inmate population, he asked to speak to someone in
charge.
Looking the warden in the eye, Carter proceeded to inform him
and the guards that he was not giving up the last thing he controlled:
himself. In his remarkable declaration, he told them, in so many
words, “I know you had nothing to do with the injustice that brought
me to this jail, so I’m willing to stay here until I get out. But I will not,
under any circumstances, be treated like a prisoner—because I am
not and never will be powerless.”
Instead of breaking down—as many would have done in such a
bleak situation—Carter declined to surrender the freedoms that were
innately his: his attitude, his beliefs, his choices. Whether they threw

him in prison or threw him in solitary confinement for weeks on end,
Carter maintained that he still had choices, choices that could not be
taken from him even though his physical freedom had been.
Was he angry about what happened? Of course. He was furious.
But understanding that anger was not constructive, he refused to
rage. He refused to break or grovel or despair. He would not wear a
uniform, eat prison food, accept visitors, attend parole hearings, or
work in the commissary to reduce his sentence. And he wouldn’t be
touched. No one could lay a hand on him, unless they wanted a
fight.
All of this had a purpose: Every second of his energy was to be
spent on his legal case. Every waking minute was spent reading—
law books, philosophy, history. They hadn’t ruined his life—they’d
just put him somewhere he didn’t deserve to be and he did not
intend to stay there. He would learn and read and make the most of
the time he had on his hands. He would leave prison not only a free
and innocent man, but a better and improved one.
It took nineteen years and two trials to overturn that verdict, but
when Carter walked out of prison, he simply resumed his life. No civil
suit to recover damages, Carter did not even request an apology
from the court. Because to him, that would imply that they’d taken
something of his that Carter felt he was owed. That had never been
his view, even in the dark depths of solitary confinement. He had
made his choice: This can’t harm me—I might not have wanted it to
happen, but I decide how it will affect me. No one else has the right.
We decide what we will make of each and every situation. We
decide whether we’ll break or whether we’ll resist. We decide
whether we’ll assent or reject. No one can force us to give up or to
believe something that is untrue (such as, that a situation is
absolutely hopeless or impossible to improve). Our perceptions are
the thing that we’re in complete control of.
They can throw us in jail, label us, deprive us of our possessions,
but they’ll never control our thoughts, our beliefs, our reactions.
Which is to say, we are never completely powerless.
Even in prison, deprived of nearly everything, some freedoms
remain. Your mind remains your own (if you’re lucky, you have
books) and you have time—lots of time. Carter did not have much

power, but he understood that that was not the same thing as being
powerless. Many great figures, from Nelson Mandela to Malcolm X,
have come to understand this fundamental distinction. It’s how they
turned prison into the workshop where they transformed themselves
and the schoolhouse where they began to transform others.
If an unjust prison sentence can be not only salvaged but
transformative and beneficial, then for our purposes, nothing we’ll
experience is likely without potential benefit. In fact, if we have our
wits fully about us, we can step back and remember that situations,
by themselves, cannot be good or bad. This is something—a
judgment—that we, as human beings, bring to them with our
perceptions.
To one person a situation may be negative. To another, that same
situation may be positive.
“Nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so,” as
Shakespeare put it.
Laura Ingalls Wilder, author of the classic series Little House, lived
that idea, facing some of the toughest and unwelcoming elements on
the planet: harsh and unyielding soil, Indian territory, Kansas
prairies, and the humid backwoods of Florida. Not afraid, not jaded—
because she saw it all as an adventure. Everywhere was a chance
to do something new, to persevere with cheery pioneer spirit
whatever fate befell her and her husband.
That isn’t to say she saw the world through delusional rosecolored glasses. Instead, she simply chose to see each situation for
what it could be—accompanied by hard work and a little upbeat
spirit. Others make the opposite choice. As for us, we face things
that are not nearly as intimidating, and then we promptly decide
we’re screwed.
This is how obstacles become obstacles.
In other words, through our perception of events, we are complicit
in the creation—as well as the destruction—of every one of our
obstacles.
There is no good or bad without us, there is only perception.
There is the event itself and the story we tell ourselves about what it
means.
That’s a thought that changes everything, doesn’t it?

An employee in your company makes a careless mistake that
costs you business. This can be exactly what you spend so much
time and effort trying to avoid. Or, with a shift in perception, it can be
exactly what you were looking for—the chance to pierce through
defenses and teach a lesson that can be learned only by experience.
A mistake becomes training.
Again, the event is the same: Someone messed up. But the
evaluation and the outcome are different. With one approach you
took advantage; with the other you succumbed to anger or fear.
Just because your mind tells you that something is awful or evil or
unplanned or otherwise negative doesn’t mean you have to agree.
Just because other people say that something is hopeless or crazy
or broken to pieces doesn’t mean it is. We decide what story to tell
ourselves. Or whether we will tell one at all.
Welcome to the power of perception. Applicable in each and every
situation, impossible to obstruct. It can only be relinquished.
And that is your decision.

STEADY YOUR NERVES

What such a man needs is not courage but nerve control, cool
headedness. This he can get only by practice.
—THEODORE ROOSEVELT

U

lysses S. Grant once sat for a photo shoot with the famous Civil
War photographer, Mathew Brady. The studio was too dark, so
Brady sent an assistant up to the roof to uncover a skylight. The
assistant slipped and shattered the window. With horror, the
spectators watched as shards of glass two inches long fell from the
ceiling like daggers, crashing around Grant—each one of them
plenty lethal.
As the last pieces hit the ground, Brady looked over and saw that
Grant hadn’t moved. He was unhurt. Grant glanced up at the hole in
the ceiling, then back at the camera as though nothing had
happened at all.
During the Overland Campaign, Grant was surveying the scene
through field glasses when an enemy shell exploded, killing the
horse immediately next to him. Grant’s eyes stayed fixed on the
front, never leaving the glasses. There’s another story about Grant at
City Point, Union headquarters, near Richmond. Troops were
unloading a steamboat and it suddenly exploded. Everyone hit the
dirt except Grant, who was seen running toward the scene of the
explosion as debris and shells and even bodies rained down.

That’s a man who has steadied himself properly. That’s a man
who has a job to do and would bear anything to get it done. That’s
nerve.
But back in our lives . . .
We are a pile of raw nerves.
Competitors surround our business. Unexpected problems
suddenly rear their heads. Our best worker suddenly quits. The
computer system can’t handle the load we’re putting on it. We’re out
of our comfort zone. The boss is making us do all the work.
Everything is falling and crashing down around us, exactly when we
feel like we can’t handle any more.
Do we stare it down? Ignore it? Blink once or twice and redouble
our concentration? Or do we get shaken up? Do we try to medicate
these “bad” feelings away?
And that’s just the stuff that happens unintentionally. Don’t forget,
there are always people out there looking to get you. They want to
intimidate you. Rattle you. Pressure you into making a decision
before you’ve gotten all the facts. They want you thinking and acting
on their terms, not yours.
So the question is, are you going to let them?
When we aim high, pressure and stress obligingly come along for
the ride. Stuff is going to happen that catches us off guard, threatens
or scares us. Surprises (unpleasant ones, mostly) are almost
guaranteed. The risk of being overwhelmed is always there.
In these situations, talent is not the most sought-after
characteristic. Grace and poise are, because these two attributes
precede the opportunity to deploy any other skill. We must possess,
as Voltaire once explained about the secret to the great military
success of the first Duke of Marlborough, that “tranquil courage in
the midst of tumult and serenity of soul in danger, which the English
call a cool head.”
Regardless of how much actual danger we’re in, stress puts us at
the potential whim of our baser—fearful—instinctual reactions.
Don’t think for a second that grace and poise and serenity are the
soft attributes of some aristocrat. Ultimately, nerve is a matter of
defiance and control.

Like: I refuse to acknowledge that. I don’t agree to be intimidated.
I resist the temptation to declare this a failure.
But nerve is also a matter of acceptance: Well, I guess it’s on me
then. I don’t have the luxury of being shaken up about this or
replaying close calls in my head. I’m too busy and too many people
are counting on me.
Defiance and acceptance come together well in the following
principle: There is always a countermove, always an escape or a
way through, so there is no reason to get worked up. No one said it
would be easy and, of course, the stakes are high, but the path is
there for those ready to take it.
This is what we’ve got to do. And we know that it’s going to be
tough, maybe even scary.
But we’re ready for that. We’re collected and serious and aren’t
going to be frightened off.
This means preparing for the realities of our situation, steadying
our nerves so we can throw our best at it. Steeling ourselves.
Shaking off the bad stuff as it happens and soldiering on—staring
straight ahead as though nothing has happened.
Because, as you now realize, it’s true. If your nerve holds, then
nothing really did “happen”—our perception made sure it was
nothing of consequence.

CONTROL YOUR EMOTIONS

Would you have a great empire? Rule over yourself.
—PUBLIUS SYRUS

W

hen America raced to send the first men into space, they
trained the astronauts in one skill more than in any other: the
art of not panicking.
When people panic, they make mistakes. They override systems.
They disregard procedures, ignore rules. They deviate from the plan.
They become unresponsive and stop thinking clearly. They just react
—not to what they need to react to, but to the survival hormones that
are coursing through their veins.
Welcome to the source of most of our problems down here on
Earth. Everything is planned down to the letter, then something goes
wrong and the first thing we do is trade in our plan for a good ol’
emotional freak-out. Some of us almost crave sounding the alarm,
because it’s easier than dealing with whatever is staring us in the
face.
At 150 miles above Earth in a spaceship smaller than a VW, this is
death. Panic is suicide.
So panic has to be trained out. And it does not go easily.
Before the first launch, NASA re-created the fateful day for the
astronauts over and over, step by step, hundreds of times—from
what they’d have for breakfast to the ride to the airfield. Slowly, in a
graded series of “exposures,” the astronauts were introduced to

every sight and sound of the experience of their firing into space.
They did it so many times that it became as natural and familiar as
breathing. They’d practice all the way through, holding nothing back
but the liftoff itself, making sure to solve for every variable and
remove all uncertainty.
Uncertainty and fear are relieved by authority. Training is authority.
It’s a release valve. With enough exposure, you can adapt out those
perfectly ordinary, even innate, fears that are bred mostly from
unfamiliarity. Fortunately, unfamiliarity is simple to fix (again, not
easy), which makes it possible to increase our tolerance for stress
and uncertainty.
John Glenn, the first American astronaut to orbit the earth, spent
nearly a day in space still keeping his heart rate under a hundred
beats per minute. That’s a man not simply sitting at the controls but
in control of his emotions. A man who had properly cultivated, what
Tom Wolfe later called, “the Right Stuff.”
But you . . . confront a client or a stranger on the street and your
heart is liable to burst out of your chest; or you are called on to
address a crowd and your stomach crashes through the floor.
It’s time to realize that this is a luxury, an indulgence of our lesser
self. In space, the difference between life and death lies in emotional
regulation.
Hitting the wrong button, reading the instrument panels incorrectly,
engaging a sequence too early—none of these could have been
afforded on a successful Apollo mission—the consequences were
too great.
Thus, the question for astronauts was not How skilled a pilot are
you, but Can you keep an even strain? Can you fight the urge to
panic and instead focus only on what you can change? On the task
at hand?
Life is really no different. Obstacles make us emotional, but the
only way we’ll survive or overcome them is by keeping those
emotions in check—if we can keep steady no matter what happens,
no matter how much external events may fluctuate.
The Greeks had a word for this: apatheia.
It’s the kind of calm equanimity that comes with the absence of
irrational or extreme emotions. Not the loss of feeling altogether, just

the loss of the harmful, unhelpful kind. Don’t let the negativity in,
don’t let those emotions even get started. Just say: No, thank you. I
can’t afford to panic.
This is the skill that must be cultivated—freedom from disturbance
and perturbation—so you can focus your energy exclusively on
solving problems, rather than reacting to them.
A boss’s urgent e-mail. An asshole at a bar. A call from the bank
—your financing has been pulled. A knock at the door—there’s been
an accident.
As Gavin de Becker writes in The Gift of Fear, “When you worry,
ask yourself, ‘What am I choosing to not see right now?’ What
important things are you missing because you chose worry over
introspection, alertness or wisdom?”
Another way of putting it: Does getting upset provide you with
more options?
Sometimes it does. But in this instance?
No, I suppose not.
Well, then.
If an emotion can’t change the condition or the situation you’re
dealing with, it is likely an unhelpful emotion. Or, quite possibly, a
destructive one.
But it’s what I feel.
Right, no one said anything about not feeling it. No one said you
can’t ever cry. Forget “manliness.” If you need to take a moment, by
all means, go ahead. Real strength lies in the control or, as Nassim
Taleb put it, the domestication of one’s emotions, not in pretending
they don’t exist.
So go ahead, feel it. Just don’t lie to yourself by conflating emoting
about a problem and dealing with it. Because they are as different as
sleeping and waking.
You can always remind yourself: I am in control, not my emotions.
I see what’s really going on here. I’m not going to get excited or
upset.
We defeat emotions with logic, or at least that’s the idea. Logic is
questions and statements. With enough of them, we get to root
causes (which are always easier to deal with).

We lost money.
But aren’t losses a pretty common part of business?
Yes.
Are these losses catastrophic?
Not necessarily.
So this is not totally unexpected, is it? How could that be so
bad? Why are you all worked up over something that is at least
occasionally supposed to happen?
Well . . . uhh . . . I . . .
And not only that, but you’ve dealt with worse situations than this.
Wouldn’t you be better off applying some of that resourcefulness
rather than anger?
Try having that conversation with yourself and see how those
extreme emotions hold up. They won’t last long, trust that.
After all, you’re probably not going to die from any of this.
It might help to say it over and over again whenever you feel the
anxiety begin to come on: I am not going to die from this. I am not
going to die from this. I am not going to die from this.
Or try Marcus’s question:
Does what happened keep you from acting with justice,
generosity, self-control, sanity, prudence, honesty, humility,
straightforwardness?
Nope.
Then get back to work!
Subconsciously, we should be constantly asking ourselves this
question: Do I need to freak out about this?
And the answer—like it is for astronauts, for soldiers, for doctors,
and for so many other professionals—must be: No, because I
practiced for this situation and I can control myself. Or, No, because I
caught myself and I’m able to realize that that doesn’t add anything
constructive.

PRACTICE OBJECTIVITY

Don’t let the force of an impression when it first hit you knock you off
your feet; just say to it: Hold on a moment; let me see who you are
and what you represent. Let me put you to the test.
—EPICTETUS

T

he phrase “This happened and it is bad” is actually two
impressions. The first—“This happened”—is objective. The
second—“it is bad”—is subjective.
The sixteenth-century Samurai swordsman Miyamoto Musashi
won countless fights against feared opponents, even multiple
opponents, in which he was swordless. In The Book of Five Rings,
he notes the difference between observing and perceiving. The
perceiving eye is weak, he wrote; the observing eye is strong.
Musashi understood that the observing eye sees simply what is
there. The perceiving eye sees more than what is there.
The observing eye sees events, clear of distractions,
exaggerations, and misperceptions. The perceiving eye sees
“insurmountable obstacles” or “major setbacks” or even just “issues.”
It brings its own issues to the fight. The former is helpful, the latter is
not.
To paraphrase Nietzsche, sometimes being superficial—taking
things only at first glance—is the most profound approach.
In our own lives, how many problems seem to come from applying
judgments to things we don’t control, as though there were a way

they were supposed to be? How often do we see what we think is
there or should be there, instead of what actually is there?
Having steadied ourselves and held back our emotions, we can
see things as they really are. We can do that using our observing
eye.
Perceptions are the problem. They give us the “information” that
we don’t need, exactly at the moment when it would be far better to
focus on what is immediately in front of us: the thrust of a sword, a
crucial business negotiation, an opportunity, a flash of insight or
anything else, for that matter.
Everything about our animalistic brains tries to compress the
space between impression and perception. Think, perceive, act—
with milliseconds between them.
A deer’s brain tells it to run because things are bad. It runs.
Sometimes, right into traffic.
We can question that impulse. We can disagree with it. We can
override the switch, examine the threat before we act.
But this takes strength. It’s a muscle that must be developed. And
muscles are developed by tension, by lifting and holding.
This is why Musashi and most martial arts practitioners focus on
mental training as much as on physical training. Both are equally
important—and require equally vigorous exercise and practice.
In the writings of the Stoics we see an exercise that might well be
described as Contemptuous Expressions. The Stoics use contempt
as an agent to lay things bare and “to strip away the legend that
encrusts them.”
Epictetus told his students, when they’d quote some great thinker,
to picture themselves observing the person having sex. It’s funny,
you should try it the next time someone intimidates you or makes
you feel insecure. See them in your mind, grunting, groaning, and
awkward in their private life—just like the rest of us.
Marcus Aurelius had a version of this exercise where he’d
describe glamorous or expensive things without their euphemisms—
roasted meat is a dead animal and vintage wine is old, fermented
grapes. The aim was to see these things as they really are, without
any of the ornamentation.

We can do this for anyone or to anything that stands in our way.
That promotion that means so much, what is it really? Our critics and
naysayers who make us feel small, let’s put them in their proper
place. It’s so much better to see things as they truly, actually are, not
as we’ve made them in our minds.
Objectivity means removing “you”—the subjective part—from the
equation. Just think, what happens when we give others advice?
Their problems are crystal clear to us, the solutions obvious.
Something that’s present when we deal with our own obstacles is
always missing when we hear other people’s problems: the
baggage. With other people we can be objective.
We take the situation at face value and immediately set about
helping our friend to solve it. Selfishly—and stupidly—we save the
pity and the sense of persecution and the complaints for our own
lives.
Take your situation and pretend it is not happening to you.
Pretend it is not important, that it doesn’t matter. How much easier
would it be for you to know what to do? How much more quickly and
dispassionately could you size up the scenario and its options? You
could write it off, greet it calmly.
Think of all the ways that someone could solve a specific problem.
No, really think. Give yourself clarity, not sympathy—there’ll be
plenty of time for that later. It’s an exercise, which means it takes
repetition. The more you try it, the better you get at it. The more
skilled you become seeing things for what they are, the more
perception will work for you rather than against you.

ALTER YOUR PERSPECTIVE

Man does not simply exist but always decides what his existence will
be, what he will become the next moment. By the same token, every
human being has the freedom to change at any instant.
—VIKTOR FRANKL

O

nce as the Athenian general Pericles cast off on a naval
mission in the Peloponnesian War, the sun was eclipsed and
his fleet of 150 ships was cast into darkness.
Surprised by this unexpected and confusing event, his men were
thrown into a state of panic. Unlike the crew, Pericles was
undaunted. He walked up to a lead steersman, removed the cloak he
was wearing, and held it up around the man’s face. He asked the
man if he was scared of what he saw.
No, of course not.
So what does it matter, Pericles replied, when the cause of the
darkness differs?
The Greeks were clever. But beneath this particular quip is the
fundamental notion that girds not just Stoic philosophy but cognitive
psychology: Perspective is everything.
That is, when you can break apart something, or look at it from
some new angle, it loses its power over you.
Fear is debilitating, distracting, tiring, and often irrational. Pericles
understood this completely, and he was able to use the power of
perspective to defeat it.

The Greeks understood that we often choose the ominous
explanation over the simple one, to our detriment. That we are
scared of obstacles because our perspective is wrong—that a simple
shift in perspective can change our reaction entirely. The task, as
Pericles showed, is not to ignore fear but to explain it away. Take
what you’re afraid of—when fear strikes you—and break it apart.
Remember: We choose how we’ll look at things. We retain the
ability to inject perspective into a situation. We can’t change the
obstacles themselves—that part of the equation is set—but the
power of perspective can change how the obstacles appear. How we
approach, view, and contextualize an obstacle, and what we tell
ourselves it means, determines how daunting and trying it will be to
overcome.
It’s your choice whether you want to put I in front of something (I
hate public speaking. I screwed up. I am harmed by this). These add
an extra element: you in relation to that obstacle, rather than just the
obstacle itself. And with the wrong perspective, we become
consumed and overwhelmed with something actually quite small. So
why subject ourselves to that?
The right perspective has a strange way of cutting obstacles—and
adversity—down to size.
But for whatever reason, we tend to look at things in isolation. We
kick ourselves for blowing a deal or having to miss a meeting.
Individually, that does suck—we just missed 100 percent of that
opportunity.
What we’re forgetting in that instance, as billionaire serial
entrepreneur Richard Branson likes to say, is that “business
opportunities are like buses; there’s always another coming around.”
One meeting is nothing in a lifetime of meetings, one deal is just one
deal. In fact, we may have actually dodged a bullet. The next
opportunity might be better.
The way we look out at the world changes how we see these
things. Is our perspective truly giving us perspective or is it what’s
actually causing the problem? That’s the question.
What we can do is limit and expand our perspective to whatever
will keep us calmest and most ready for the task at hand. Think of it

as selective editing—not to deceive others, but to properly orient
ourselves.
And it works. Small tweaks can change what once felt like
impossible tasks. Suddenly, where we felt weak, we realize we are
strong. With perspective, we discover leverage we didn’t know we
had.
Perspective has two definitions.
1. Context: a sense of the larger picture of the world, not
just what is immediately in front of us
2. Framing: an individual’s unique way of looking at the
world, a way that interprets its events
Both matter, both can be effectively injected to change a situation
that previously seemed intimidating or impossible.
George Clooney spent his first years in Hollywood getting rejected
at auditions. He wanted the producers and directors to like him, but
they didn’t and it hurt and he blamed the system for not seeing how
good he was.
This perspective should sound familiar. It’s the dominant viewpoint
for the rest of us on job interviews, when we pitch clients, or try to
connect with an attractive stranger in a coffee shop. We
subconsciously submit to what Seth Godin, author and entrepreneur,
refers to as the “tyranny of being picked.”
Everything changed for Clooney when he tried a new perspective.
He realized that casting is an obstacle for producers, too—they need
to find somebody, and they’re all hoping that the next person to walk
in the room is the right somebody. Auditions were a chance to solve
their problem, not his.
From Clooney’s new perspective, he was that solution. He wasn’t
going to be someone groveling for a shot. He was someone with
something special to offer. He was the answer to their prayers, not
the other way around. That was what he began projecting in his
auditions—not exclusively his acting skills but that he was the man
for the job. That he understood what the casting director and
producers were looking for in a specific role and that he would

deliver it in each and every situation, in preproduction, on camera,
and during promotion.
The difference between the right and the wrong perspective is
everything.
How we interpret the events in our lives, our perspective, is the
framework for our forthcoming response—whether there will even be
one or whether we’ll just lie there and take it.
Where the head goes, the body follows. Perception precedes
action. Right action follows the right perspective.

IS IT UP TO YOU?

In life our first job is this, to divide and distinguish things into two
categories: externals I cannot control, but the choices I make with
regard to them I do control. Where will I find good and bad? In me, in
my choices.
—EPICTETUS

T

ommy John, one of baseball’s most savvy and durable pitchers,
played twenty-six seasons in the majors. Twenty-six seasons!
His rookie year, Kennedy was president. His final year, it was
George H. W. Bush. He pitched to Mickey Mantle and Mark
McGwire.
It’s an almost superhuman accomplishment. But he was able to
do it because he got really good at asking himself and others, in
various forms, one question over and over again: Is there a chance?
Do I have a shot? Is there something I can do?
All he ever looked for was a yes, no matter how slight or tentative
or provisional the chance. If there was a chance, he was ready to
take it and make good use of it—ready to give every ounce of effort
and energy he had to make it happen. If effort would affect the
outcome, he would die on the field before he let that chance go to
waste.
The first time came during the middle of the 1974 season when
Tommy John blew out his arm, permanently damaging the ulnar
collateral ligament in his pitching elbow. Up until this point in baseball

and sports medicine, when a pitcher blew out his arm that was it.
They called it a “dead arm” injury. Game over.
John wouldn’t accept that. Was there anything that could give him
a shot to get back on the mound? It turns out there was. The doctors
suggested an experimental surgery in which they would try to
replace the ligament in his pitching elbow with a tendon from his
other arm. What are the chances of me coming back after this
surgery? One in one hundred. And without it? No chance, they said.
He could have retired. But there was a one in one hundred
chance. With rehab and training, the opportunity was partially in his
control. He took it. And won 164 more games over the next thirteen
seasons. That procedure is now famously known as Tommy John
surgery.
Less than ten years later, John mustered the same spirit and effort
he marshaled for his elbow surgery when his young son fell
horrifyingly from a third-story window, swallowed his tongue, and
nearly died. Even in the chaos of the emergency room, with doctors
convinced that the boy probably wouldn’t survive, John reminded his
family that whether it took one year or ten years, they wouldn’t give
up until there was absolutely nothing left that they could do.
His son made a full recovery.
For John, his baseball career seemed to finally come to an end in
1988, when, at the age of forty-five, he was cut by the Yankees at
the end of the season. Still, he would not accept it. He called the
coach and demanded: If he showed up at spring training as a walkon the next spring, would he get a fair look? They replied that he
shouldn’t be playing baseball at his age. He repeated the question:
Be straight with me, if I come down there, would I have a chance?
The baseball officials answered, Fine, yes, you’ll get one look.
So Tommy John was the first to report to camp. He trained many
hours a day, brought every lesson he’d learned playing the sport for
a quarter century, and made the team—as the oldest player in the
game. He started the season opener—and won, giving up a scant
two runs over seven innings on the road at Minnesota.
The things that Tommy John could change—when he had a
chance—got a full 100 percent of the effort he could muster. He used
to tell coaches that he would die on the field before he quit. He

understood that as a professional athlete his job was to parse the
difference between the unlikely and the impossible. Seeing that
minuscule distinction was what made him who he was.
To harness the same power, recovering addicts learn the Serenity
Prayer.
God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change
The courage to change the things I can,
And the wisdom to know the difference.

This is how they focus their efforts. It’s a lot easier to fight
addiction when you aren’t also fighting the fact that you were born,
that your parents were monsters, or that you lost everything. That
stuff is done. Delivered. Zero in one hundred chances that you can
change it.
So what if you focused on what you can change? That’s where
you can make a difference.
Behind the Serenity Prayer is a two-thousand-year-old Stoic
phrase: “ta eph’hemin, ta ouk eph’hemin.” What is up to us, what is
not up to us.
And what is up to us?
Our emotions
Our judgments
Our creativity
Our attitude
Our perspective
Our desires
Our decisions
Our determination
This is our playing field, so to speak. Everything there is fair
game.
What is not up to us?
Well, you know, everything else. The weather, the economy,
circumstances, other people’s emotions or judgments, trends,
disasters, et cetera.

If what’s up to us is the playing field, then what is not up to us are
the rules and conditions of the game. Factors that winning athletes
make the best of and don’t spend time arguing against (because
there is no point).
To argue, to complain, or worse, to just give up, these are choices.
Choices that more often than not, do nothing to get us across the
finish line.
When it comes to perception, this is the crucial distinction to
make: the difference between the things that are in our power and
the things that aren’t. That’s the difference between the people who
can accomplish great things, and the people who find it impossible to
stay sober—to avoid not just drugs or alcohol but all addictions.
In its own way, the most harmful dragon we chase is the one that
makes us think we can change things that are simply not ours to
change. That someone decided not to fund your company, this isn’t
up to you. But the decision to refine and improve your pitch? That is.
That someone stole your idea or got to it first? No. To pivot, improve
it, or fight for what’s yours? Yes.
Focusing exclusively on what is in our power magnifies and
enhances our power. But every ounce of energy directed at things
we can’t actually influence is wasted—self-indulgent and selfdestructive. So much power—ours, and other people’s—is frittered
away in this manner.
To see an obstacle as a challenge, to make the best of it anyway,
that is also a choice—a choice that is up to us.
Will I have a chance, Coach?
Ta eph’hemin?
Is this up to me?

LIVE IN THE PRESENT MOMENT

The trick to forgetting the big picture is to look at everything close up.
—CHUCK PALAHNIUK

D

o yourself a favor and run down the list of businesses started
during depressions or economic crises.

Fortune magazine (ninety days after the market crash of 1929)
FedEx (oil crisis of 1973)
UPS (Panic of 1907)
Walt Disney Company (After eleven months of smooth
operation, the twelfth was the market crash of 1929.)
Hewlett-Packard (Great Depression, 1935)
Charles Schwab (market crash of 1974–75)
Standard Oil (Rockefeller bought out his partners in what
became Standard Oil and took over in February 1865, the
final year of the Civil War.)
Coors (Depression of 1873)
Costco (recession in the late 1970s)
Revlon (Great Depression, 1932)
General Motors (Panic of 1907)
Proctor & Gamble (Panic of 1837)
United Airlines (1929)
Microsoft (recession in 1973–75)
LinkedIn (2002, post–dot-com bubble)

For the most part, these businesses had little awareness they
were in some historically significant depression. Why? Because the
founders were too busy existing in the present—actually dealing with
the situation at hand. They didn’t know whether it would get better or
worse, they just knew what was. They had a job they wanted to do, a
great idea they believed in or a product they thought they could sell.
They knew they had payroll to meet.
Yet in our own lives, we aren’t content to deal with things as they
happen. We have to dive endlessly into what everything “means,”
whether something is “fair” or not, what’s “behind” this or that, and
what everyone else is doing. Then we wonder why we don’t have the
energy to actually deal with our problems. Or we get ourselves so
worked up and intimidated because of the overthinking, that if we’d
just gotten to work we’d probably be done already.
Our understanding of the world of business is all mixed up with
storytelling and mythology. Which is funny because we’re missing
the real story by focusing on individuals. In fact, half the companies
in the Fortune 500 were started during a bear market or recession.
Half.
The point is that most people start from disadvantage (often with
no idea they are doing so) and do just fine. It’s not unfair, it’s
universal. Those who survive it, survive because they took things
day by day—that’s the real secret.
Focus on the moment, not the monsters that may or may not be
up ahead.
A business must take the operating constraints of the world
around it as a given and work for whatever gains are possible. Those
people with an entrepreneurial spirit are like animals, blessed to
have no time and no ability to think about the ways things should be,
or how they’d prefer them to be.
For all species other than us humans, things just are what they
are. Our problem is that we’re always trying to figure out what things
mean—why things are the way they are. As though the why matters.
Emerson put it best: “We cannot spend the day in explanation.” Don’t
waste time on false constructs.
It doesn’t matter whether this is the worst time to be alive or the
best, whether you’re in a good job market or a bad one, or that the

obstacle you face is intimidating or burdensome. What matters is
that right now is right now.
The implications of our obstacle are theoretical—they exist in the
past and the future. We live in the moment. And the more we
embrace that, the easier the obstacle will be to face and move.
You can take the trouble you’re dealing with and use it as an
opportunity to focus on the present moment. To ignore the totality of
your situation and learn to be content with what happens, as it
happens. To have no “way” that the future needs to be to confirm
your predictions, because you didn’t make any. To let each new
moment be a refresh wiping clear what came before and what others
were hoping would come next.
You’ll find the method that works best for you, but there are many
things that can pull you into the present moment: Strenuous
exercise. Unplugging. A walk in the park. Meditation. Getting a dog—
they’re a constant reminder of how pleasant the present is.
One thing is certain. It’s not simply a matter of saying: Oh, I’ll live
in the present. You have to work at it. Catch your mind when it
wanders—don’t let it get away from you. Discard distracting
thoughts. Leave things well enough alone—no matter how much you
feel like doing otherwise.
But it’s easier when the choice to limit your scope feels like editing
rather than acting. Remember that this moment is not your life, it’s
just a moment in your life. Focus on what is in front of you, right now.
Ignore what it “represents” or it “means” or “why it happened to you.”
There is plenty else going on right here to care about any of that.

THINK DIFFERENTLY

Genius is the ability to put into effect what is in your mind. There’s no
other definition of it.
—F. SCOTT FITZGERALD

S

teve Jobs was famous for what observers called his “reality
distortion field.” Part motivational tactic, part sheer drive and
ambition, this field made him notoriously dismissive of phrases such
as “It can’t be done” or “We need more time.”
Having learned early in life that reality was falsely hemmed in by
rules and compromises that people had been taught as children,
Jobs had a much more aggressive idea of what was or wasn’t
possible. To him, when you factored in vision and work ethic, much
of life was malleable.
For instance, in the design stages for a new mouse for an early
Apple product, Jobs had high expectations. He wanted it to move
fluidly in any direction—a new development for any mouse at that
time—but a lead engineer was told by one of his designers that this
would be commercially impossible. What Jobs wanted wasn’t
realistic and wouldn’t work. The next day, the lead engineer arrived
at work to find that Steve Jobs had fired the employee who’d said
that. When the replacement came in, his first words were: “I can
build the mouse.”
This was Jobs’s view of reality at work. Malleable, adamant, selfconfident. Not in the delusional sense, but for the purposes of

accomplishing something. He knew that to aim low meant to accept
mediocre accomplishment. But a high aim could, if things went right,
create something extraordinary. He was Napoleon shouting to his
soldiers: “There shall be no Alps!”
For most of us, such confidence does not come easy. It’s
understandable. So many people in our lives have preached the
need to be realistic or conservative or worse—to not rock the boat.
This is an enormous disadvantage when it comes to trying big
things. Because though our doubts (and self-doubts) feel real, they
have very little bearing on what is and isn’t possible.
Our perceptions determine, to an incredibly large degree, what we
are and are not capable of. In many ways, they determine reality
itself. When we believe in the obstacle more than in the goal, which
will inevitably triumph?
For instance, think of artists. It’s their unique vision and voice that
push the definition of “art” forward. What was possible for an artist
before Caravaggio and after he stunned us with his dark
masterpieces were two very different things. Plug in any other
thinker or writer or painter in their own time, and the same applies.
This is why we shouldn’t listen too closely to what other people
say (or to what the voice in our head says, either). We’ll find
ourselves erring on the side of accomplishing nothing.
Be open. Question.
Though of course we don’t control reality, our perceptions do
influence it.
One week before the first Macintosh computer was supposed to
ship, the engineers told Jobs they couldn’t make the deadline. On a
hastily assembled conference call, the engineers explained that they
needed just two additional weeks’ work before it was ready. Jobs
responded calmly, explaining to the engineers that if they could
make it in two weeks, they could surely make it one—there was no
real difference in such a short period of time. And, more important,
since they’d come this far and done so much good work, there was
no way they would not ship on January 16, the original ship date.
The engineers rallied and made their deadline. His insistence
pushed them, once again, past what they ever thought possible.

Now, how do you and I usually deal with an impossible deadline
handed down from someone above us? We complain. We get angry.
We question. How could they? What’s the point? Who do they think I
am? We look for a way out and feel sorry for ourselves.
Of course, none of these things affect the objective reality of that
deadline. Not in the way that pushing forward can. Jobs refused to
tolerate people who didn’t believe in their own abilities to succeed.
Even if his demands were unfair, uncomfortable, or ambitious.
The genius and wonder of his products—which often felt
impossibly intuitive and futuristic—embody that trait. He had pushed
through what others thought were hard limitations and, as a result,
he created something totally new. No one believed Apple could
make the products it made. In fact, Jobs was pushed out in 1985
because the board members at that time felt that Apple’s foray into
consumer products was a “lunatic plan.” Of course, they were wrong.
Jobs learned to reject the first judgments and the objections that
spring out of them because those objections are almost always
rooted in fear. When he ordered a special kind of glass for the first
iPhone, the manufacturer was aghast at the aggressive deadline.
“We don’t have capacity,” they said. “Don’t be afraid,” Jobs replied.
“You can do it. Get your mind around it. You can do it.” Nearly
overnight, manufacturers transformed their facilities into glassmaking behemoths, and within six months they’d made enough for
the whole first run of the phone.
This is radically different from how we’ve been taught to act. Be
realistic, we’re told. Listen to feedback. Play well with others.
Compromise. Well, what if the “other” party is wrong? What if
conventional wisdom is too conservative? It’s this all-too-common
impulse to complain, defer, and then give up that holds us back.
An entrepreneur is someone with faith in their ability to make
something where there was nothing before. To them, the idea that no
one has ever done this or that is a good thing. When given an unfair
task, some rightly see it as a chance to test what they’re made of—to
give it all they’ve got, knowing full well how difficult it will be to win.
They see it as an opportunity because it is often in that desperate
nothing-to-lose state that we are our most creative.

Our best ideas come from there, where obstacles illuminate new
options.

FINDING THE OPPORTUNITY

A good person dyes events with his own color . . . and turns
whatever happens to his own benefit.
—SENECA

O

ne of the most intimidating and shocking developments in
modern warfare was the German Blitzkrieg (lightning war). In
World War II the Germans wanted to avoid the drawn-out trench
fighting of previous wars. So they concentrated mobile divisions into
rapid, narrow offensive forces that caught their enemies completely
unprepared.
Like the tip of a spear, columns of panzer tanks rushed into
Poland, the Netherlands, Belgium, and France with devastating
results and little opposition. In most cases, the opposing
commanders simply surrendered rather than face what felt like an
invincible, indefatigable monster bearing down on them. The
Blitzkrieg strategy was designed to exploit the flinch of the enemy—
he must collapse at the sight of what appears to be overwhelming
force. Its success depends completely on this response. This military
strategy works because the set-upon troops see the offensive force
as an enormous obstacle bearing down on them.
This is how the Allied opposition regarded the Blitzkrieg for most
of the war. They could see only its power, and their own vulnerability
to it. In the weeks and months after the successful invasion of
Normandy by Allied forces, they faced it again: a set of massive

German counteroffensives. How could they stop it? Would it throw
them back to the very beaches they just purchased at such high
cost?
A great leader answered that question. Striding into the
conference room at headquarters in Malta, General Dwight D.
Eisenhower made an announcement: He’d have no more of this
quivering timidity from his deflated generals. “The present situation is
to be regarded as opportunity for us and not disaster,” he
commanded. “There will be only cheerful faces at this conference
table.”
In the surging counteroffensive, Eisenhower was able to see the
tactical solution that had been in front of them the entire time: the
Nazi strategy carried its own destruction within itself.
Only then were the Allies able to see the opportunity inside the
obstacle rather than simply the obstacle that threatened them.
Properly seen, as long as the Allies could bend and not break, this
attack would send more than fifty thousand Germans rushing
headfirst into a net—or a “meat grinder,” as Patton eloquently put it.
The Battle of the Bulge and before that the Battle of the Falaise
Pocket, both of which were feared to be major reversals and the end
of the Allies’ momentum, in fact were their greatest triumphs. By
allowing a forward wedge of the German army through and then
attacking from the sides, the Allies encircled the enemy completely
from the rear. The invincible, penetrating thrust of the German
Panzers wasn’t just impotent but suicidal—a textbook example of
why you never leave your flanks exposed.
More important, it’s a textbook example of the role our own
perceptions play in the success or failures of those who oppose us.
It’s one thing to not be overwhelmed by obstacles, or discouraged
or upset by them. This is something that few are able to do. But after
you have controlled your emotions, and you can see objectively and
stand steadily, the next step becomes possible: a mental flip, so
you’re looking not at the obstacle but at the opportunity within it.
As Laura Ingalls Wilder put it: “There is good in everything, if only
we look for it.”
Yet we are so bad at looking. We close our eyes to the gift.
Imagine if you’d been in Eisenhower’s shoes, with an army racing

toward you, and you could see only impending defeat. How much
longer would the war have gone on? How many more lives lost?
It’s our preconceptions that are the problem. They tell us that
things should or need to be a certain way, so when they’re not, we
naturally assume that we are at a disadvantage or that we’d be
wasting our time to pursue an alternate course. When really, it’s all
fair game, and every situation is an opportunity for us to act.
Let’s take a circumstance we’ve all been in: having a bad boss. All
we see is the hell. All we see is that thing bearing down on us. We
flinch.
But what if you regarded it as an opportunity instead of a
disaster?
If you mean it when you say you’re at the end of your rope and
would rather quit, you actually have a unique chance to grow and
improve yourself. A unique opportunity to experiment with different
solutions, to try different tactics, or to take on new projects to add to
your skill set. You can study this bad boss and learn from him—while
you fill out your résumé and hit up contacts for a better job
elsewhere. You can prepare yourself for that job by trying new styles
of communication or standing up for yourself, all with a perfect safety
net for yourself: quitting and getting out of there.
With this new attitude and fearlessness, who knows, you might be
able to extract concessions and find that you like the job again. One
day, the boss will make a mistake, and then you’ll make your move
and outmaneuver them. It will feel so much better than the
alternative—whining, bad-mouthing, duplicity, spinelessness.
Or take that longtime rival at work (or that rival company), the one
who causes endless headaches? Note the fact that they also:
keep you alert
raise the stakes
motivate you to prove them wrong
harden you
help you to appreciate true friends
provide an instructive antilog—an example of whom
you don’t want to become

Or that computer glitch that erased all your work? You will now be
twice as good at it since you will do it again.
How about that business decision that turned out to be a mistake?
Well, you had a hypothesis and it turned out to be wrong. Why
should that upset you? It wouldn’t piss off a scientist, it would help
him. Maybe don’t bet so much on it next time. And now you’ve
learned two things: that your instinct was wrong, and the kind of
appetite for risk you really have.
Blessings and burdens are not mutually exclusive. It’s a lot more
complicated. Socrates had a mean, nagging wife; he always said
that being married to her was good practice for philosophy.
Of course you’d want to avoid something negative if you could.
But what if you were able to remember, in the moment, the second
act that seems to come with the unfortunate situations we try so hard
to avoid?
Sports psychologists recently did a study of elite athletes who
were struck with some adversity or serious injury. Initially, each
reported feeling isolation, emotional disruption, and doubts about
their athletic ability. Yet afterward, each reported gaining a desire to
help others, additional perspective, and realization of their own
strengths. In other words, every fear and doubt they felt during the
injury turned into greater abilities in those exact areas.
It’s a beautiful idea. Psychologists call it adversarial growth and
post-traumatic growth. “That which doesn’t kill me makes me
stronger” is not a cliché but fact.
The struggle against an obstacle inevitably propels the fighter to a
new level of functioning. The extent of the struggle determines the
extent of the growth. The obstacle is an advantage, not adversity.
The enemy is any perception that prevents us from seeing this.
Of all the strategies we’ve talked about, this is the one you can
always use. Everything can be flipped, seen with this kind of gaze: a
piercing look that ignores the package and sees only the gift.
Or we can fight it the entire way. The result is the same. The
obstacle still exists. One just hurts less. The benefit is still there
below the surface. What kind of idiot decides not to take it?
Now the things that other people avoid, or flinch away from, we’re
thankful for.

When people are:
—rude or disrespectful:
They underestimate us. A huge advantage.
—conniving:
We won’t have to apologize when we make an example out
of them.
—critical or question our abilities:
Lower expectations are easier to exceed.
—lazy:
Makes whatever we accomplish seem all the more
admirable.
It’s striking: These are perfectly fine starting points, better, in some
cases, than whatever you’d have hoped for in the best scenario.
What advantage do you derive from someone being polite? Or
pulling their punches? Behind the behaviors that provoke an
immediate negative reaction is opportunity—some exposed benefit
that we can seize mentally and then act upon.
So focus on that—on the poorly wrapped and initially repulsive
present you’ve been handed in every seemingly disadvantageous
situation. Because beneath the packaging is what we need—often
something of real value. A gift of great benefit.
No one is talking glass-half-full-style platitudes here. This must be
a complete flip. Seeing through the negative, past its underside, and
into its corollary: the positive.

PREPARE TO ACT

Then imitate the action of the tiger; stiffen the sinews, summon up
the blood.
—SHAKESPEARE

P

roblems are rarely as bad as we think—or rather, they are
precisely as bad as we think.
It’s a huge step forward to realize that the worst thing to happen is
never the event, but the event and losing your head. Because then
you’ll have two problems (one of them unnecessary and post hoc).
The demand on you is this: Once you see the world as it is, for
what it is, you must act. The proper perception—objective, rational,
ambitious, clean—isolates the obstacle and exposes it for what it is.
A clearer head makes for steadier hands.
And then those hands must be put to work. Good use.
We all have to make assumptions in life, we have to weigh the
costs and benefits. No one is asking you to look at the world through
rose-colored glasses. No one is asking for noble failure or
martyrdom.
But boldness is acting anyway, even though you understand the
negative and the reality of your obstacle. Decide to tackle what
stands in your way—not because you’re a gambler defying the odds
but because you’ve calculated them and boldly embraced the risk.
After all, now that you’ve managed perceptions properly, what’s
next is to act.

Are you ready?

PART II

Action

WHAT IS ACTION? Action is commonplace, right action is not. As a
discipline, it’s not any kind of action that will do, but directed action.
Everything must be done in the service of the whole. Step by step,
action by action, we’ll dismantle the obstacles in front of us. With
persistence and flexibility, we’ll act in the best interest of our goals.
Action requires courage, not brashness—creative application and
not brute force. Our movements and decisions define us: We must
be sure to act with deliberation, boldness, and persistence. Those
are the attributes of right and effective action. Nothing else—not
thinking or evasion or aid from others. Action is the solution and the
cure to our predicaments.

THE DISCIPLINE OF ACTION

T

here was little evidence that Demosthenes was destined to
become the greatest orator of Athens, let alone all of history. He
was born sickly and frail with a nearly debilitating speech
impediment. At seven years old, he lost his father. And then things
got worse.
The large inheritance left to him—intended to pay for tutors and
the best schools—was stolen by the guardians entrusted to protect
him. They refused to pay his tutors, depriving him of the education
he was entitled to. Still weak and sick, Demosthenes was also
unable to distinguish himself in the other critical sphere of Greek life:
the floor of the gymnasia.
Here was this fatherless, effeminate, awkward child who no one
understood, who everyone laughed at. Not exactly the boy you’d
expect would soon hold the power to mobilize a nation to war by his
voice alone.
Disadvantaged by nature, abandoned by the people he depended
on, nearly every wrong that can be inflicted on a child befell
Demosthenes. None of it was fair, none of it was right. Most of us,
were we in his position, would have given up right then and there.
But Demosthenes did not.
Stuck in his young mind was the image of a great orator, a man
he’d once witnessed speaking at the court at Athens. This lone
individual, so skilled and powerful, had held the admiration of the
crowd, who hung on his every word for hours—subduing all
opposition with no more than the sound of his voice and the strength
of his ideas. It inspired and challenged Demosthenes, weak, beaten

on, powerless, and ignored; for in many ways, this strong, confident
speaker was the opposite of him.
So he did something about it.
To conquer his speech impediment, he devised his own strange
exercises. He would fill his mouth with pebbles and practice
speaking. He rehearsed full speeches into the wind or while running
up steep inclines. He learned to give entire speeches with a single
breath. And soon, his quiet, weak voice erupted with booming,
powerful clarity.
Demosthenes locked himself away underground—literally—in a
dugout he’d had built in which to study and educate himself. To
ensure he wouldn’t indulge in outside distractions, he shaved half his
head so he’d be too embarrassed to go outside. And from that point
forward, he dutifully descended each day into his study to work with
his voice, his facial expressions, and his arguments.
When he did venture out, it was to learn even more. Every
moment, every conversation, every transaction, was an opportunity
for him to improve his art. All of it aimed at one goal: to face his
enemies in court and win back what had been taken from him. Which
he did.
When he came of age, he finally filed suits against the negligent
guardians who had wronged him. They evaded his efforts and hired
their own lawyers, but he refused to be stopped. Flexible and
creative, he matched them suit for suit and delivered countless
speeches. Confident in his new strengths, driven on by his own toil,
they were no match. Demosthenes eventually won.
Only a fraction of the original inheritance remained, but the money
had become secondary. Demosthenes’s reputation as an orator,
ability to command a crowd and his peerless knowledge of the
intricacies of the law, was worth more than whatever remained of a
once-great fortune.
Every speech he delivered made him stronger, every day that he
stuck with it made him more determined. He could see through
bullies and stare down fear. In struggling with his unfortunate fate,
Demosthenes found his true calling: He would be the voice of
Athens, its great speaker and conscience. He would be successful
precisely because of what he’d been through and how he’d reacted

to it. He had channeled his rage and pain into his training, and then
later into his speeches, fueling it all with a kind of fierceness and
power that could be neither matched nor resisted.
Some academic once asked Demosthenes what the three most
important traits of speechmaking were. His reply says it all: “Action,
Action, Action!”
Sure, Demosthenes lost the inheritance he’d been born with, and
that was unfortunate. But in the process of dealing with this reality,
he created a far better one—one that could never be taken from him.
But you, when you’re dealt a bad hand. What’s your response?
Do you fold? Or do you play it for all you’ve got? There’s an
explosion, metaphoric or otherwise. Are you the guy running toward
it? Or running away from it? Or worse, are you paralyzed and do
nothing?
This little test of character says everything about us.
And it’s sad that so many of us fail—opting away from action.
Because action is natural, innate. You trip and fall right now, your
body’s instincts protect you. You extend your hands to break your
fall, so you don’t break your face. In a vicious accident, you go into
shock but still manage to get your arms up around your face. That’s
where the term defensive wounds comes from. We don’t think, we
don’t complain, we don’t argue. We act. We have real strength—
more strength than we know.
But in our lives, when our worst instincts are in control, we dally.
We don’t act like Demosthenes, we act frail and are powerless to
make ourselves better. We may be able to articulate a problem, even
potential solutions, but then weeks, months, or sometimes years
later, the problem is still there. Or it’s gotten worse. As though we
expect someone else to handle it, as though we honestly believe that
there is a chance of obstacles unobstacle-ing themselves.
We’ve all done it. Said: “I am so [overwhelmed, tired, stressed,
busy, blocked, outmatched].”
And then what do we do about it? Go out and party. Or treat
ourselves. Or sleep in. Or wait.
It feels better to ignore or pretend. But you know deep down that
that isn’t going to truly make it any better. You’ve got to act. And
you’ve got to start now.

We forget: In life, it doesn’t matter what happens to you or where
you came from. It matters what you do with what happens and what
you’ve been given. And the only way you’ll do something spectacular
is by using it all to your advantage.
People turn shit into sugar all the time—shit that’s a lot worse than
whatever we’re dealing with. I’m talking physical disabilities, racial
discrimination, battles against overwhelmingly superior armies. But
those people didn’t quit. They didn’t feel sorry for themselves. They
didn’t delude themselves with fantasies about easy solutions. They
focused on the one thing that mattered: applying themselves with
gusto and creativity.
Born with nothing, into poverty, strife, or the chaos of decades
past, certain types of people were freed from modern notions of
fairness or good or bad. Because none of it applied to them. What
was in front of them was all they knew—all they had. And instead of
complaining, they worked with it. They made the best of it. Because
they had to, because they didn’t have a choice.
No one wants to be born weak or to be victimized. No one wants
to be down to their last dollar. No one wants to be stuck behind an
obstacle, blocked from where they need to go. Such circumstances
are not impressed by perception, but they are not indifferent—or
rather immune—from action. In fact, that’s the only thing these
situations will respond to.
No one is saying you can’t take a minute to think, Dammit, this
sucks. By all means, vent. Exhale. Take stock. Just don’t take too
long. Because you have to get back to work. Because each obstacle
we overcome makes us stronger for the next one.
But . . .
No. No excuses. No exceptions. No way around it: It’s on you.
We don’t have the luxury of running away. Of hiding. Because we
have something very specific we’re trying to do. We have an
obstacle we have to lean into and transform.
No one is coming to save you. And if we’d like to go where we
claim we want to go—to accomplish what we claim are our goals—
there is only one way. And that’s to meet our problems with the right
action.
Therefore, we can always (and only) greet our obstacles

with energy
with persistence
with a coherent and deliberate process
with iteration and resilience
with pragmatism
with strategic vision
with craftiness and savvy
and an eye for opportunity and pivotal moments
Are you ready to get to work?

GET MOVING

We must all either wear out or rust out, every one of us. My choice is
to wear out.
—THEODORE ROOSEVELT

A

melia Earhart wanted to be a great aviator. But it was the 1920s,
and people still thought that women were frail and weak and
didn’t have the stuff. Woman suffrage was not even a decade old.
She couldn’t make her living as a pilot, so she took a job as a
social worker. Then one day the phone rang. The man on the line
had a pretty offensive proposition, along the lines of: We have
someone willing to fund the first female transatlantic flight. Our first
choice has already backed out. You won’t get to actually fly the
plane, and we’re going to send two men along as chaperones and
guess what, we’ll pay them a lot of money and you won’t get
anything. Oh, and you very well might die while doing it.
You know what she said to that offer? She said yes.
Because that’s what people who defy the odds do. That’s how
people who become great at things—whether it’s flying or blowing
through gender stereotypes—do. They start. Anywhere. Anyhow.
They don’t care if the conditions are perfect or if they’re being
slighted. Because they know that once they get started, if they can
just get some momentum, they can make it work.
As it went for Amelia Earhart. Less than five years later she was
the first woman to fly solo nonstop across the Atlantic and became,

rightly, one of the most famous and respected people in the world.
But none of that would have happened had she turned up her
nose at that offensive offer or sat around feeling sorry for herself.
None of it could have happened if she’d stopped after that first
accomplishment either. What mattered was that she took the
opening and then pressed ahead. That was the reason for her
success.
Life can be frustrating. Oftentimes we know what our problems
are. We may even know what to do about them. But we fear that
taking action is too risky, that we don’t have the experience or that
it’s not how we pictured it or because it’s too expensive, because it’s
too soon, because we think something better might come along,
because it might not work.
And you know what happens as a result? Nothing. We do nothing.
Tell yourself: The time for that has passed. The wind is rising. The
bell’s been rung. Get started, get moving.
We often assume that the world moves at our leisure. We delay
when we should initiate. We jog when we should be running or,
better yet, sprinting. And then we’re shocked—shocked!—when
nothing big ever happens, when opportunities never show up, when
new obstacles begin to pile up, or the enemies finally get their act
together.
Of course they did, we gave them room to breathe. We gave them
the chance.
So the first step is: Take the bat off your shoulder and give it a
swing. You’ve got to start, to go anywhere.
Now let’s say you’ve already done that. Fantastic. You’re already
ahead of most people. But let’s ask an honest question: Could you
be doing more? You probably could—there’s always more. At
minimum, you could be trying harder. You might have gotten started,
but your full effort isn’t in it—and that shows.
Is that going to affect your results? No question.
In the first years of World War II, there was no worse assignment
for British troops than being sent to the North African front.
Methodical and orderly, the British hated the grueling weather and
terrain that wreaked havoc on their machines and their plans. They
acted how they felt: slow, timid, cautious.

German Field Marshal General Erwin Rommel, on the other hand,
loved it. He saw war as a game. A dangerous, reckless, untidy, fastpaced game. And, most important, he took to this game with
incredible energy and was perennially pushing his troops forward.
The German troops had a saying about him: Where Rommel is,
there is the front.
That’s the next step: ramming your feet into the stirrups and really
going for it.
That’s definitely not what they say about most leaders today.
While overpaid CEOs take long vacations and hide behind e-mail
autoresponders, some programmer is working eighteen-hour days
coding the start-up that will destroy that CEO’s business. And if we
were honest, we’re probably closer to the former than the latter when
it comes to the problems we face (or don’t face).
While you’re sleeping, traveling, attending meetings, or messing
around online, the same thing is happening to you. You’re going soft.
You’re not aggressive enough. You’re not pressing ahead. You’ve got
a million reasons why you can’t move at a faster pace. This all
makes the obstacles in your life loom very large.
For some reason, these days we tend to downplay the importance
of aggression, of taking risks, of barreling forward. It’s probably
because it’s been negatively associated with certain notions of
violence or masculinity.
But of course Earhart shows that that isn’t true. In fact, on the side
of her plane she painted the words, “Always think with your stick
forward.” That is: You can’t ever let up your flying speed—if you do,
you crash. Be deliberate, of course, but you always need to be
moving forward.
And that’s the final part: Stay moving, always.
Like Earhart, Rommel knew from history that those who attack
problems and life with the most initiative and energy usually win. He
was always pushing ahead, keeping the stampede on the more
cautious British forces to devastating effect.
His string of offensives at Cyrenaica, Tobruk, and Tunisia led to
some of the most astonishing victories in the history of warfare. He
got started early, while the British were still trying to get comfortable,
and as a result, Rommel was able to seize what appeared to be an

unstoppable advantage in some of the most uninhabitable terrain on
the planet. He blew right through the bleak battlefields of North
Africa, with its enormous distances, blinding sandstorms, scorching
heat, and lack of water, because he never, ever stopped moving.
It surprised even his commanding officers, who time and time
again attempted to slow Rommel down. They preferred deliberation
and discourse to advancement. It had a devastating effect on the
momentum that Rommel had built with his troops—just as it does in
our own lives.
So when you’re frustrated in pursuit of your own goals, don’t sit
there and complain that you don’t have what you want or that this
obstacle won’t budge. If you haven’t even tried yet, then of course
you will still be in the exact same place. You haven’t actually pursued
anything.
We talk a lot about courage as a society, but we forget that at its
most basic level it’s really just taking action—whether that’s
approaching someone you’re intimidated by or deciding to finally
crack a book on a subject you need to learn. Just as Earhart did, all
the greats you admire started by saying, Yes, let’s go. And they
usually did it in less desirable circumstances than we’ll ever suffer.
Just because the conditions aren’t exactly to your liking, or you
don’t feel ready yet, doesn’t mean you get a pass. If you want
momentum, you’ll have to create it yourself, right now, by getting up
and getting started.

PRACTICE PERSISTENCE

He says the best way out is always through
And I agree to that, or in so far
As I can see no way out but through.
—ROBERT FROST

F

or nearly a year, General Ulysses S. Grant tried to crack the
defenses of Vicksburg, a city perched high on the cliffs of the
Mississippi, critical to the Confederacy’s stranglehold on the most
important river in the country. He tried attacking head-on. He tried to
go around. He spent months digging a new canal that would change
the course of the river. He blew the levees upstream and literally
tried to float boats down into the city over flooded land.
None of it worked. All the while, the newspapers chattered. It’d
been months without progress. Lincoln had sent a replacement, and
the man was waiting in the wings. But Grant refused to be rattled,
refused to rush or cease. He knew there was a weak spot
somewhere. He’d find it or he’d make one.
His next move ran contrary to nearly all conventional military
theory. He decided to run his boats past the gun batteries guarding
the river—a considerable risk, because once down, they could not
come back up. Despite an unprecedented nighttime firefight, nearly
all the boats made the run unharmed. A few days later, Grant
crossed the river about thirty miles downstream at the appropriately
named Hard Times, Louisiana.

Grant’s plan was bold: Leaving most of their supplies behind, his
troops had to live off the land and make their way up the river, taking
town after town along the way. By the time Grant laid siege to
Vicksburg itself, the message to his men and his enemies was clear:
He would never give up. The defenses would eventually crack. Grant
was unstoppable. His victory wouldn’t be pretty, but it was
inexorable.
If we’re to overcome our obstacles, this is the message to
broadcast—internally and externally. We will not be stopped by
failure, we will not be rushed or distracted by external noise. We will
chisel and peg away at the obstacle until it is gone. Resistance is
futile.
At Vicksburg, Grant learned two things. First, persistence and
pertinacity were incredible assets and probably his main assets as a
leader. Second, as often is the result from such dedication, in
exhausting all the other traditional options, he’d been forced to try
something new. That option—cutting loose from his supply trains and
living off the spoils of hostile territory—was a previously untested
strategy that the North could now use to slowly deplete the South of
its resources and will to fight.
In persistence, he’d not only broken through: In trying it all the
wrong ways, Grant discovered a totally new way—the way that
would eventually win the war.
Grant’s story is not the exception to the rule. It is the rule. This is
how innovation works.
In 1878, Thomas Edison wasn’t the only person experimenting
with incandescent lights. But he was the only man willing to test six
thousand different filaments—including one made from the beard
hair of one of his men—inching closer each time to the one that
would finally work.
And, of course, he eventually found it—proving that genius often
really is just persistence in disguise. In applying the entirety of his
physical and mental energy—in never growing weary or giving up—
Edison had outlasted impatient competitors, investors, and the press
to discover, in a piece of bamboo, of all things, the power to
illuminate the world.

Nikola Tesla, who spent a frustrated year in Edison’s lab during
the invention of the lightbulb, once sneered that if Edison needed to
find a needle in a haystack, he would “proceed at once” to simply
“examine straw after straw until he found the object of his search.”
Well, sometimes that’s exactly the right method.
As we butt up against obstacles, it is helpful to picture Grant and
Edison. Grant with a cigar clenched in his mouth. Edison on his
hands and knees in the laboratory for days straight. Both unceasing,
embodying cool persistence and the spirit of the line from the Alfred
Lord Tennyson poem about that other Ulysses, “to strive, to seek, to
find.” Both, refusing to give up. Turning over in their minds option
after option, and trying each one with equal enthusiasm. Knowing
that eventually—inevitably—one will work. Welcoming the
opportunity to test and test and test, grateful for the priceless
knowledge this reveals.
The thing standing in your way isn’t going anywhere. You’re not
going to outthink it or outcreate it with some world-changing
epiphany. You’ve got to look at it and the people around you, who
have begun their inevitable chorus of doubts and excuses, and say,
as Margaret Thatcher famously did: “You turn if you want to. The
lady’s not for turning.”
Too many people think that great victories like Grant’s and
Edison’s came from a flash of insight. That they cracked the problem
with pure genius. In fact, it was the slow pressure, repeated from
many different angles, the elimination of so many other more
promising options, that slowly and surely churned the solution to the
top of the pile. Their genius was unity of purpose, deafness to doubt,
and the desire to stay at it.
So what if this method isn’t as “scientific” or “proper” as others?
The important part is that it works.
Working at it works. It’s that simple. (But again, not easy.)
For most of what we attempt in life, chops are not the issue. We’re
usually skilled and knowledgeable and capable enough. But do we
have the patience to refine our idea? The energy to beat on enough
doors until we find investors or supporters? The persistence to slog
through the politics and drama of working with a group?

Once you start attacking an obstacle, quitting is not an option. It
cannot enter your head. Abandoning one path for another that might
be more promising? Sure, but that’s a far cry from giving up. Once
you can envision yourself quitting altogether, you might as well ring
the bell. It’s done.
Consider this mind-set.
never in a hurry
never worried
never desperate
never stopping short
Remember and remind yourself of a phrase favored by Epictetus:
“persist and resist.” Persist in your efforts. Resist giving in to
distraction, discouragement, or disorder.
There’s no need to sweat this or feel rushed. No need to get upset
or despair. You’re not going anywhere—you’re not going to be
counted out. You’re in this for the long haul.
Because when you play all the way to the whistle, there’s no
reason to worry about the clock. You know you won’t stop until it’s
over—that every second available is yours to use. So temporary
setbacks aren’t discouraging. They are just bumps along a long road
that you intend to travel all the way down.
Doing new things invariably means obstacles. A new path is, by
definition, uncleared. Only with persistence and time can we cut
away debris and remove impediments. Only in struggling with the
impediments that made others quit can we find ourselves on
untrodden territory—only by persisting and resisting can we learn
what others were too impatient to be taught.
It’s okay to be discouraged. It’s not okay to quit. To know you want
to quit but to plant your feet and keep inching closer until you take
the impenetrable fortress you’ve decided to lay siege to in your own
life—that’s persistence.
Edison once explained that in inventing, “the first step is an
intuition—and comes with a burst—then difficulties arise.” What set
Edison apart from other inventors is tolerance for these difficulties,

and the steady dedication with which he applied himself toward
solving them.
In other words: It’s supposed to be hard. Your first attempts aren’t
going to work. It’s goings to take a lot out of you—but energy is an
asset we can always find more of. It’s a renewable resource. Stop
looking for an epiphany, and start looking for weak points. Stop
looking for angels, and start looking for angles. There are options.
Settle in for the long haul and then try each and every possibility, and
you’ll get there.
When people ask where we are, what we’re doing, how that
“situation” is coming along, the answer should be clear: We’re
working on it. We’re getting closer. When setbacks come, we
respond by working twice as hard.

ITERATE

What is defeat? Nothing but education; nothing but the first steps to
something better.
—WENDELL PHILLIPS

I

n Silicon Valley, start-ups don’t launch with polished, finished
businesses. Instead, they release their “Minimum Viable Product”
(MVP)—the most basic version of their core idea with only one or
two essential features.
The point is to immediately see how customers respond. And, if
that response is poor, to be able to fail cheaply and quickly. To avoid
making or investing in a product customers do not want.
As engineers now like to quip: Failure is a Feature.
But it’s no joke. Failure really can be an asset if what you’re trying
to do is improve, learn, or do something new. It’s the preceding
feature of nearly all successes. There’s nothing shameful about
being wrong, about changing course. Each time it happens we have
new options. Problems become opportunities.
The old way of business—where companies guess what
customers want from research and then produce those products in a
lab, isolated and insulated from feedback—reflects a fear of failure
and is deeply fragile in relation to it. If the highly produced product
flops on launch day, all that effort was wasted. If it succeeds, no one
really knows why or what was responsible for that success. The
MVP model, on the other hand, embraces failure and feedback. It

gets stronger by failure, dropping the features that don’t work, that
customers don’t find interesting, and then focusing the developers’
limited resources on improving the features that do.
In a world where we increasingly work for ourselves, are
responsible for ourselves, it makes sense to view ourselves like a
start-up—a start-up of one.
And that means changing the relationship with failure. It means
iterating, failing, and improving. Our capacity to try, try, try is
inextricably linked with our ability and tolerance to fail, fail, fail.
On the path to successful action, we will fail—possibly many
times. And that’s okay. It can be a good thing, even. Action and
failure are two sides of the same coin. One doesn’t come without the
other. What breaks this critical connection down is when people stop
acting—because they’ve taken failure the wrong way.
When failure does come, ask: What went wrong here? What can
be improved? What am I missing? This helps birth alternative ways
of doing what needs to be done, ways that are often much better
than what we started with. Failure puts you in corners you have to
think your way out of. It is a source of breakthroughs.
This is why stories of great success are often preceded by epic
failure—because the people in them went back to the drawing board.
They weren’t ashamed to fail, but spurred on, piqued by it.
Sometimes in sports it takes a close loss to finally convince an
underdog that they’ve got the ability to compete that competitor that
had intimidated (and beat) them for so long. The loss might be
painful, but as Franklin put it, it can also instruct.
With a business, we take most failures less personally and
understand they’re part of the process. If an investment or a new
product pays off, great. If it fails, we’re fine because we’re prepared
for it—we didn’t invest every penny in that option.
Great entrepreneurs are:
never wedded to a position
never afraid to lose a little of their investment
never bitter or embarrassed
never out of the game for long

They slip many times, but they don’t fall.
Even though we know that there are great lessons from failure—
lessons we’ve seen with our own two eyes—we repeatedly shrink
from it. We do everything we can to avoid it, thinking it’s
embarrassing or shameful. We fail, kicking and screaming.
Well why would I want to fail? It hurts.
I would never claim it doesn’t. But can we acknowledge that
anticipated, temporary failure certainly hurts less than catastrophic,
permanent failure? Like any good school, learning from failure isn’t
free. The tuition is paid in discomfort or loss and having to start over.
Be glad to pay the cost. There will be no better teacher for your
career, for your book, for your new venture. There’s a saying about
how the Irish ship captain located all the rocks in the harbor—using
the bottom of his boat. Whatever works, right?
Remember Erwin Rommel and the quick work he made of the
British and American forces in North Africa? There’s another part to
that story. The Allied forces actually chose that disadvantageous
battlefield on purpose. Churchill knew that they would have to take
their first stand against the Germans somewhere, but to do that and
lose in Europe would be disastrous for morale.
In North Africa, the British learned how to fight the Germans—and
early on they learned mostly by failure. But that was acceptable,
because they’d anticipated a learning curve and planned for it. They
welcomed it because they knew, like Grant and Edison did, what it
meant: victory further down the road. As a result, the Allied troops
Hitler faced in Italy were far better than those he’d faced in Africa
and the ones he ultimately faced in France and Germany were better
still.
The one way to guarantee we don’t benefit from failure—to ensure
it is a bad thing—is to not learn from it. To continue to try the same
thing over and over (which is the definition of insanity for a reason).
People fail in small ways all the time. But they don’t learn. They don’t
listen. They don’t see the problems that failure exposes. It doesn’t
make them better.
Thickheaded and resistant to change, these are the types who are
too self-absorbed to realize that the world doesn’t have time to

plead, argue, and convince them of their errors. Soft bodied and
hardheaded, they have too much armor and ego to fail well.
It’s time you understand that the world is telling you something
with each and every failure and action. It’s feedback—giving you
precise instructions on how to improve, it’s trying to wake you up
from your cluelessness. It’s trying to teach you something. Listen.
Lessons come hard only if you’re deaf to them. Don’t be.
Being able to see and understand the world this way is part and
parcel of overturning obstacles. Here, a negative becomes a
positive. We turn what would otherwise be disappointment into
opportunity. Failure shows us the way—by showing us what isn’t the
way.

FOLLOW THE PROCESS

Under the comb
the tangle and the straight path
are the same.
—HERACLITUS

C

oach Nick Saban doesn’t actually refer to it very often, but
every one of his assistants and players lives by it. They say it
for him, tattooing it at the front of their minds and on every action
they take, because just two words are responsible for their
unprecedented success: The Process.
Saban, the head coach of the University of Alabama football team
—perhaps the most dominant dynasty in the history of college
football—doesn’t focus on what every other coach focuses on, or at
least not the way they do. He teaches The Process.
“Don’t think about winning the SEC Championship. Don’t think
about the national championship. Think about what you
needed to do in this drill, on this play, in this moment. That’s
the process: Let’s think about what we can do today, the task
at hand.”
In the chaos of sport, as in life, process provides us a way.
It says: Okay, you’ve got to do something very difficult. Don’t focus
on that. Instead break it down into pieces. Simply do what you need

to do right now. And do it well. And then move on to the next thing.
Follow the process and not the prize.
The road to back-to-back championships is just that, a road. And
you travel along a road in steps. Excellence is a matter of steps.
Excelling at this one, then that one, and then the one after that.
Saban’s process is exclusively this—existing in the present, taking it
one step at a time, not getting distracted by anything else. Not the
other team, not the scoreboard or the crowd.
The process is about finishing. Finishing games. Finishing
workouts. Finishing film sessions. Finishing drives. Finishing reps.
Finishing plays. Finishing blocks. Finishing the smallest task you
have right in front of you and finishing it well.
Whether it’s pursuing the pinnacle of success in your field or
simply surviving some awful or trying ordeal, the same approach
works. Don’t think about the end—think about surviving. Making it
from meal to meal, break to break, checkpoint to checkpoint,
paycheck to paycheck, one day at a time.
And when you really get it right, even the hardest things become
manageable. Because the process is relaxing. Under its influence,
we needn’t panic. Even mammoth tasks become just a series of
component parts.
This was what the great nineteenth-century pioneer of
meteorology, James Pollard Espy, was shown in a chance encounter
as a young man. Unable to read and write until he was eighteen,
Espy attended a rousing speech by the famous orator Henry Clay.
After the talk, a spellbound Espy tried to make his way toward Clay,
but he couldn’t form the words to speak to his idol. One of his friends
shouted out for him: “He wants to be like you, even though he can’t
read.”
Clay grabbed one of his posters, which had the word CLAY written
in big letters. He looked at Espy and said, “You see that, boy?”
pointing to a letter. “That’s an A. Now, you’ve only got twenty-five
more letters to go.”
Espy had just been gifted the process. Within a year, he started
college.
I know that seems almost too simple. But envision, for a second, a
master practicing an exceedingly difficult craft and making it look

effortless. There’s no strain, no struggling. So relaxed. No exertion or
worry. Just one clean movement after another. That’s a result of the
process.
We can channel this, too. We needn’t scramble like we’re so often
inclined to do when some difficult task sits in front of us. Remember
the first time you saw a complicated algebra equation? It was a
jumble of symbols and unknowns. But then you stopped, took a deep
breath, and broke it down. You isolated the variables, solved for
them, and all that was left was the answer.
Do that now, for whatever obstacles you come across. We can
take a breath, do the immediate, composite part in front of us—and
follow its thread into the next action. Everything in order, everything
connected.
When it comes to our actions, disorder and distraction are death.
The unordered mind loses track of what’s in front of it—what matters
—and gets distracted by thoughts of the future. The process is order,
it keeps our perceptions in check and our actions in sync.
It seems obvious, but we forget this when it matters most.
Right now, if I knocked you down and pinned you to the ground,
how would you respond? You’d probably panic. And then you’d push
with all your strength to get me off you. It wouldn’t work; just using
my body weight, I would be able to keep your shoulders against the
ground with little effort—and you’d grow exhausted fighting it.
That’s the opposite of the process.
There is a much easier way. First, you don’t panic, you conserve
your energy. You don’t do anything stupid like get yourself choked
out by acting without thinking. You focus on not letting it get worse.
Then you get your arms up, to brace and create some breathing
room, some space. Now work to get on your side. From there you
can start to break down my hold on you: Grab an arm, trap a leg,
buck with your hips, slide in a knee and push away.
It’ll take some time, but you’ll get yourself out. At each step, the
person on top is forced to give a little up, until there’s nothing left.
Then you’re free—thanks to the process.
Being trapped is just a position, not a fate. You get out of it by
addressing and eliminating each part of that position through small,

deliberate actions—not by trying (and failing) to push it away with
superhuman strength.
With our business rivals, we rack our brains to think of some
mind-blowing new product that will make them irrelevant, and, in the
process, we take our eye off the ball. We shy away from writing a
book or making a film even though it’s our dream because it’s so
much work—we can’t imagine how we get from here to there.
How often do we compromise or settle because we feel that the
real solution is too ambitious or outside our grasp? How often do we
assume that change is impossible because it’s too big? Involves too
many different groups? Or worse, how many people are paralyzed
by all their ideas and inspirations? They chase them all and go
nowhere, distracting themselves and never making headway.
They’re brilliant, sure, but they rarely execute. They rarely get where
they want and need to go.
All these issues are solvable. Each would collapse beneath the
process. We’ve just wrongly assumed that it has to happen all at
once, and we give up at the thought of it. We are A-to-Z thinkers,
fretting about A, obsessing over Z, yet forgetting all about B through
Y.
We want to have goals, yes, so everything we do can be in the
service of something purposeful. When we know what we’re really
setting out to do, the obstacles that arise tend to seem smaller, more
manageable. When we don’t, each one looms larger and seems
impossible. Goals help put the blips and bumps in proper proportion.
When we get distracted, when we start caring about something
other than our own progress and efforts, the process is the helpful, if
occasionally bossy, voice in our head. It is the bark of the wise, older
leader who knows exactly who he is and what he’s got to do: Shut
up. Go back to your stations and try to think about what we are going
to do ourselves instead of worrying about what’s going on out there.
You know what your job is. Stop jawing and get to work.
The process is the voice that demands we take responsibility and
ownership. That prompts us to act even if only in a small way.
Like a relentless machine, subjugating resistance each and every
way it exists, little by little. Moving forward, one step at a time.

Subordinate strength to the process. Replace fear with the process.
Depend on it. Lean on it. Trust in it.
Take your time, don’t rush. Some problems are harder than
others. Deal with the ones right in front of you first. Come back to the
others later. You’ll get there.
The process is about doing the right things, right now. Not
worrying about what might happen later, or the results, or the whole
picture.

DO YOUR JOB, DO IT RIGHT

Whatever is rightly done, however humble, is noble. (Quidvis recte
factum quamvis humile praeclarum.)
—SIR HENRY ROYCE

L

ong past his humble beginnings, President Andrew Johnson
would speak proudly of his career as a tailor before he entered
politics. “My garments never ripped or gave way,” he would say.
On the campaign trail, a heckler once tried to embarrass him by
shouting about his working-class credentials. Johnson replied
without breaking stride: “That does not disconcert me in the least; for
when I used to be a tailor I had the reputation of being a good one,
and making close fits, always punctual with my customers, and
always did good work.”
Another president, James Garfield, paid his way through college
in 1851 by persuading his school, the Western Reserve Eclectic
Institute, to let him be the janitor in exchange for tuition. He did the
job every day smiling and without a hint of shame. Each morning,
he’d ring the university’s bell tower to start the classes—his day
already having long begun—and stomp to class with cheer and
eagerness.
Within just one year of starting at the school he was a professor—
teaching a full course load in addition to his studies. By his twentysixth birthday he was the dean.

This is what happens when you do your job—whatever it is—and
do it well.
These men went from humble poverty to power by always doing
what they were asked to do—and doing it right and with real pride.
And doing it better than anyone else. In fact, doing it well because no
one else wanted to do it.
Sometimes, on the road to where we are going or where we want
to be, we have to do things that we’d rather not do. Often when we
are just starting out, our first jobs “introduce us to the broom,” as
Andrew Carnegie famously put it. There’s nothing shameful about
sweeping. It’s just another opportunity to excel—and to learn.
But you, you’re so busy thinking about the future, you don’t take
any pride in the tasks you’re given right now. You just phone it all in,
cash your paycheck, and dream of some higher station in life. Or you
think, This is just a job, it isn’t who I am, it doesn’t matter.
Foolishness.
Everything we do matters—whether it’s making smoothies while
you save up money or studying for the bar—even after you already
achieved the success you sought. Everything is a chance to do and
be your best. Only self-absorbed assholes think they are too good
for whatever their current station requires.
Wherever we are, whatever we’re doing and wherever we are
going, we owe it to ourselves, to our art, to the world to do it well.
That’s our primary duty. And our obligation. When action is our
priority, vanity falls away.
An artist is given many different canvases and commissions in
their lifetime, and what matters is that they treat each one as a
priority. Whether it’s the most glamorous or highest paying is
irrelevant. Each project matters, and the only degrading part is giving
less than one is capable of giving.
Same goes for us. We will be and do many things in our lives.
Some are prestigious, some are onerous, none are beneath us. To
whatever we face, our job is to respond with:
hard work
honesty
helping others as best we can

You should never have to ask yourself, But what am I supposed to
do now? Because you know the answer: your job.
Whether anyone notices, whether we’re paid for it, whether the
project turns out successfully—it doesn’t matter. We can and always
should act with those three traits—no matter the obstacle.
There will never be any obstacles that can ever truly prevent us
from carrying out our obligation—harder or easier challenges, sure,
but never impossible. Each and every task requires our best.
Whether we’re facing down bankruptcy and angry customers, or
raking in money and deciding how to grow from here, if we do our
best we can be proud of our choices and confident they’re the right
ones. Because we did our job—whatever it is.
Yeah, yeah, I get it. “Obligations” sound stuffy and oppressive.
You want to be able to do whatever you want.
But duty is beautiful, and inspiring and empowering.
Steve Jobs cared even about the inside of his products, making
sure they were beautifully designed even though the users would
never see them. Taught by his father—who finished even the back of
his cabinets though they would be hidden against the wall—to think
like a craftsman. In every design predicament, Jobs knew his
marching orders: Respect the craft and make something beautiful.
Every situation is different, obviously. We’re not inventing the next
iPad or iPhone, but we are making something for someone—even if
it’s just our own résumé. Every part—especially the work that
nobody sees, the tough things we wanted to avoid or could have
skated away from—we can treat same way Jobs did: with pride and
dedication.
The great psychologist Viktor Frankl, survivor of three
concentration camps, found presumptuousness in the age-old
question: “What is the meaning of life?” As though it is someone
else’s responsibility to tell you. Instead, he said, the world is asking
you that question. And it’s your job to answer with your actions.
In every situation, life is asking us a question, and our actions are
the answer. Our job is simply to answer well.
Right action—unselfish, dedicated, masterful, creative—that is the
answer to that question. That’s one way to find the meaning of life.
And how to turn every obstacle into an opportunity.

If you see any of this as a burden, you’re looking at it the wrong
way.
Because all we need to do is those three little duties—to try hard,
to be honest, and to help others and ourselves. That’s all that’s been
asked of us. No more and no less.
Sure, the goal is important. But never forget that each individual
instance matters, too—each is a snapshot of the whole. The whole
isn’t certain, only the instances are.
How you do anything is how you can do everything.
We can always act right.

WHAT’S RIGHT IS WHAT WORKS

The cucumber is bitter? Then throw it out.
There are brambles in the path? Then go around.
That’s all you need to know.
—MARCUS AURELIUS

I

n 1915, deep in the jungles of South America, the rising conflict
between two rival American fruit companies came to a head. Each
desperately wanted to acquire the same five thousand acres of
valuable land.
The issue? Two different locals claimed to own the deed to the
plantation. In the no-man’s-land between Honduras and Guatemala,
neither company was able to tell who was the rightful owner so they
could buy it from them.
How they each responded to this problem was defined by their
company’s organization and ethos. One company was big and
powerful, the other crafty and cunning. The first, one of the most
powerful corporations in the United States: United Fruit. The second,
a small upstart owned by Samuel Zemurray.
To solve the problem, United Fruit dispatched a team of highpowered lawyers. They set out in search of every file and scrap of
paper in the country, ready to pay whatever it cost to win. Money,
time, and resources were no object.
Zemurray, the tiny, uneducated competitor, was outmatched,
right? He couldn’t play their game. So he didn’t. Flexible, fluid, and
defiant, he just met separately with both of the supposed owners and

bought the land from each of them. He paid twice, sure, but it was
over. The land was his. Forget the rule book, settle the issue.
This is pragmatism embodied. Don’t worry about the “right” way,
worry about the right way. This is how we get things done.
Zemurray always treated obstacles this way. Told he couldn’t build
a bridge he needed across the Utila River—because government
officials had been bribed by competitors to make bridges illegal—
Zemurray had his engineers build two long piers instead. And in
between which reached out far into the center of the river, they
strung a temporary pontoon that could be assembled and deployed
to connect them in a matter of hours. Railroads ran down each side
of the riverbank, going in opposite direction. When United Fruit
complained, Zemurray laughed and replied: “Why, that’s no bridge.
It’s just a couple of little old wharfs.”
Sometimes you do it this way. Sometimes that way. Not deploying
the tactics you learned in school but adapting them to fit each and
every situation. Any way that works—that’s the motto.
We spend a lot of time thinking about how things are supposed to
be, or what the rules say we should do. Trying to get it all perfect.
We tell ourselves that we’ll get started once the conditions are right,
or once we’re sure we can trust this or that. When, really, it’d be
better to focus on making due with what we’ve got. On focusing on
results instead of pretty methods.
As they say in Brazilian jujitsu, it doesn’t matter how you get your
opponents to the ground, after all, only that you take them down.
What Zemurray never lost sight of was the mission: getting
bananas across the river. Whether it was a bridge or two piers with a
dock in the middle, it didn’t matter so long as it got the cargo where it
needed to go. When he wanted to plant bananas on a particular
plantation, it wasn’t important to find the rightful owner of the land—it
was to become the rightful owner.
You’ve got your mission, whatever it is. To accomplish it, like the
rest of us you’re in the pinch between the way you wish things were
and the way they actually are (which always seem to be a disaster).
How far are you willing to go? What are you willing to do about it?
Scratch the complaining. No waffling. No submitting to
powerlessness or fear. You can’t just run home to Mommy. How are

you going to solve this problem? How are you going to get around
the rules that hold you back?
Maybe you’ll need to be a little more cunning or conniving than
feels comfortable. Sometimes that requires ignoring some outdated
regulations or asking for forgiveness from management later rather
than for permission (which would be denied) right now. But if you’ve
got an important mission, all that matters is that you accomplish it.
At twenty-one, Richard Wright was not the world-famous author
he would eventually be. But poor and black, he decided he would
read and no one could stop him. Did he storm the library and make a
scene? No, not in the Jim Crow South he didn’t. Instead, he forged a
note that said, “Dear Madam: Will you please let this nigger boy have
some books by HL Mencken?” (because no one would write that
about themselves, right?), and checked them out with a stolen library
card, pretending they were for someone else.
With the stakes this high, you better be willing to bend the rules or
do something desperate or crazy. To thumb your nose at the
authorities and say: What? This is not a bridge. I don’t know what
you’re talking about. Or, in some cases, giving the middle finger to
the people trying to hold you down and blowing right through their
evil, disgusting rules.
Pragmatism is not so much realism as flexibility. There are a lot of
ways to get from point A to point B. It doesn’t have to be a straight
line. It’s just got to get you where you need to go. But so many of us
spend so much time looking for the perfect solution that we pass up
what’s right in front of us.
As Deng Xiaoping once said, “I don’t care if the cat is black or
white, so long as it catches mice.”
The Stoics had their own reminder: “Don’t go expecting Plato’s
Republic.”
Because you’re never going to find that kind of perfection.
Instead, do the best with what you’ve got. Not that pragmatism is
inherently at odds with idealism or pushing the ball forward. The first
iPhone was revolutionary, but it still shipped without a copy-andpaste feature or a handful of other features Apple would have liked
to have included. Steve Jobs, the supposed perfectionist, knew that

at some point, you have to compromise. What mattered was that you
got it done and it worked.
Start thinking like a radical pragmatist: still ambitious, aggressive,
and rooted in ideals, but also imminently practical and guided by the
possible. Not on everything you would like to have, not on changing
the world right at this moment, but ambitious enough to get
everything you need. Don’t think small, but make the distinction
between the critical and the extra.
Think progress, not perfection.
Under this kind of force, obstacles break apart. They have no
choice. Since you’re going around them or making them irrelevant,
there is nothing for them to resist.

IN PRAISE OF THE FLANK ATTACK

Whoever cannot seek
the unforeseen sees nothing,
for the known way
is an impasse.
—HERACLITUS

T

he popular image of George Washington in American lore is of a
brave and bold general, towering over everything he surveyed,
repelling the occupied and tyrannical British. Of course, the true
picture is a little less glorious. Washington wasn’t a guerrilla, but he
was close enough. He was wily, evasive, often refusing to battle.
His army was small, undertrained, undersupplied, and fragile. He
waged a war mostly of defense, deliberately avoiding large
formations of British troops. For all the rhetoric, most of his
maneuvers were pinpricks against a stronger, bigger enemy. Hit and
run. Stick and move.
Never attack where it is obvious, Washington told his men. Don’t
attack as the enemy would expect, he explained, instead, “Where
little danger is apprehended, the more the enemy will be unprepared
and consequently there is the fairest prospect of success.” He had a
powerful sense of which minor skirmishes would feel and look like
major victories.
His most glorious “victory” wasn’t even a direct battle with the
British. Instead, Washington, nearly at the end of his rope, crossed
the Delaware at dawn on Christmas Day to attack a group of

sleeping German mercenaries who may or may not have been
drunk.
He was actually better at withdrawing than at advancing—skilled
at saving troops that otherwise would have been lost in defeat.
Washington rarely got trapped—he always had a way out. Hoping
simply to tire out his enemy, this evasiveness was a powerful
weapon—though not necessarily a glamorous one.
It’s not surprising then, as the general of the Continental Army and
the country’s first president, that his legacy has been whitewashed
and embellished a little. And he’s not the only general we’ve done it
for. The great myth of history, propagated by movies and stories and
our own ignorance, is that wars are won and lost by two great armies
going head-to-head in battle. It’s a dramatic, courageous notion—but
also very, very wrong.
In a study of some 30 conflicts comprising more than 280
campaigns from ancient to modern history, the brilliant strategist and
historian B. H. Liddell Hart came to a stunning conclusion: In only 6
of the 280 campaigns was the decisive victory a result of a direct
attack on the enemy’s main army.
Only six. That’s 2 percent.
If not from pitched battles, where do we find victory?
From everywhere else. From the flanks. From the unexpected.
From the psychological. From drawing opponents out from their
defenses. From the untraditional. From anything but . . .
As Hart writes in his masterwork Strategy:
[T]he Great Captain will take even the most hazardous indirect
approach—if necessary over mountains, deserts or swamps,
with only a fraction of the forces, even cutting himself loose
from his communications. Facing, in fact, every unfavorable
condition rather than accept the risk of stalemate invited by
direct approach.
When you’re at your wit’s end, straining and straining with all your
might, when people tell you you look like you might pop a vein . . .
Take a step back, then go around the problem. Find some
leverage. Approach from what is called the “line of least

expectation.”
What’s your first instinct when faced with a challenge? Is it to
outspend the competition? Argue with people in an attempt to
change long-held opinions? Are you trying to barge through the front
door? Because the back door, side doors, and windows may have
been left wide open.
Whatever you’re doing, it’s going to be harder (to say nothing of
impossible) if your plan includes defying physics or logic. Instead,
think of Grant realizing he had to bypass Vicksburg—not go at it—in
order to capture it. Think of Hall of Fame coach Phil Jackson and his
famous triangle offense, which is designed to automatically route the
basketball away from defensive pressure rather than attack it
directly.
If we’re starting from scratch and the established players have
had time to build up their defenses, there is just no way we are going
to beat them on their strengths. So it’s smarter to not even try, but
instead focus our limited resources elsewhere.
Part of the reason why a certain skill often seems so effortless for
great masters is not just because they’ve mastered the process—
they really are doing less than the rest of us who don’t know any
better. They choose to exert only calculated force where it will be
effective, rather than straining and struggling with pointless attrition
tactics.
As someone once put it after fighting Jigoro Kano, the legendary
five-foot-tall founder of judo, “Trying to fight with Kano was like trying
to fight with an empty jacket!”
That can be you.
Being outnumbered, coming from behind, being low on funds,
these don’t have to be disadvantages. They can be gifts. Assets that
make us less likely to commit suicide with a head-to-head attack.
These things force us to be creative, to find workarounds, to
sublimate the ego and do anything to win besides challenging our
enemies where they are strongest. These are the signs that tell us to
approach from an oblique angle.
In fact, having the advantage of size or strength or power is often
the birthing ground for true and fatal weakness. The inertia of
success makes it much harder to truly develop good technique.

People or companies who have that size advantage never really
have to learn the process when they’ve been able to coast on brute
force. And that works for them . . . until it doesn’t. Until they meet you
and you make quick work of them with deft and oblique maneuvers,
when you refuse to face them in the one setting they know: head-tohead.
We’re in the game of little defeating big. Therefore, Force can’t try
to match Force.
Of course, when pushed, the natural instinct is always to push
back. But martial arts teach us that we have to ignore this impulse.
We can’t push back, we have to pull until opponents lose their
balance. Then we make our move.
The art of the side-door strategy is a vast, creative space. And it is
by no means limited to war, business, or sales.
The great philosopher Søren Kierkegaard rarely sought to
convince people directly from a position of authority. Instead of
lecturing, he practiced a method he called “indirect communication.”
Kierkegaard would write under pseudonyms, where each fake
personality would embody a different platform or perspective—
writing multiple times on the same subject from multiple angles to
convey his point emotionally and dramatically. He would rarely tell
the reader “do this” or “think that.” Instead he would show new ways
of looking at or understanding the world.
You don’t convince people by challenging their longest and most
firmly held opinions. You find common ground and work from there.
Or you look for leverage to make them listen. Or you create an
alterative with so much support from other people that the opposition
voluntarily abandons its views and joins your camp.
The way that works isn’t always the most impressive. Sometimes
it even feels like you’re taking a shortcut or fighting unfairly. There’s a
lot of pressure to try to match people move for move, as if sticking
with what works for you is somehow cheating. Let me save you the
guilt and self-flagellation: It’s not.
You’re acting like a real strategist. You aren’t just throwing your
weight around and hoping it works. You’re not wasting your energy in
battles driven by ego and pride rather than tactical advantage.
Believe it or not, this is the hard way. That’s why it works.

Remember, sometimes the longest way around is the shortest
way home.

USE OBSTACLES AGAINST THEMSELVES

Wise men are able to make a fitting use even of their enmities.
—PLUTARCH

G

andhi didn’t fight for independence for India. The British Empire
did all of the fighting—and, as it happens, all of the losing.
That was deliberate, of course. Gandhi’s extensive satyagraha
campaign and civil disobedience show that action has many
definitions. It’s not always moving forward or even obliquely. It can
also be a matter of positions. It can be a matter of taking a stand.
Sometimes you overcome obstacles not by attacking them but by
withdrawing and letting them attack you. You can use the actions of
others against themselves instead of acting yourself.
Weak compared to the forces he hoped to change, Gandhi leaned
into that weakness, exaggerated it, exposed himself. He said to the
most powerful occupying military in the world, I’m marching to the
ocean to collect salt in direct violation of your laws. He was
provoking them—What are you going to do about it? There is
nothing wrong with what we’re doing—knowing that it placed
authorities in an impossible dilemma: Enforce a bankrupt policy or
abdicate. Within that framework, the military’s enormous strength is
neutralized. Its very usage is counterproductive.
Martin Luther King Jr., taking Gandhi’s lead, told his followers that
they would meet “physical force with soul force.” In other words, they
would use the power of opposites. In the face of violence they would

be peaceful, to hate they would answer with love—and in the
process, they would expose those attributes as indefensible and evil.
Opposites work. Nonaction can be action. It uses the power of
others and allows us to absorb their power as our own. Letting them
—or the obstacle—do the work for us.
Just ask the Russians, who defeated Napoléon and the Nazis not
by rigidly protecting their borders but by retreating into the interior
and leaving the winter to do their work on the enemy, bogged down
in battles far from home.
Is this an action? You bet it is.
Perhaps your enemy or obstacle really is insurmountable—as it
was for many of these groups. Perhaps in this case, you haven’t got
the ability to win through attrition (persistence) or you don’t want to
risk learning on the job (iterate). Okay. You’re still a long way from
needing to give up.
It is, however, time to acknowledge that some adversity might be
impossible for you to defeat—no matter how hard you try. Instead,
you must find some way to use the adversity, its energy, to help
yourself.
Before the invention of steam power, boat captains had an
ingenious way of defeating the wickedly strong current of the
Mississippi River. A boat going upriver would pull alongside a boat
about to head downriver, and after wrapping a rope around a tree or
a rock, the boats would tie themselves to each other. The second
boat would let go and let the river take it downstream, slingshotting
the other vessel upstream.
So instead of fighting obstacles, find a means of making them
defeat themselves.
There is a famous story of Alexander the Great doing just that—
and it was Alexander’s masterful use of an obstacle against itself
that gave observers their first hint that the ambitious teenager might
one day conquer the world. As a young man, he trained his famous
horse Bucephalus—the horse that even his father, King Philip II of
Macedon, could not break—by tiring him out. While others had tried
sheer force and whips and ropes, only to be bucked off, Alexander
succeeded by lightly mounting and simply hanging on until the horse
was calm. Having exhausted himself, Bucephalus had no choice but

to submit to his rider’s influence. Alexander would ride into battle on
this faithful horse for the next twenty years.
Now what of your obstacles?
Yes, sometimes we need to learn from Amelia Earhart and just
take action. But we also have to be ready to see that restraint might
be the best action for us to take. Sometimes in your life you need to
have patience—wait for temporary obstacles to fizzle out. Let two
jousting egos sort themselves out instead of jumping immediately
into the fray. Sometimes a problem needs less of you—fewer people
period—and not more.
When we want things too badly we can be our own worst enemy.
In our eagerness, we strip the very screw we want to turn and make
it impossible to ever get what we want. We spin our tires in the snow
or mud and dig a deeper rut—one that we’ll never get out of.
We get so consumed with moving forward that we forget that
there are other ways to get where we are heading. It doesn’t
naturally occur to us that standing still—or in some cases, even
going backward—might be the best way to advance. Don’t just do
something, stand there!
We push and push—to get a raise, a new client, to prevent some
exigency from happening. In fact, the best way to get what we want
might be to reexamine those desires in the first place. Or it might be
to aim for something else entirely, and use the impediment as an
opportunity to explore a new direction. In doing so, we might end up
creating a new venture that replaces our insufficient income entirely.
Or we might discover that in ignoring clients, we attract more—
finding that they want to work with someone who does not so badly
want to work with them. Or we rethink that disaster we feared (along
with everyone else) and come up with a way to profit from it when
and if it happens.
We wrongly assume that moving forward is the only way to
progress, the only way we can win. Sometimes, staying put, going
sideways, or moving backward is actually the best way to eliminate
what blocks or impedes your path.
There is a certain humility required in the approach. It means
accepting that the way you originally wanted to do things is not

possible. You just haven’t got it in you to do it the “traditional” way.
But so what?
What matters is whether a certain approach gets you to where
you want to go. And let’s be clear, using obstacles against
themselves is very different from doing nothing. Passive resistance
is, in fact, incredibly active. But those actions come in the form of
discipline, self-control, fearlessness, determination, and grand
strategy.
The great strategist Saul Alinsky believed that if you “push a
negative hard enough and deep enough it will break through into its
counterside.” Every positive has its negative. Every negative has its
positive. The action is in the pushing through—all the way through to
the other side. Making a negative into a positive.
This should be great solace. It means that very few obstacles are
ever too big for us. Because that bigness might in fact be an
advantage. Because we can use that bigness against the obstacle
itself. Remember, a castle can be an intimidating, impenetrable
fortress, or it can be turned into a prison when surrounded. The
difference is simply a shift in action and approach.
We can use the things that block us to our advantage, letting them
do the difficult work for us. Sometimes this means leaving the
obstacle as is, instead of trying so hard to change it.
The harder Bucephalus ran, the sooner he got tired out. The more
vicious the police response to civil disobedience, the more
sympathetic the cause becomes. The more they fight, the easier it
becomes. The harder you fight, the less you’ll achieve (other than
exhaustion).
So it goes with our problems.

CHANNEL YOUR ENERGY

When jarred, unavoidably, by circumstance revert at once to yourself
and don’t lose the rhythm more than you can help. You’ll have a
better grasp of harmony if you keep going back to it.
—MARCUS AURELIUS

A

s a tennis player, Arthur Ashe was a beautiful contradiction. To
survive segregation in the 1950s and 1960s, he learned from
his father to mask his emotions and feelings on the court. No
reacting, no getting upset at missed shots, and no challenging bad
calls. Certainly, as a black player he could not afford to show off,
celebrate, or be seen as trying too hard.
But his actual form and playing style was something quite
different. All the energy and emotion he had to suppress was
channeled into a bold and graceful playing form. While his face was
controlled, his body was alive—fluid, brilliant, and all over the court.
His style is best described in the epithet he created for himself:
“physically loose and mentally tight.”
For Arthur Ashe, this combination created a nearly unbeatable
tennis game. As a person he’d control his emotions, but as a player
he was swashbuckling, bold, and cool. He dove for balls and took—
and made—the kind of shots that made other players gasp. He was
able to do this because he was free. He was free where it mattered:
inside.
Other players, free to celebrate, free to throw tantrums or glower
at refs and opponents, never seemed to be able to handle the

pressure of high-stakes matches the way Ashe could. They often
mistook Ashe as inhuman, as bottled up. Feelings need an outlet, of
course, but Ashe deployed them to fuel his explosive speed, in his
slams and chips and dives. In the abandon with which he played,
there was none of the quiet prudence with which he composed
himself.
Adversity can harden you. Or it can loosen you up and make you
better—if you let it.
Rename it and claim it, that’s what Ashe did—as have many other
black athletes. The boxer Joe Louis, for example, knew that racist
white boxing fans would not tolerate an emotional black fighter, so he
sublimated all displays behind a steely, blank face. Known as the
Ring Robot, he greatly intimidated opponents by seeming almost
inhuman. He took a disadvantage and turned it into an unexpected
asset in the ring.
We all have our own constraints to deal with—rules and social
norms we’re required to observe that we’d rather not. Dress codes,
protocols, procedures, legal obligations, and company hierarchies
that are all telling us how we have to behave. Think about it too
much and it can start to feel oppressive, even suffocating. If we’re
not careful, this is likely to throw us off our game.
Instead of giving in to frustration, we can put it to good use. It can
power our actions, which, unlike our disposition, become stronger
and better when loose and bold. While others obsess with observing
the rules, we’re subtly undermining them and subverting them to our
advantage. Think water. When dammed by a man-made obstacle, it
does not simply sit stagnant. Instead, its energy is stored and
deployed, fueling the power plants that run entire cities.
Toussaint Louverture, the former Haitian slave turned general, so
exasperated his French enemies that they once remarked: “Cet
homme fait donc l’ouverture partout” (“This man makes an opening
everywhere”). He was so fluid, so uncontainable, he was actually
given the surname Louverture, meaning “the opening.” It makes
sense. Everything in his life had been an obstacle, and he turned as
many of his experiences as he could into openings. Why should
troops or politics or mountains or Napoléon himself have been any
different?

And yet we feel like going to pieces when the PowerPoint
projector won’t work (instead of throwing it aside and delivering an
exciting talk without notes). We stir up gossip with our coworkers
(instead of pounding something productive out on our keyboards).
We act out, instead of act.
But think of an athlete “in the pocket,” “in the zone,” “on a streak,”
and the seemingly insurmountable obstacles that fall in the face of
that effortless state. Enormous deficits collapse, every pass or shot
hits its intended target, fatigue melts away. Those athletes might be
stopped from carrying out this or that action, but not from their goal.
External factors influence the path, but not the direction: forward.
What setbacks in our lives could resist that elegant, fluid, and
powerful mastery?
To be physically and mentally loose takes no talent. That’s just
recklessness. (We want right action, not action period.) To be
physically and mentally tight? That’s called anxiety. It doesn’t work,
either. Eventually we snap. But physical looseness combined with
mental restraint? That is powerful.
It’s a power that drives our opponents and competitors nuts. They
think we’re toying with them. It’s maddening—like we aren’t even
trying, like we’ve tuned out the world. Like we’re immune to external
stressors and limitations on the march toward our goals.
Because we are.

SEIZE THE OFFENSIVE

The best men are not those who have waited for chances but who
have taken them; besieged chance, conquered the chance, and
made chance the servitor.
—E. H. CHAPIN

I

n the spring of 2008, Barack Obama’s presidential candidacy was
imperiled. A race scandal involving inflammatory remarks by his
pastor, Reverend Jeremiah Wright, threatened to unravel his
campaign—to break the thin bond he’d established between black
and white voters at a critical moment in the primaries.
Race, religion, demographics, controversy emulsified into one. It
was the kind of political disaster that political campaigns do not
survive, leaving most candidates so paralyzed by fear that they defer
taking action. Their typical response is to hide, ignore, obfuscate, or
distance themselves.
Whatever one thinks about Obama’s politics, no one can deny
what happened next. He turned one of the lowest moments in his
campaign into a surprise offensive.
Against all advice and convention, he decided that he would take
action and that this negative situation was actually a “teachable
moment.” Obama channeled the attention and energy swirling
around the controversy to draw a national audience and speak
directly to the American people of the divisive issue of race.
This speech, known today as the “A More Perfect Union” speech,
was a transformative moment. Instead of distancing himself, Obama

addressed everything directly. In doing so, he not only neutralized a
potentially fatal controversy but created an opportunity to seize the
electoral high ground. Absorbing the power of that negative situation,
his campaign was instantly infused with an energy that propelled it
into the White House.
If you think it’s simply enough to take advantage of the
opportunities that arise in your life, you will fall short of greatness.
Anyone sentient can do that. What you must do is learn how to press
forward precisely when everyone around you sees disaster.
It’s at the seemingly bad moments, when people least expect it,
that we can act swiftly and unexpectedly to pull off a big victory.
While others are arrested by discouragement, we are not. We see
the moment differently, and act accordingly.
Ignore the politics and focus on the brilliant strategic advice that
Obama’s adviser Rahm Emanuel, once gave him. “You never want a
serious crisis to go to waste. Things that we had postponed for too
long, that were long-term, are now immediate and must be dealt
with. [A] crisis provides the opportunity for us to do things that you
could not do before.”
If you look at history, some of our greatest leaders used shocking
or negative events to push through much-needed reforms that
otherwise would have had little chance of passing. We can apply that
in our own lives.
You always planned to do something. Write a screenplay. Travel.
Start a business. Approach a possible mentor. Launch a movement.
Well, now something has happened—some disruptive event like a
failure or an accident or a tragedy. Use it.
Perhaps you’re stuck in bed recovering. Well, now you have time
to write. Perhaps your emotions are overwhelming and painful, turn it
into material. You lost your job or a relationship? That’s awful, but
now you can travel unencumbered. You’re having a problem? Now
you know exactly what to approach that mentor about. Seize this
moment to deploy the plan that has long sat dormant in your head.
Every chemical reaction requires a catalyst. Let this be yours.
Ordinary people shy away from negative situations, just as they
do with failure. They do their best to avoid trouble. What great
people do is the opposite. They are their best in these situations.

They turn personal tragedy or misfortune—really anything,
everything—to their advantage.
But this crisis in front of you? You’re wasting it feeling sorry for
yourself, feeling tired or disappointed. You forget: Life speeds on the
bold and favors the brave.
We sit here and complain that we’re not being given opportunities
or chances. But we are.
At certain moments in our brief existences we are faced with great
trials. Often those trials are frustrating, unfortunate, or unfair. They
seem to come exactly when we think we need them the least. The
question is: Do we accept this as an exclusively negative event, or
can we get past whatever negativity or adversity it represents and
mount an offensive? Or more precisely, can we see that this
“problem” presents an opportunity for a solution that we have long
been waiting for?
If you don’t take that, it’s on you.
Napoleon described war in simple terms: Two armies are two
bodies that clash and attempt to frighten each other. At impact, there
is a moment of panic and it is that moment that the superior
commander turns to his advantage.
Rommel, for instance, was renowned for his Fronterführing, his
sixth sense for the decisive point in battle. He had an acute ability to
feel—even in the heat of the moment—the precise instance when
going on the offensive would be most effective. It’s what allowed him
to, repeatedly and often unbelievably, snatch victory from the jaws of
defeat.
Where others saw disaster or, at best, simply the normal noise
and dust of a battle, Rommel sensed opportunities. “It is given to
me,” he said, “to feel where the enemy is weak.” And on these
feelings he would attack with every iota of his energy. Seizing control
of the tempo and never giving it up.
Great commanders look for decision points. For it is bursts of
energy directed at decisive points that break things wide open. They
press and press and press and then, exactly when the situation
seems hopeless—or, more likely, hopelessly deadlocked—they
press once more.

In many battles, as in life, the two opposing forces will often reach
a point of mutual exhaustion. It’s the one who rises the next morning
after a long day of fighting and rallies, instead of retreating—the one
who says, I intend to attack and whip them right here and now—who
will carry victory home . . . intelligently.
This is what Obama did. Not shirking, not giving in to exhaustion
despite the long neck-and-neck primary. But rallying at the last
moment. Transcending the challenge and reframing it, triumphing as
a result of it. He turned an ugly incident into that “teachable
moment,” and one of the most profound speeches on race in our
history.
The obstacle is not only turned upside down but used as a
catapult.

PREPARE FOR NONE OF IT TO WORK

In the meantime, cling tooth and nail to the following rule: not to give
in to adversity, not to trust prosperity, and always take full note of
fortune’s habit of behaving just as she pleases.
—SENECA

P

erceptions can be managed. Actions can be directed.
We can always think clearly, respond creatively. Look for
opportunity, seize the initiative.
What we can’t do is control the world around us—not as much as
we’d like to, anyway. We might perceive things well, then act rightly,
and fail anyway.
Run it through your head like this: Nothing can ever prevent us
from trying. Ever.
All creativity and dedication aside, after we’ve tried, some
obstacles may turn out to be impossible to overcome. Some actions
are rendered impossible, some paths impassable. Some things are
bigger than us.
This is not necessarily a bad thing. Because we can turn that
obstacle upside down, too, simply by using it as an opportunity to
practice some other virtue or skill—even if it is just learning to accept
that bad things happen, or practicing humility.
It’s an infinitely elastic formula: In every situation, that which
blocks our path actually presents a new path with a new part of us. If
someone you love hurts you, there is a chance to practice
forgiveness. If your business fails, now you can practice acceptance.

If there is nothing else you can do for yourself, at least you can try to
help others.
Problems, as Duke Ellington once said, are a chance for us to do
our best.
Just our best, that’s it. Not the impossible.
We must be willing to roll the dice and lose. Prepare, at the end of
the day, for none of it to work.
Anyone in pursuit of a goal comes face-to-face with this time and
time again. Sometimes, no amount of planning, no amount of
thinking—no matter how hard we try or patiently we persist—will
change the fact that some things just aren’t going to work.
The world could use fewer martyrs.
We have it within us to be the type of people who try to get things
done, try with everything we’ve got and, whatever verdict comes in,
are ready to accept it instantly and move on to whatever is next.
Is that you? Because it can be.

PART III

Will

WHAT IS WILL? Will is our internal power, which can never be
affected by the outside world. It is our final trump card. If action is
what we do when we still have some agency over our situation, the
will is what we depend on when agency has all but disappeared.
Placed in some situation that seems unchangeable and undeniably
negative, we can turn it into a learning experience, a humbling
experience, a chance to provide comfort to others. That’s will power.
But that needs to be cultivated. We must prepare for adversity and
turmoil, we must learn the art of acquiescence and practice
cheerfulness even in dark times. Too often people think that will is
how bad we want something. In actuality, the will has a lot more to
do with surrender than with strength. Try “God willing” over “the will
to win” or “willing it into existence,” for even those attributes can be
broken. True will is quiet humility, resilience, and flexibility; the other
kind of will is weakness disguised by bluster and ambition. See
which lasts longer under the hardest of obstacles.

THE DISCIPLINE OF THE WILL

B

ecause he has become more myth than man, most people are
unaware that Abraham Lincoln battled crippling depression his
entire life. Known at the time as melancholy, his depression was
often debilitating and profound—nearly driving him to suicide on two
separate occasions.
His penchant for jokes and bawdy humor, which we find more
pleasant to remember him for, was in many ways the opposite of
what life must have seemed like to him during his darker moments.
Though he could be light and joyous, Lincoln suffered periods of
intense brooding, isolation, and pain. Inside, he struggled to manage
a heavy burden that often felt impossible to lift.
Lincoln’s life was defined by enduring and transcending great
difficulty. Growing up in rural poverty, losing his mother while he was
still a child, educating himself, teaching himself the law, losing the
woman he loved as a young man, practicing law in a small country
town, experiencing multiple defeats at the ballot box as he made his
way through politics, and, of course, the bouts of depression, which
at the time were not understood or appreciated as a medical
condition. All of these were impediments that Lincoln reduced with a
kind of prodding, gracious ambition, and smiling, tender endurance.
Lincoln’s personal challenges had been so intense that he came
to believe they were destined for him in some way, and that the
depression, especially, was a unique experience that prepared him
for greater things. He learned to endure all this, articulate it, and find
benefit and meaning from it. Understanding this is key to
understanding the man’s greatness.

For most of Lincoln’s political career, slavery was a dark cloud that
hung over our entire nation, a cloud that portended an awful storm.
Some ran from it, others resigned themselves to it or became
apologists, most assumed it meant the permanent breakup of the
Union—or worse, the end of the world as they knew it.
It came to be that every quality produced by Lincoln’s personal
journey was exactly what was required to lead the nation through its
own journey and trial. Unlike other politicians, he was not tempted to
lose himself in petty conflict and distractions, he could not be
sanguine, he could not find it in his heart to hate like others would.
His own experience with suffering drove his compassion to allay it in
others. He was patient because he knew that difficult things took
time. Above all, he found purpose and relief in a cause bigger than
himself and his personal struggles.
The nation called for a leader of magnanimity and force of
purpose—it found one in Lincoln, a political novice who was
nevertheless a seasoned expert on matters of will and patience.
These attributes were born of his own “severe experience,” as he
often called it, and the characteristics were representative of a
singular ability to lead the nation through one of its most difficult and
painful trials: the Civil War.
As crafty and ambitious and smart as he was, Lincoln’s real
strength was his will: the way he was able to resign himself to an
onerous task without giving in to hopelessness, the way he could
contain both humor and deadly seriousness, the way he could use
his own private turmoil to teach and help others, the way he was
able to rise above the din and see politics philosophically. “This too
shall pass” was Lincoln’s favorite saying, one he once said was
applicable in any and every situation one could encounter.
To live with his depression, Lincoln had developed a strong inner
fortress that girded him. And in 1861 it again gave him what he
needed in order to endure and struggle through a war that was about
to begin. Over four years, the war was to become nearly
incomprehensibly violent, and Lincoln, who’d attepted at first to
prevent it, would fight to win justly, and finally try to end it with
“malice towards none.” Admiral David Porter, who was with Lincoln
in his last days, described it as though Lincoln “seemed to think only

that he had an unpleasant duty to perform” and set himself to
“perform it as smoothly as possible.”
We should count ourselves lucky to never experience such a trial,
or be required, as Lincoln had been, to hold and be able to draw
from our personal woe in order to surmount it. But we certainly can
and must learn from his poise and courage.
Clearheadedness and action are not always enough, in politics or
in life. Some obstacles are beyond a snap of the fingers or novel
solution. It is not always possible for one man to rid the world of a
great evil or stop a country bent toward conflict. Of course, we try—
because it can happen. But we should be ready for it not to. And we
need to be able to find a greater purpose in this suffering and handle
it with firmness and forbearance.
This was Lincoln: always ready with a new idea or innovative
approach (whether it was sending a supply boat instead of
reinforcements to the troops besieged at Fort Sumter, or timing the
Emancipation Proclamation with a Union victory at Antietam to back
it with the appearance of strength) but equally prepared for the
worst. And then prepared to make the best of the worst.
Leadership requires determination and energy. And certain
situations, at times, call on leaders to marshal that determined
energy simply to endure. To provide strength in terrible times.
Because of what Lincoln had gone through, because of what he’d
struggled with and learned to cope with in his own life, he was able
to lead. To hold a nation, a cause, an effort, together.
This is the avenue for the final discipline: the Will. If Perception
and Action were the disciplines of the mind and the body, then Will is
the discipline of the heart and the soul. The will is the one thing we
control completely, always. Whereas I can try to mitigate harmful
perceptions and give 100 percent of my energy to actions, those
attempts can be thwarted or inhibited. My will is different, because it
is within me.
Will is fortitude and wisdom—not just about specific obstacles but
about life itself and where the obstacles we are facing fit within it. It
gives us ultimate strength. As in: the strength to endure,
contextualize, and derive meaning from the obstacles we cannot

simply overcome (which, as it happens, is the way of flipping the
unflippable).
Even in his own time, Lincoln’s contemporaries marveled at the
calmness, the gravity, and compassion of the man. Today, those
qualities seem almost godlike—almost superhuman. His sense of
what needed to be done set him apart. As though he were above or
beyond the bitter divisions that weighed everyone else down. As
though he were from another planet.
In a way, he was. Or at least he had traveled from somewhere
very far away, somewhere deep inside himself, from where others
hadn’t. Schooled in suffering, to quote Virgil, Lincoln learned “to
comfort those who suffer too.” This, too, is part of the will—to think of
others, to make the best of a terrible situation that we tried to prevent
but could not, to deal with fate with cheerfulness and compassion.
Lincoln’s words went to the people’s hearts because they came
from his, because he had access to a part of the human experience
that many had walled themselves off from. His personal pain was an
advantage.
Lincoln was strong and decisive as a leader. But he also
embodied the Stoic maxim: sustine et abstine. Bear and forbear.
Acknowledge the pain but trod onward in your task. Had the war
gone on even longer, Lincoln would have lead his people through it.
Had the Union lost the Civil War, he’d have known that he’d done
everything he could in pursuit of victory. More important, if Lincoln
had been defeated, he was prepared to bear whatever the resulting
consequences with dignity and strength and courage. Providing an
example for others, in victory or in defeat—whichever occurred.
With all our modern technology has come the conceited delusion
that we control the world around us. We’re convinced that we can
now, finally, control the uncontrollable.
Of course that is not true. It’s highly unlikely we will ever get rid of
all the unpleasant and unpredictable parts of life. One needs only to
look at history to see how random and vicious and awful the world
can be. The incomprehensible happens all the time.
Certain things in life will cut you open like a knife. When that
happens—at that exposing moment—the world gets a glimpse of

what’s truly inside you. So what will be revealed when you’re sliced
open by tension and pressure? Iron? Or air? Or bullshit?
As such, the will is the critical third discipline. We can think, act,
and finally adjust to a world that is inherently unpredictable. The will
is what prepares us for this, protects us against it, and allows us to
thrive and be happy in spite of it. It is also the most difficult of all the
disciplines. It’s what allows us to stand undisturbed while others wilt
and give in to disorder. Confident, calm, ready to work regardless of
the conditions. Willing and able to continue, even during the
unthinkable, even when our worst nightmares have come true.
It’s much easier to control our perceptions and emotions than it is
to give up our desire to control other people and events. It’s easier to
persist in our efforts and actions than to endure the uncomfortable or
the painful. It’s easier to think and act than it is to practice wisdom.
These lessons come harder but are, in the end, the most critical to
wresting advantage from adversity. In every situation, we can
Always prepare ourselves for more difficult times.
Always accept what we’re unable to change.
Always manage our expectations.
Always persevere.
Always learn to love our fate and what happens to us.
Always protect our inner self, retreat into ourselves.
Always submit to a greater, larger cause.
Always remind ourselves of our own mortality.
And, of course, prepare to start the cycle once more.

BUILD YOUR INNER CITADEL

If thy faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.
—PROVERBS 24:10

B

y age twelve, Theodore Roosevelt had spent almost every day
of his short life struggling with horrible asthma. Despite his
privileged birth, his life hung in a precarious balance—the attacks
were an almost nightly near-death experience. Tall, gangly, and frail,
the slightest exertion would upset the entire balance and leave him
bedridden for weeks.
One day his father came into his room and delivered a message
that would change the young boy’s life: “Theodore, you have the
mind but haven’t got the body. I’m giving you the tools to make your
body. It’s going to be hard drudgery and I think you have the
determination to go through with it.”
You’d think that would be lost on a child, especially a fragile one
born into great wealth and status. But according to Roosevelt’s
younger sister, who witnessed the conversation, it wasn’t. His
response, using what would become his trademark cheerful grit, was
to look at his father and say with determination: “I’ll make my body.”
At the gym that his father built on the second-floor porch, young
Roosevelt proceeded to work out feverishly every day for the next
five years, slowly building muscle and strengthening his upper body
against his weak lungs and for the future. By his early twenties the

battle against asthma was essentially over, he’d worked—almost
literally—that weakness out of his body.
That gym work prepared a physically weak but smart young boy
for the uniquely challenging course on which the nation and the
world were about to embark. It was the beginning of his preparation
for and fulfillment of what he would call “the Strenuous Life.”
And for Roosevelt, life threw a lot at him: He lost a wife and his
mother in rapid succession, he faced powerful, entrenched political
enemies who despised his progressive agenda, was dealt defeat in
elections, the nation was embroiled in foreign wars, and he survived
nearly fatal assassination attempts. But he was equipped for it all
because of his early training and because he kept at it every single
day.
Are you similarly prepared? Could you actually handle yourself if
things suddenly got worse?
We take weakness for granted. We assume that the way we’re
born is the way we simply are, that our disadvantages are
permanent. And then we atrophy from there.
That’s not necessarily the best recipe for the difficulties of life.
Not everyone accepts their bad start in life. They remake their
bodies and their lives with activities and exercise. They prepare
themselves for the hard road. Do they hope they never have to walk
it? Sure. But they are prepared for it in any case.
Are you?
Nobody is born with a steel backbone. We have to forge that
ourselves.
We craft our spiritual strength through physical exercise, and our
physical hardiness through mental practice (mens sana in corpore
sano—sound mind in a strong body).
This approach goes back to the ancient philosophers. Every bit of
the philosophy they developed was intended to reshape, prepare,
and fortify them for the challenges to come. Many saw themselves
as mental athletes—after all, the brain is a muscle like any other
active tissue. It can be built up and toned through the right exercises.
Over time, their muscle memory grew to the point that they could
intuitively respond to every situation. Especially obstacles.

It is said of the Jews, deprived of a stable homeland for so long,
their temples destroyed, and their communities in the Diaspora, that
they were forced to rebuild not physically but within their minds. The
temple became a metaphysical one, located independently in the
mind of every believer. Each one—wherever they’d been dispersed
around the world, whatever persecution or hardship they faced—
could draw upon it for strength and security.
Consider the line from the Haggadah: “In every generation a
person is obligated to view himself as if he were the one who went
out of Egypt.”
During Passover Seder, the menu is bitter herbs and unleavened
bread—the “bread of affliction.” Why? In some ways, this taps into
the fortitude that sustained the community for generations. The ritual
not only celebrates and honors Jewish traditions, but it prompts
those partaking in the feast to visualize and possess the strength
that has kept them going.
This is strikingly similar to what the Stoics called the Inner Citadel,
that fortress inside of us that no external adversity can ever break
down. An important caveat is that we are not born with such a
structure; it must be built and actively reinforced. During the good
times, we strengthen ourselves and our bodies so that during the
difficult times, we can depend on it. We protect our inner fortress so
it may protect us.
To Roosevelt, life was like an arena and he was a gladiator. In
order to survive, he needed to be strong, resilient, fearless, ready for
anything. And he was willing to risk great personal harm and expend
massive amounts of energy to develop that hardiness.
You’ll have far better luck toughening yourself up than you ever
will trying to take the teeth out of a world that is—at best—indifferent
to your existence. Whether we were born weak like Roosevelt or we
are currently experiencing good times, we should always prepare for
things to get tough. In our own way, in our own fight, we are all in the
same position Roosevelt was in.
No one is born a gladiator. No one is born with an Inner Citadel. If
we’re going to succeed in achieving our goals despite the obstacles
that may come, this strength in will must be built.

To be great at something takes practice. Obstacles and adversity
are no different. Though it would be easier to sit back and enjoy a
cushy modern life, the upside of preparation is that we’re not
disposed to lose all of it—least of all our heads—when someone or
something suddenly messes with our plans.
It’s almost a cliché at this point, but the observation that the way
to strengthen an arch is to put weight on it—because it binds the
stones together, and only with tension does it hold weight—is a great
metaphor.
The path of least resistance is a terrible teacher. We can’t afford
to shy away from the things that intimidate us. We don’t need to take
our weaknesses for granted.
Are you okay being alone? Are you strong enough to go a few
more rounds if it comes to that? Are you comfortable with
challenges? Does uncertainty bother you? How does pressure feel?
Because these things will happen to you. No one knows when or
how, but their appearance is certain. And life will demand an answer.
You chose this for yourself, a life of doing things. Now you better be
prepared for what it entails.
It’s your armor plating. It doesn’t make you invincible, but it helps
prepare you for when fortune shifts . . . and it always does.

ANTICIPATION (THINKING NEGATIVELY)

Offer a guarantee and disaster threatens.
—ANCIENT INSCRIPTION AT THE ORACLE OF DELPHI

calls her staff into the conference room on the eve of the
A CEO
launch of a major new initiative. They file in and take their seats
around the table. She calls the meeting to attention and begins: “I
have bad news. The project has failed spectacularly. Tell me what
went wrong?”
What?! But we haven’t even launched yet . . .
That’s the point. The CEO is forcing an exercise in hindsight—in
advance. She is using a technique designed by psychologist Gary
Klein known as a premortem.
In a postmortem, doctors convene to examine the causes of a
patient’s unexpected death so they can learn and improve for the
next time a similar circumstance arises. Outside of the medical
world, we call this a number of things—a debriefing, an exit
interview, a wrap-up meeting, a review—but whatever it’s called, the
idea is the same: We’re examining the project in hindsight, after it
happened.
A premortem is different. In it, we look to envision what could go
wrong, what will go wrong, in advance, before we start. Far too many
ambitious undertakings fail for preventable reasons. Far too many
people don’t have a backup plan because they refuse to consider
that something might not go exactly as they wish.

Your plan and the way things turn out rarely resemble each other.
What you think you deserve is also rarely what you’ll get. Yet we
constantly deny this fact and are repeatedly shocked by the events
of the world as they unfold.
It’s ridiculous. Stop setting yourself up for a fall.
No one has ever said this better than Mike Tyson, who, reflecting
on the collapse of his fortune and fame, told a reporter, “If you’re not
humble, life will visit humbleness upon you.”
If only more people had been thinking worst-case scenario at
critical points in our lifetimes, the tech bubble, Enron, 9/11, the
invasion of Iraq, and the real estate bubble might have been
avoidable. No one wanted to consider what could happen, and the
result? Catastrophe.
Today, the premortem is increasingly popular in business circles,
from start-ups to Fortune 500 companies and the Harvard Business
Review. But like all great ideas, it is actually nothing new. The credit
goes to the Stoics. They even had a better name: premeditatio
malorum (premeditation of evils).
A writer like Seneca would begin by reviewing or rehearsing his
plans, say, to take a trip. And then he would go over, in his head (or
in writing), the things that could go wrong or prevent it from
happening: a storm could arise, the captain could fall ill, the ship
could be attacked by pirates.
“Nothing happens to the wise man against his expectation,” he
wrote to a friend. “. . . nor do all things turn out for him as he wished
but as he reckoned—and above all he reckoned that something
could block his plans.”
Always prepared for disruption, always working that disruption into
our plans. Fitted, as they say, for defeat or victory. And let’s be
honest, a pleasant surprise is a lot better than an unpleasant one.
What if . . .
Then I will . . .
What if . . .
Instead I’ll just . . .
What if . . .
No problem, we can always . . .

And in the case where nothing could be done, the Stoics would
use it as an important practice to do something the rest of us too
often fail to do: manage expectations. Because sometimes the only
answer to “What if . . .” is, It will suck but we’ll be okay.
Your world is ruled by external factors. Promises aren’t kept. You
don’t always get what is rightfully yours, even if you earned it. Not
everything is as clean and straightforward as the games they play in
business school. Be prepared for this.
You have to make concessions for the world around you. We are
dependent on other people. Not everyone can be counted on like
you can (though, let’s be honest, we’re all our own worst enemy
sometimes). And that means people are going to make mistakes and
screw up your plans—not always, but a lot of the time.
If this comes as a constant surprise each and every time it occurs,
you’re not only going to be miserable, you’re going to have a much
harder time accepting it and moving on to attempts number two,
three, and four. The only guarantee, ever, is that things will go
wrong. The only thing we can use to mitigate this is anticipation.
Because the only variable we control completely is ourselves.
Common wisdom provides us with the maxims:
Beware the calm before the storm.
Hope for the best, prepare for the worst.
The worst is yet to come.
It gets worse before it gets better.
The world might call you a pessimist. Who cares? It’s far better to
seem like a downer than to be blindsided or caught off guard. It’s
better to meditate on what could happen, to probe for weaknesses in
our plans, so those inevitable failures can be correctly perceived,
appropriately addressed, or simply endured.
Then, the real reason we won’t have any problem thinking about
bad luck is because we’re not afraid of what it portends. We’re
prepared in advance for adversity—it’s other people who are not. In
other words, this bad luck is actually a chance for us to make up
some time. We’re like runners who train on hills or at altitude so they
can beat the runners who expected the course would be flat.

Anticipation doesn’t magically make things easier, of course. But
we are prepared for them to be as hard as they need to be, as hard
as they actually are.
As a result of our anticipation, we understand the range of
potential outcomes and know that they are not all good (they rarely
are). We can accommodate ourselves to any of them. We
understand that it could possibly all go wrong. And now we can get
back to the task at hand.
You know you want to accomplish X, so you invest time, money,
and relationships into achieving it. About the worst thing that can
happen is not something going wrong, but something going wrong
and catching you by surprise. Why? Because unexpected failure is
discouraging and being beaten back hurts.
But the person who has rehearsed in their mind what could go
wrong will not be caught by surprise. The person ready to be
disappointed won’t be. They will have the strength to bear it. They
are not as likely to get discouraged or to shirk from the task that lies
before them, or make a mistake in the face of it.
You know what’s better than building things up in your
imagination? Building things up in real life. Of course, it’s a lot more
fun to build things up in your imagination than it is to tear them down.
But what purpose does that serve? It only sets you up for
disappointment. Chimeras are like bandages—they hurt only when
torn away.
With anticipation, we have time to raise defenses, or even avoid
them entirely. We’re ready to be driven off course because we’ve
plotted a way back. We can resist going to pieces if things didn’t go
as planned. With anticipation, we can endure.
We are prepared for failure and ready for success.

THE ART OF ACQUIESCENCE

The Fates guide the person who accepts them and hinder the
person who resists them.
—CLEANTHES

T

homas Jefferson: born quiet, contemplative, and reserved—
purportedly with a speech impediment. Compared to the great
orators of his time—Patrick Henry, John Wesley, Edmund Burke—he
was a terrible public speaker.
His heart set on politics, he had two options: Fight against this
sentence, or accept it.
He chose the latter, channeling the energy into his writing, which
others put into oratory instead. There he found his medium. He
found he could express himself clearly. Writing was his strength.
Jefferson was the one the founding fathers turned to when they
needed the Declaration of Independence. He wrote one of the most
important documents in history, in a single draft.
Jefferson just wasn’t a public speaker—that doesn’t make him
less of a man for acknowledging it and acting accordingly.
Same goes for Edison, who, as most people have no idea, was
almost completely deaf. Or Helen Keller, who was deaf and blind.
For both, it was the deprivation of these senses—and acceptance
rather than resentment of that fact—that allowed them to develop
different, but acutely powerful, senses to adjust to their reality.

It doesn’t always feel that way but constraints in life are a good
thing. Especially if we can accept them and let them direct us. They
push us to places and to develop skills that we’d otherwise never
have pursued. Would we rather have everything? Sure, but that isn’t
up to us.
“True genius,” as the infamous Dr. Samuel Johnson once said, “is
a mind of large general powers accidentally determined in some
particular direction.”
That channeling requires consent. It requires acceptance. We
have to allow some accidents to happen to us.
I can’t just give up! I want to fight!
You know you’re not the only one who has to accept things you
don’t necessarily like, right? It’s part of the human condition.
If someone we knew took traffic signals personally, we would
judge them insane.
Yet this is exactly what life is doing to us. It tells us to come to a
stop here. Or that some intersection is blocked or that a particular
road has been rerouted through an inconvenient detour. We can’t
argue or yell this problem away. We simply accept it.
That is not to say we allow it to prevent us from reaching our
ultimate destination. But it does change the way we travel to get
there and the duration of the trip.
When a doctor gives you orders or a diagnosis—even if it’s the
opposite of what you wanted—what do you do? You accept it. You
don’t have to like or enjoy the treatment but you know that denying it
only delays the cure.
After you’ve distinguished between the things that are up to you
and the things that aren’t (ta eph’hemin, ta ouk eph’hemin), and the
break comes down to something you don’t control . . . you’ve got
only one option: acceptance.
The shot didn’t go in.
The stock went to zero.
The weather disrupted the shipment.
Say it with me: C’est la vie. It’s all fine.
You don’t have to like something to master it—or to use it to some
advantage. When the cause of our problem lies outside of us, we are
better for accepting it and moving on. For ceasing to kick and fight

against it, and coming to terms with it. The Stoics have a beautiful
name for this attitude. They call it the Art of Acquiescence.
Let’s be clear, that is not the same thing as giving up. This has
nothing to do with action—this is for the things that are immune to
action. It is far easier to talk of the way things should be. It takes
toughness, humility, and will to accept them for what they actually
are. It takes a real man or woman to face necessity.
All external events can be equally beneficial to us because we
can turn them all upside down and make use of them. They can
teach us a lesson we were reluctant to otherwise learn.
For instance, in 2006 a long-term hip injury finally caught up with
Lakers’ coach Phil Jackson, and the surgery he had to fix it severely
limited his courtside movement. Relegated to a special captain’sstyle chair near the players, he couldn’t pace the sideline or interact
with the team the same way. Initially, Jackson was worried this would
affect his coaching. In fact, sitting back on the sideline above the rest
of the bench increased his authority. He learned how to assert
himself without ever being overbearing the way he’d been in the
past.
But to get these unexpected benefits we first have to accept the
unexpected costs—even though we’d rather not have them in the
first place.
Unfortunately, we are often too greedy to do this. We instinctively
think about how much better we’d like any given situation to be. We
start thinking about what we’d rather have. Rarely do we consider
how much worse things could have been.
And things can always be worse. Not to be glib, but the next time
you:
Lose money?
Remember, you could have lost a friend.
Lost that job?
What if you’d lost a limb?
Lost your house?
You could have lost everything.

Yet we squirm and complain about what was taken from us. We
still can’t appreciate what we have.
The hubris at the core of this notion that we can change
everything is somewhat new. In a world where we can beam
documents around the world in nanoseconds, chat in high-definition
video with anyone anywhere, predict the weather down to the
minute, it’s very easy to internalize the assumption that nature has
been domesticated and submits to our whim. Of course it hasn’t.
People didn’t always think this way. The ancients (and the not so
ancients) used the word fate far more frequently than us because
they were better acquainted with and exposed to how capricious and
random the world could be. Events were considered to be the “will of
the Gods.” The Fates were forces that shaped our lives and
destinies, often not with much consent.
Letters used to be signed “Deo volente”—God willing. Because
who knew what would happen?
Think of George Washington, putting everything he had into the
American Revolution, and then saying, “The event is in the hand of
God.” Or Eisenhower, writing to his wife on the eve of the Allied
invasion at Sicily: “Everything we could think of have been done, the
troops are fit everybody is doing his best. The answer is in the lap of
the gods.” These were not guys prone to settling or leaving the
details up to other people—but they understood ultimately that what
happened would happen. And they’d go from there.
It’s time to be humble and flexible enough to acknowledge the
same in our own lives. That there is always someone or something
that could change the plan. And that person is not us. As the saying
goes, “Man proposes but God disposes. ”
As fate would have it.
Heaven forbid.
Nature permitting.
Murphy’s Law.
Whatever version you prefer, it’s all the same. Not that much has
changed between their time and ours—they were just more
cognizant of it.

Look: If we want to use the metaphor that life is a game, it means
playing the dice or the chips or the cards where they fall. Play it
where it lies, a golfer would say.
The way life is gives you plenty to work with, plenty to leave your
imprint on. Taking people and events as they are is quite enough
material already. Follow where the events take you, like water rolling
down a hill—it always gets to the bottom eventually, doesn’t it?
Because (a) you’re robust and resilient enough to handle
whatever occurs, (b) you can’t do anything about it anyway, and (c)
you’re looking at a big-enough picture and long-enough time line that
whatever you have to accept is still only a negligible blip on the way
to your goal.
We’re indifferent and that’s not a weakness.
As Francis Bacon once said, nature, in order to be commanded,
must be obeyed.

LOVE EVERYTHING THAT HAPPENS: AMOR FATI

My formula for greatness in a human being is amor fati: that one
wants nothing to be different, not forward, not backward, not in all
eternity. Not merely bear what is necessary, still less conceal it . . .
but love it.
—NIETZSCHE

A

t age sixty-seven, Thomas Edison returned home early one
evening from another day at the laboratory. Shortly after dinner,
a man came rushing into his house with urgent news: A fire had
broken out at Edison’s research and production campus a few miles
away.
Fire engines from eight nearby towns rushed to the scene, but
they could not contain the blaze. Fueled by the strange chemicals in
the various buildings, green and yellow flames shot up six and seven
stories, threatening to destroy the entire empire Edison had spent his
life building.
Edison calmly but quickly made his way to the fire, through the
now hundreds of onlookers and devastated employees, looking for
his son. “Go get your mother and all her friends,” he told his son with
childlike excitement. “They’ll never see a fire like this again.”
What?!
Don’t worry, Edison calmed him. “It’s all right. We’ve just got rid of
a lot of rubbish.”
That’s a pretty amazing reaction. But when you think about it,
there really was no other response.

What should Edison have done? Wept? Gotten angry? Quit and
gone home?
What, exactly, would that have accomplished?
You know the answer now: nothing. So he didn’t waste time
indulging himself. To do great things, we need to be able to endure
tragedy and setbacks. We’ve got to love what we do and all that it
entails, good and bad. We have to learn to find joy in every single
thing that happens.
Of course, there was more than just a little “rubbish” in Edison’s
buildings. Years and years of priceless records, prototypes, and
research were turned to ash. The buildings, which had been made of
what was supposedly fire-proofed concrete, had been insured for
only a fraction of their worth. Thinking they were immune to such
disasters, Edison and his investors were covered for about a third of
the damage.
Still, Edison wasn’t heartbroken, not as he could have and
probably should have been. Instead, it invigorated him. As he told a
reporter the next day, he wasn’t too old to make a fresh start. “I’ve
been through a lot of things like this. It prevents a man from being
afflicted with ennui.”
Within about three weeks, the factory was partially back up and
running. Within a month, its men were working two shifts a day
churning out new products the world had never seen. Despite a loss
of almost $1 million dollars (more than $23 million in today’s dollars),
Edison would marshal enough energy to make nearly $10 million
dollars in revenue that year ($200-plus million today). He not only
suffered a spectacular disaster, but he recovered and replied to it
spectacularly.
The next step after we discard our expectations and accept what
happens to us, after understanding that certain things—particularly
bad things—are outside our control, is this: loving whatever happens
to us and facing it with unfailing cheerfulness.
It is the act of turning what we must do into what we get to do.
We put our energies and emotions and exertions where they will
have real impact. This is that place. We will tell ourselves: This is
what I’ve got to do or put up with? Well, I might as well be happy
about it.

Here’s an image to consider: the great boxer Jack Johnson in his
famous fifteen-round brawl with Jim Jeffries. Jeffries, the Great White
Hope, called out of retirement like some deranged Cincinnatus to
defeat the ascendant black champion. And Johnson, genuinely
hated by his opponent and the crowd, still enjoying every minute of
it. Smiling, joking, playing the whole fight.
Why not? There’s no value in any other reaction. Should he hate
them for hating him? Bitterness was their burden and Johnson
refused to pick it up.
Not that he simply took the abuse. Instead, Johnson designed his
fight plan around it. At every nasty remark from Jeffries’s corner, he’d
give his opponent another lacing. At every low trick or rush from
Jeffries, Johnson would quip and beat it back—but never lose his
cool. And when one well-placed blow opened a cut on Johnson’s lip,
he kept smiling—a gory, bloody, but nevertheless cheerful smile.
Every round, he got happier, friendlier, as his opponent grew
enraged and tired, eventually losing the will to fight.
In your worst moments, picture Johnson: always calm, always in
control, genuinely loving the opportunity to prove himself, to perform
for people, whether they wanted him to succeed or not. Each remark
bringing the response it deserved and no more—letting the opponent
dig his own grave. Until the fight ended with Jeffries on the floor and
every doubt about Johnson silenced.
As Jack London, the famous novelist, reported from ringside
seats:
No one understands him, this man who smiles. Well, the story
of the fight is the story of a smile. If ever a man won by nothing
more fatiguing than a smile, Johnson won today.
That man is us—or rather, it can be us if we strive to become like
him. For we’re in our own fight with our own obstacles, and we can
wear them down with our relentless smile (frustrating the people or
impediments attempting to frustrate us). We can be Edison, our
factory on fire, not bemoaning our fate but enjoying the spectacular
scene. And then starting the recovery effort the very next day—
roaring back soon enough.

Your obstacle may not be so serious or violent. But they are
nevertheless significant and outside your control. They warrant only
one response: a smile.
As the Stoics commanded themselves: Cheerfulness in all
situations, especially the bad ones. Who knows where Edison and
Johnson learned this epithet, but they clearly did.
Learning not to kick and scream about matters we can’t control is
one thing. Indifference and acceptance are certainly better than
disappointment or rage. Very few understand or practice that art. But
it is only a first step. Better than all of that is love for all that happens
to us, for every situation.
The goal is:
Not: I’m okay with this.
Not: I think I feel good about this.
But: I feel great about it.
Because if it happened, then it was meant to happen, and I
am glad that it did when it did. I am meant to make the best
of it.
And proceed to do exactly that.
We don’t get to choose what happens to us, but we can always
choose how we feel about it. And why on earth would you choose to
feel anything but good? We can choose to render a good account of
ourselves. If the event must occur, Amor fati (a love of fate) is the
response.
Don’t waste a second looking back at your expectations. Face
forward, and face it with a smug little grin.
It’s important to look at Johnson and Edison because they weren’t
passive. They didn’t simply roll over and tolerate adversity. They
accepted what happened to them. They liked it.
It’s a little unnatural, I know, to feel gratitude for things we never
wanted to happen in the first place. But we know, at this point, the
opportunities and benefits that lie within adversities. We know that in
overcoming them, we emerge stronger, sharper, empowered. There
is little reason to delay these feelings. To begrudgingly acknowledge

later that it was for the best, when we could have felt that in advance
because it was inevitable.
You love it because it’s all fuel. And you don’t just want fuel. You
need it. You can’t go anywhere without it. No one or no thing can. So
you’re grateful for it.
That is not to say that the good will always outweigh the bad. Or
that it comes free and without cost. But there is always some good—
even if only barely perceptible at first—contained within the bad.
And we can find it and be cheerful because of it.

PERSEVERANCE

“Gentleman, I am hardening on this enterprise. I repeat, I am now
hardening towards this enterprise.”
—WINSTON CHURCHILL

O

dysseus leaves Troy after ten long years of war destined for
Ithaca, for home. If only he knew what was ahead of him: ten
more years of travel. That he’d come so close to the shores of his
homeland, his queen and young son, only to be blown back again.
That he’d face storms, temptation, a Cyclops, deadly whirlpools,
and a six-headed monster. Or that he’d be held captive for seven
years and suffer the wrath of Poseidon. And, of course, that back in
Ithaca his rivals were circling, trying to take his kingdom and his wife.
How did he get through it? How did the hero make it home despite
it all?
Creativity, of course. And craftiness and leadership and discipline
and courage.
But above all: perseverance.
We talked about Ulysses S. Grant across the river from Vicksburg,
searching for some way, any way, to get across and take it. That’s
persistence. That was Odysseus standing at the gates of Troy, trying
everything before the success of the Trojan horse. Persistence.
Everything directed at one problem, until it breaks.
But a ten-year voyage of trials and tribulations. Of disappointment
and mistakes without giving in. Of checking your bearings each day

and trying to inch a little closer to home—where you’ll face a whole
other host of problems once you arrive. Ironhearted and ready to
endure whatever punishment the Gods decide you must, and to do it
with courage and tenacity in order to make it back to Ithaca? That’s
more than persistence, that’s perseverance.
If persistence is attempting to solve some difficult problem with
dogged determination and hammering until the break occurs, then
plenty of people can be said to be persistent. But perseverance is
something larger. It’s the long game. It’s about what happens not just
in round one but in round two and every round after—and then the
fight after that and the fight after that, until the end.
The Germans have a word for it: Sitzfleisch. Staying power.
Winning by sticking your ass to the seat and not leaving until after it’s
over.
Life is not about one obstacle, but many. What’s required of us is
not some shortsighted focus on a single facet of a problem, but
simply a determination that we will get to where we need to go,
somehow, someway, and nothing will stop us.
We will overcome every obstacle—and there will be many in life—
until we get there. Persistence is an action. Perseverance is a matter
of will. One is energy. The other, endurance.
And, of course, they work in conjunction with each other.
That Tennyson line in full:
Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield

Persist and persevere.
Throughout human history, there have been many strategies for
overcoming the seemingly endless problems that affect us as
individuals and as a group. Sometimes the solution was technology,
sometimes it was violence, sometimes it was a radical new way of
thinking that changed everything.
We’ve looked at a lot of those examples. But across the board,
one strategy has been more effective than all the others, and it is
responsible for far more than anything else. It works in good
situations and in bad situations, dangerous situations and seemingly
hopeless situations.
When Antonio Pigafetta, the assistant to Magellan on his trip
around the world, reflected on his boss’s greatest and most

admirable skill, what do you think he said? It had nothing to do with
sailing. The secret to his success, Pigafetta said, was Magellan’s
ability to endure hunger better than the other men.
There are far more failures in the world due to a collapse of will
than there will ever be from objectively conclusive external events.
Perseverance. Force of purpose. Indomitable will. Those traits
were once uniquely part of the American DNA. But they’ve been
weakening for some time. As Emerson wrote in 1841,
If our young men miscarry in their first enterprises, they lose all
heart. If the young merchant fails, men say he is ruined. If the
finest genius studies at one of our colleges, and is not installed
in an office within one year afterwards in the cities or suburbs
of Boston or New York, it seems to his friends and to himself
that he is right in being disheartened, and in complaining the
rest of his life.
Think of what he’d say about us now. What would he say about
you?
The majority of my generation decides to move back in with their
parents after college. Unemployment, for them, is twice the national
average. According to one 2011 study by the University of Michigan,
many graduates aren’t even bothering to learn how to drive. The
road is blocked, they are saying, so why get a license I won’t be able
to use?
We whine and complain and mope when things won’t go our way.
We’re crushed when what we were “promised” is revoked—as if
that’s not allowed to happen. Instead of doing much about it, we sit
at home and play video games or travel or worse, pay for more
school with more loan debt that will never be forgiven. And then we
wonder why it isn’t getting any better.
We’d be so much better following the lead of Emerson’s
counterexample. Someone who is willing to try not one thing, but
“tries all the professions, who teams it, farms it, peddles, keeps a
school, preaches, edits a newspaper, goes to Congress, buys a
township, and so forth, in successive years, and always, like a cat,
falls on his feet.”

This is perseverance. And with it, Emerson said, “with the
exercise of self-trust, new powers shall appear.” The good thing
about true perseverance is that it can’t be stopped by anything
besides death. To quote Beethoven: “The barriers are not erected
which can say to aspiring talents and industry, Thus far and no
farther.”
We can go around or under or backward. We can decide that
momentum and defeat are not mutually exclusive—we can keep
going, advancing, even if we’ve been stopped in one particular
direction.
Our actions can be constrained, but our will can’t be. Our plans—
even our bodies—can be broken. But belief in ourselves? No matter
how many times we are thrown back, we alone retain the power to
decide to go once more. Or to try another route. Or, at the very least,
to accept this reality and decide upon a new aim.
Determination, if you think about it, is invincible. Nothing other
than death can prevent us from following Churchill’s old acronym:
KBO. Keep Buggering On.
Despair? That’s on you. No one else is to blame when you throw
in the towel.
We don’t control the barriers or the people who put them there.
But we control ourselves—and that is sufficient.
The true threat to determination, then, is not what happens to us,
but us ourselves. Why would you be your own worst enemy?
Hold on and hold steady.

SOMETHING BIGGER THAN YOURSELF

A man’s job is to make the world a better place to live in, so far as he
is able—always remembering the results will be infinitesimal—and to
attend to his own soul.
—LEROY PERCY

States Navy fighter pilot named James Stockdale was
A United
shot down in North Vietnam in 1965. As he drifted back down to
earth after ejecting from his plane, he spent those few minutes
contemplating what awaited him down below. Imprisonment?
Certainly. Torture? Likely. Death? Possibly. Who knew how long it
would all take, or if he’d ever see his family or home again.
But the second Stockdale hit the ground, that contemplation
stopped. He wouldn’t dare think about himself. See, he had a
mission.
During the Korean War a decade earlier, individual selfpreservation showed its ugly side. In the terrible, freezing prison
camps of that war, it had very much become every American soldier
for himself. Scared to death, the survival instincts of American
prisoners of war kicked in so overwhelmingly that they ended up
fighting and even killing one another simply to stay alive, rather than
fighting against their captors to survive or escape.
Stockdale (then, a commander), aware that he would be the
highest-ranking Navy POW the North Vietnamese had ever
captured, knew he couldn’t do anything about his fate. But as a
commanding officer, he could provide leadership and support and

direction to his fellow prisoners (who included future senator John
McCain). He could change that situation and not let history repeat
itself—this would be his cause, and he would help his men and lead
them. Which is exactly what he proceeded to do for more than seven
years; two of which were spent wearing leg irons in solitary
confinement.
Stockdale didn’t take his obligation as a commander lightly. He
went so far as to attempt suicide at one point, not to end his suffering
but to send a message to the guards. Other soldiers in the war effort
had given their lives. He would not disgrace them or their sacrifice by
allowing himself to be used as a tool against their common cause.
He would rather hurt himself than contribute—even against his will—
to hurting or undermining others. He proved himself formidable to
whatever physical harm his captors threatened him with.
But he was human. And he understood that his men were, too.
The first thing he did was throw out any idealistic notions about what
happens to a soldier when asked to give up information under hours
of torture. So he set up a network of support inside the camp,
specifically to help soldiers who felt ashamed for having broken
under the pressure. We’re in this together, he told them. He gave
them a watchword to remind them: U.S.—Unity over Self.
John McCain in his own cell nearby responded in essentially the
same way and was able to endure indescribable torture for the same
reasons. Hoping to stain the McCain family’s prestigious military
legacy and the United States, the Vietcong repeatedly offered
McCain the opportunity to be released and return home. He wouldn’t
take it. He would not undermine the cause, despite self-interest. He
stayed and was tortured—by choice.
These two men were not zealots for the cause—they certainly had
their own doubts about the war in Vietnam. But their cause was their
men. They cared about their fellow prisoners and drew great
strength by putting their well-being ahead of their own.
Hopefully, you will not find yourself in a POW camp anytime soon.
But we are in our own tough economic times—in fact, they can
sometimes feel downright desperate.
You’re young, you didn’t cause this, it isn’t your fault. We all got
screwed. This only makes it easier to lose our sense of self, to say

nothing of our sense of others. To think—if only privately—I don’t
care about them, I’ve got to get mine before it’s too late.
Especially when the leaders in your supposed community make it
clear that that is exactly how they feel about you when it comes
down to the crunch. But no, ignore that. It is in this moment that we
must show the true strength of will within us.
A few years ago, in the middle of the financial crisis, the artist and
musician Henry Rollins managed to express this deeply human
obligation better than millennia of religious doctrine ever have:
People are getting a little desperate. People might not show
their best elements to you. You must never lower yourself to
being a person you don’t like. There is no better time than now
to have a moral and civic backbone. To have a moral and civic
true north. This is a tremendous opportunity for you, a young
person, to be heroic.
Not that you need to martyr yourself. See, when we focus on
others, on helping them or simply providing a good example, our
own personal fears and troubles will diminish. With fear or heartache
no longer our primary concern, we don’t have time for it. Shared
purpose gives us strength.
The desire to quit or compromise on principles suddenly feels
rather selfish when we consider the people who would be affected by
that decision. When it comes to obstacles and whatever reactions
they provoke—boredom, hatred, frustration, or confusion—just
because you feel that way, doesn’t mean everyone else does.
Sometimes when we are personally stuck with some intractable or
impossible problem, one of the best ways to create opportunities or
new avenues for movement is to think: If I can’t solve this for myself,
how can I at least make this better for other people? Take it for
granted, for a second, that there is nothing else in it for us, nothing
we can do for ourselves. How can we use this situation to benefit
others? How can we salvage some good out of this? If not for me,
then for my family or the others I’m leading or those who might later
find themselves in a similar situation.

What doesn’t help anyone is making this all about you, all the
time. Why did this happen to me? What am I going to do about this?
You’ll be shocked by how much of the hopelessness lifts when we
reach that conclusion. Because now we have something to do. Like
Stockdale, now we have a mission. In the light of blinding futility,
we’ve got marching orders and things that must be done.
Stop making it harder on yourself by thinking about I, I, I. Stop
putting that dangerous “I” in front of events. I did this. I was so smart.
I had that. I deserve better than this. No wonder you take losses
personally, no wonder you feel so alone. You’ve inflated your own
role and importance.
Start thinking: Unity over Self. We’re in this together.
Even if we can’t carry the load all the way, we’re going to take our
crack at picking up the heavy end. We’re going to be of service to
others. Help ourselves by helping them. Becoming better because of
it, drawing purpose from it.
Whatever you’re going through, whatever is holding you down or
standing in your way, can be turned into a source of strength—by
thinking of people other than yourself. You won’t have time to think of
your own suffering because there are other people suffering and
you’re too focused on them.
Pride can be broken. Toughness has its limits. But a desire to
help? No harshness, no deprivation, no toil should interfere with our
empathy toward others. Compassion is always an option.
Camaraderie as well. That’s a power of the will that can never be
taken away, only relinquished.
Stop pretending that what you’re going through is somehow
special or unfair. Whatever trouble you’re having—no matter how
difficult—is not some unique misfortune picked out especially for
you. It just is what it is.
This kind of myopia is what convinces us, to our own detriment,
that we’re the center of the universe. When really, there is a world
beyond our own personal experience filled with people who have
dealt with worse. We’re not special or unique simply by virtue of
being. We’re all, at varying points in our lives, the subject of random
and often incomprehensible events.

Reminding ourselves of this is another way of being a bit more
selfless.
You can always remember that a decade earlier, a century earlier,
a millennium earlier, someone just like you stood right where you are
and felt very similar things, struggling with the very same thoughts.
They had no idea that you would exist, but you know that they did.
And a century from now, someone will be in your exact same
position, once more.
Embrace this power, this sense of being part of a larger whole. It
is an exhilarating thought. Let it envelop you. We’re all just humans,
doing the best we can. We’re all just trying to survive, and in the
process, inch the world forward a little bit.
Help your fellow humans thrive and survive, contribute your little
bit to the universe before it swallows you up, and be happy with that.
Lend a hand to others. Be strong for them, and it will make you
stronger.

MEDITATE ON YOUR MORTALITY

When a man knows he is to be hanged in a fortnight, it concentrates
his mind wonderfully.
—DR. JOHNSON

I

n late 1569, a French nobleman named Michel de Montaigne was
given up as dead after being flung from a galloping horse.
As his friends carried his limp and bloodied body home,
Montaigne watched life slip away from his physical self, not
traumatically but almost flimsily, like some dancing spirit on the “tip of
his lips.” Only to have it return at the last possible second.
This sublime and unusual experience marked the moment
Montaigne changed his life. Within a few years, he would be one of
the most famous writers in Europe. After his accident, Montaigne
went on to write volumes of popular essays, serve two terms as
mayor, travel internationally as a dignitary, and serve as a confidante
of the king.
It’s a story as old as time. Man nearly dies, he takes stock, and
emerges from the experience a completely different, and better,
person.
And so it was for Montaigne. Coming so close to death energized
him, made him curious. No longer was death something to be afraid
of—looking it in the eyes had been a relief, even inspiring.
Death doesn’t make life pointless, but rather purposeful. And,
fortunately, we don’t have to nearly die to tap into this energy.

In Montaigne’s essays, we see proof of the fact that one can
meditate on death—be well aware of our own mortality—without
being morbid or a downer. In fact, his experience gave him a
uniquely playful relationship with his existence and a sense of clarity
and euphoria that he carried with him from that point forward. This is
encouraging: It means that embracing the precariousness of our own
existence can be exhilarating and empowering.
Our fear of death is a looming obstacle in our lives. It shapes our
decisions, our outlook, and our actions.
But for Montaigne, for the rest of his life, he would dwell and
meditate on that moment, re-creating the near-death moment as
best he could. He studied death, discussing it, learning of its place in
other cultures. For instance, Montaigne once wrote of an ancient
drinking game in which participants took turns holding up a painting
of a corpse inside a coffin and toasting to it: “Drink and be merry for
when you’re dead you will look like this.”
As Shakespeare wrote in The Tempest not many years later, as
he himself was growing older, “Every third thought shall be my
grave.”
Every culture has its own way of teaching the same lesson:
Memento mori, the Romans would remind themselves. Remember
you are mortal.
It seems weird to think that we’d forget this or need to be
reminded of it, but clearly we do.
Part of the reason we have so much trouble with acceptance is
because our relationship with our own existence is totally messed
up. We may not say it, but deep down we act and behave like we’re
invincible. Like we’re impervious to the trials and tribulations of
morality. That stuff happens to other people, not to ME. I have plenty
of time left.
We forget how light our grip on life really is.
Otherwise, we wouldn’t spend so much time obsessing over
trivialities, or trying to become famous, make more money than we
could ever spend in our lifetime, or make plans far off in the future.
All of these are negated by death. All these assumptions presume
that death won’t affect us, or at least, not when we don’t want it to.
The paths of glory, Thomas Gray wrote, lead but to the grave.

It doesn’t matter who you are or how many things you have left to
be done, somewhere there is someone who would kill you for a
thousand dollars or for a vile of crack or for getting in their way. A car
can hit you in an intersection and drive your teeth back into your
skull. That’s it. It will all be over. Today, tomorrow, someday soon.
It’s a cliché question to ask, What would I change about my life if
the doctor told me I had cancer? After our answer, we inevitably
comfort ourselves with the same insidious lie: Well, thank God I don’t
have cancer.
But we do. The diagnosis is terminal for all of us. A death
sentence has been decreed. Each second, probability is eating away
at the chances that we’ll be alive tomorrow; something is coming and
you’ll never be able to stop it. Be ready for when that day comes.
Remember the serenity prayer: If something is in our control, it’s
worth every ounce of our efforts and energy. Death is not one of
those things—it is not in our control how long we will live or what will
come and take us from life.
But thinking about and being aware of our mortality creates real
perspective and urgency. It doesn’t need to be depressing. Because
it’s invigorating.
And since this is true, we ought to make use of it. Instead of
denying—or worse, fearing—our mortality, we can embrace it.
Reminding ourselves each day that we will die helps us treat our
time as a gift. Someone on a deadline doesn’t indulge himself with
attempts at the impossible, he doesn’t waste time complaining about
how he’d like things to be.
They figure out what they need to do and do it, fitting in as much
as possible before the clock expires. They figure out how, when that
moment strikes, to say, Of course, I would have liked to last a little
longer, but I made a lot of out what I was already given so this works
too.
There’s no question about it: Death is the most universal of our
obstacles. It’s the one we can do the least about. At the very best,
we can hope to delay it—and even then, we’ll still succumb
eventually.
But that is not to say it is not without value to us while we are
alive. In the shadow of death, prioritization is easier. As are

graciousness and appreciation and principles. Everything falls in its
proper place and perspective. Why would you do the wrong thing?
Why feel fear? Why let yourself and others down? Life will be over
soon enough; death chides us that we may as well do life right.
We can learn to adjust and come to terms with death—this final
and most humbling fact of life—and find relief in the understanding
that there is nothing else nearly as hard left.
And so, if even our own mortality can have some benefit, how
dare you say that you can’t derive value from each and every other
kind of obstacle you encounter?

PREPARE TO START AGAIN

Live on in your blessings, your destiny’s been won. But ours calls us
on from one ordeal to the next.
—VIRGIL

T

he great law of nature is that it never stops. There is no end.
Just when you think you’ve successfully navigated one obstacle,
another emerges.
But that’s what keeps life interesting. And as you’re starting to
see, that’s what creates opportunities.
Life is a process of breaking through these impediments—a series
of fortified lines that we must break through.
Each time, you’ll learn something. Each time, you’ll develop
strength, wisdom, and perspective. Each time, a little more of the
competition falls away. Until all that is left is you: the best version of
you.
As the Haitian proverb puts it: Behind mountains are more
mountains.
Elysium is a myth. One does not overcome an obstacle to enter
the land of no obstacles.
On the contrary, the more you accomplish, the more things will
stand in your way. There are always more obstacles, bigger
challenges. You’re always fighting uphill. Get used to it and train
accordingly.

Knowing that life is a marathon and not a sprint is important.
Conserve your energy. Understand that each battle is only one of
many and that you can use it to make the next one easier. More
important, you must keep them all in real perspective.
Passing one obstacle simply says you’re worthy of more. The
world seems to keep throwing them at you once it knows you can
take it. Which is good, because we get better with every attempt.
Never rattled. Never frantic. Always hustling and acting with
creativity. Never anything but deliberate. Never attempting to do the
impossible—but everything up to that line.
Simply flipping the obstacles that life throws at you by improving in
spite of them, because of them.
And therefore no longer afraid. But excited, cheerful, and eagerly
anticipating the next round.

FINAL THOUGHTS
The Obstacle Becomes the Way

L

ate in his reign, sick and possibly near death, Marcus Aurelius
received surprising news. His old friend and most trusted
general, Avidius Cassius, had rebelled in Syria. Having heard the
emperor was vulnerable or possibly dead, the ambitious general had
decided to declare himself Caesar and forcibly seize the throne.
Marcus should have been angry. History would have forgiven him
for wanting to avenge this enemy. To crush this man who had
betrayed him, who threatened his life, his family, and his legacy.
Instead, Marcus did nothing—going as far as to keep the news
secret from his troops, who might have been enraged or provoked
on his behalf—but waited to see if Cassius would come to his
senses.
The man did not. And so Marcus Aurelius called a council of his
soldiers and made a rather extraordinary announcement. They
would march against Cassius and obtain the “great prize of war and
of victory.” But of course, because it was Marcus, this war prize was
something wholly different.
They would capture Cassius and endeavor not to kill him, but “. . .
forgive a man who has wronged one, to remain a friend to one who
has transgressed friendship, to continue faithful to one who has
broken faith.”
Marcus had controlled his perceptions. He wasn’t angry, he didn’t
despise his enemy. He would not say an ill word against him. He
would not take it personally. Then he acted—rightly and firmly—

ordering troops to Rome to calm the panicking crowds and then set
out to do what must be done: protect the empire, put down a threat.
As he told his men, if there was one profit they could derive from
this awful situation that they had not wanted, it would be to “settle
this affair well and show to all mankind that there is a right way to
deal even with civil wars.”
The obstacle becomes the way.
Of course, as so often happens, even the most well-intentioned
plans can be interrupted by others. For both Cassius and Marcus,
their destiny was changed when a lone assassin struck Cassius
down in Egypt, three months later. His dream of empire ended right
there. Marcus’s initial hope to be able to forgive, in person, his
betrayer ended as well.
But this itself created a better opportunity—the opportunity to
practice forgiveness on a significantly larger scale. The Stoics liked
to use the metaphor of fire. Writing in his journal, Marcus once
reminded himself that “when the fire is strong, it soon appropriates to
itself the matter which is heaped on it, and consumes it, and rises
higher by means of this very material.”
The unexpected death of his rival, the man whom Marcus had
been deprived of granting clemency to, was this metaphor
embodied. Marcus would now forgive essentially everyone involved.
He wouldn’t take any of it personally. He’d be a better person, a
better leader for it.
Arriving in the provinces shortly after the death of Cassius,
Marcus refused to put any coconspirators to death. He declined to
prosecute any of the senators or governors who had endorsed or
expressed support for the uprising. And when other senators insisted
on death sentences for their peers associated with the rebellion, he
wrote them simply: “I implore you, the senate, to keep my reign
unstained by the blood of any senator. May it never happen.”
The obstacle becomes the way, becomes the way.
Forever and ever and ever.
Yes, it’s unlikely that anyone is going to make an armed run at our
throne anytime soon. But people will make pointed remarks. They
will cut us off in traffic. Our rivals will steal our business. We will be
hurt. Forces will try to hold us back. Bad stuff will happen.

We can turn even this to our advantage. Always.
It is an opportunity. Always.
And if our only option—as was the case with Marcus—because of
someone else’s greed or lust for power, is simply to be a good
person and practice forgiveness? Well, that’s still a pretty good
option.
This, I’m sure you’ve noticed, is the pattern in every one of the
stories in this book.
Something stands in someone’s way. They stare it down, they
aren’t intimidated. Leaning into their problem or weakness or issue,
they give everything they have, mentally and physically. Even though
they did not always overcome it in the way they intended or
expected, each individual emerged better, stronger.
What stood in the way became the way. What impeded action in
some way advanced it.
It’s inspiring. It’s moving. It’s an art we need to bring to our own
lives.
Not everyone looks at obstacles—often the same ones you and I
face—and sees reason to despair. In fact, they see the opposite.
They see a problem with a ready solution. They see a chance to test
and improve themselves.
Nothing stands in their way. Rather, everything guides them on
the way.
It is so much better to be this way, isn’t it? There is a lightness and
a flexibility to this approach that seem very different from how we—
and most people—choose to live. With our disappointments and
resentments and frustrations.
We can see the “bad” things that happen in our lives with gratitude
and not with regret because we turn them from disaster to real
benefit—from defeat to victory.
Fate doesn’t have to be fatalistic. It can be destiny and freedom
just as easily.
There is no special school that these individuals attended (aside
from, for many, a familiarity with the ancient wisdom of Stoicism).
Nothing that they do is out of reach for us. Rather, they have
unlocked something that is very much within each and every person.
Tested in the crucible of adversity and forged in the furnace of trial,

they realized these latent powers—the powers of perception, action,
and the will.
With this triad, they:
First, see clearly.
Next, act correctly.
Finally, endure and accept the world as it is.
Perceive things as they are, leave no option unexplored, then
stand strong and transform whatever can’t be changed. And they all
feed into one another: Our actions give us the confidence to ignore
or control our perceptions. We prove and support our will with our
actions.
The philosopher and writer Nassim Nicholas Taleb defined a Stoic
as someone who “transforms fear into prudence, pain into
transformation, mistakes into initiation and desire into undertaking.”
It’s a loop that becomes easier over time.
To be sure, no one is saying you’ve got to do it all at once.
Margaret Thatcher didn’t become known as the Iron Lady until she
was sixty years old. There’s a saying in Latin: Vires acquirit eundo
(We gather strength as we go). That’s how it works. That’s our motto.
In mastering these three disciplines we have the tools to flip any
obstacle upside down. We are worthy of any and every challenge.
Of course, it is not enough to simply read this or say it. We must
practice these maxims, rolling them over and over in our minds and
acting on them until they become muscle memory.
So that under pressure and trial we get better—become better
people, leaders, and thinkers. Because those trials and pressures
will inevitably come. And they won’t ever stop coming.
But don’t worry, you’re prepared for this now, this life of obstacles
and adversity. You know how to handle them, how to brush aside
obstacles and even benefit from them. You understand the process.
You are schooled in the art of managing your perceptions and
impressions. Like Rockefeller, you’re cool under pressure, immune
to insults and abuse. You see opportunity in the darkest of places.
You are able to direct your actions with energy and persistence.
Like Demosthenes, you assume responsibility for yourself—teaching

yourself, compensating for disadvantages, and pursuing your rightful
calling and place in the world.
You are iron-spined and possess a great and powerful will. Like
Lincoln, you realize that life is a trial. It will not be easy, but you are
prepared to give it everything you have regardless, ready to endure,
persevere, and inspire others.
The names of countless other practitioners escape us, but they
dealt with the same problems and obstacles. This philosophy helped
them navigate those successfully. They quietly overcame what life
threw at them and, in fact, thrived because of it.
They were nothing special, nothing that we are not just as capable
of being. What they did was simple (simple, not easy). But let’s say it
once again just to remind ourselves:
See things for what they are.
Do what we can.
Endure and bear what we must.
What blocked the path now is a path.
What once impeded action advances action.
The Obstacle is the Way.

POSTSCRIPT
You’re Now a Philosopher. Congratulations.

To be a philosopher is not merely to have subtle thoughts, nor even
to found a school . . . it is to solve some of the problems of life, not
only theoretically, but practically.
—HENRY DAVID THOREAU

Y

ou now join the ranks of Marcus Aurelius, Cato, Seneca,
Thomas Jefferson, James Stockdale, Epictetus, Theodore
Roosevelt, George Washington, and many others.
All these men explicitly practiced and studied Stoicism—we know
this for a fact. They were not academics, but men of action. Marcus
Aurelius was emperor of the most powerful empire in the history of
the world. Cato, the moral example for many philosophers, never
wrote down a word but defended the Roman republic with Stoic
bravery until his defiant death. Even Epictetus, the lecturer, had no
cushy tenure—he was a former slave.
Frederick the Great was said to ride with the works of the Stoics in
his saddlebags because they could, in his words, “sustain you in
misfortune.” Montaigne, the politician and essayist, had a line from
Epictetus carved into the beam above the study in which he spent
most of his time. George Washington was introduced to Stoicism by
his neighbors at age seventeen, then he put on a play about Cato to
inspire his men in that dark winter at Valley Forge.

When Thomas Jefferson died, he had a copy of Seneca on his
nightstand. The economist Adam Smith’s theories on the
interconnectedness of the world—capitalism—were significantly
influenced by the Stoicism he’d studied as a schoolboy under a
teacher who’d translated the works of Marcus Aurelius. Eugène
Delacroix, the renowned French Romantic artist (known best for his
painting Liberty Leading the People) was an ardent Stoic, referring to
it as his “consoling religion.” Toussaint Louverture, himself a former
slave who challenged an emperor, read and was deeply influenced
by the works of Epictetus. The political thinker John Stuart Mill wrote
of Marcus Aurelius and Stoicism in his famous treatise On Liberty,
calling it “the highest ethical product of the ancient mind.”
The writer Ambrose Bierce, decorated Civil War veteran and
contemporary of Mark Twain and H. L. Mencken, used to
recommend Seneca, Marcus Aurelius, and Epictetus to aspiring
writers who wrote to him, saying they’d teach them “how to be a
worthy guest at the table of the gods.” Theodore Roosevelt, after his
presidency, spent eight months exploring (and nearly dying in) the
unknown jungles of the Amazon, and of the eight books he brought
on the journey, two were Marcus Aurelius’s Meditations and
Epictetus’s Enchiridion.
Beatrice Webb, the English social reformer who invented the
concept of collective bargaining, recalled the Meditations fondly in
her memoirs as a “manual of devotion.” The Percys, the famous
Southern political, writing, and planting dynasty (LeRoy Percy,
United States senator; William Alexander Percy, Lanterns on the
Levee; and Walker Percy, The Moviegoer) who saved thousands of
lives during the flood of 1927, were well-known adherents to the
works of the Stoics, because, as one of them wrote, “when all is lost,
it stands fast.”
In 1908, the banker, industrialist, and senator Robert Hale Ives
Goddard donated an equestrian statue of Marcus Aurelius to Brown
University. Eighty or so years after Goddard’s donation, the Soviet
poet, dissident, and political prisoner Joseph Brodsky wrote in his
famous essay on the original version of that same statue of Marcus
Aurelius in Rome that “if Meditations is antiquity, it is we who are the
ruins.” Like Brodsky, James Stockdale spent time imprisoned against

his will—seven and a half years in a Vietcong prison camp, to be
exact. And as he parachuted from his plane, Stockdale said to
himself “I’m leaving the world of technology and entering the world of
Epictetus.”
Today, Bill Clinton rereads Marcus Aurelius every single year.
Wen Jiabao, the former prime minister of China, claims that
Meditations is one of two books he travels with and has read it more
than one hundred times over the course of his life. Bestselling author
and investor Tim Ferriss refers to Stoicism as his “operating
system”—and, in the tradition of those who came before him, has
successfully driven its adoption throughout Silicon Valley.
You might not see yourself as a “philosopher,” but then again,
neither did most of these men and women. By every definition that
counts, however, they were. And now you are, too. You are a person
of action. And the thread of Stoicism runs through your life just as it
did through theirs—just as it has for all of history, sometimes
explicitly, sometimes not.
The essence of philosophy is action—in making good on the
ability to turn the obstacle upside down with our minds.
Understanding our problems for what’s within them and their greater
context. To see things philosophically and act accordingly.
As I tried to show in this book, countless others have embodied
the best practices of Stoicism and philosophy without even knowing
it. These individuals weren’t writers or lecturers, they were doers—
like you.
Over the centuries though, this kind of wisdom has been taken
from us, co-opted and deliberately obscured by selfish, sheltered
academics. They deprived us of philosophy’s true use: as an
operating system for the difficulties and hardships of life.
Philosophy was never what happened in the classroom. It was a
set of lessons from the battlefield of life.
The Latin translation for the title of Enchiridion—Epictetus’s
famous work—means “close at hand,” or as some have said, “in your
hands.” That’s what the philosophy was meant for: to be in your
hands, to be an extension of you. Not something you read once and
put up on a shelf. It was meant, as Marcus once wrote, to make us

boxers instead of fencers—to wield our weaponry, we simply need to
close our fists.
Hopefully, in some small way, this book has translated those
lessons and armed you with them.
Now you are a philosopher and a person of action. And that is not
a contradiction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

It was Dr. Drew Pinsky, of all people, who introduced me to Stoicism.
I was in college and I was invited to a small, private summit of
college journalists that Dr. Drew, then the host of Loveline, was
hosting. After it ended, he was standing in the corner and I
cautiously made my way over to nervously ask if he had any book
recommendations. He said he’d been studying a philosopher named
Epictetus and that I should check it out.
I went back to my hotel room and ordered the book on Amazon
along with another, Meditations by Marcus Aurelius. Marcus
Aurelius, translated by Gregory Hays, arrived first. My life has not
been the same since.
I want to thank Samantha, my girlfriend, whom I love more than
anyone. We’d only been dating a few weeks, but I knew she was
special when she went out and bought this book Meditations, the
book I had been raving about. She deserves extra credit if only for
enduring my many private and admittedly unstoic moments over the
years. Thank you for coming on the many walks with me where I
thought out loud. I want to thank my dog, Hanno—not that she is
reading this—because she is a constant reminder of living in the
present and of pure and honest joy.
The book you’ve just read would not have been possible without
Nils Parker, whose editing and long talks shaped it. It would not exist
without Stephen Hanselman, my agent who pushed for it, and my
editor, Niki Papadopoulos, who believed in it and fought for what was
a radical departure from my first book. Thanks to Adrian Zackheim

for giving me my shot and providing a home for me as a writer at
Portfolio.
I need to thank my master teacher and mentor Robert Greene,
who not only subsidized my reading of many of the books I used as
sources, but taught me the art of crafting a message and a book. His
notes on my drafts were invaluable.
Thanks to Aaron Ray and Tucker Max, who showed me that a
philosophic life and a life of action were not incompatible. Tucker,
you’re the one who encouraged me to read (and the one who told
me to follow up Epictetus with Marcus Aurelius. I just found some
endearing old e-mails where I asked you a million questions after I
did). Thanks especially to Aaron, who pulled me out of school and
forced me to live in the real world. Thanks to Tim Ferriss for
encouraging me to write about Stoicism for his site back in 2009 and
for our long talk in Amsterdam, which provided great additions to the
book.
I owe Jimmy Soni and Rob Goodman for their excellent notes
(and book on Cato), Shawn Coyne for his suggestion of a three-part
structure, Brett Mckay of Art of Manliness .com for his book
recommendations, and Matthias Meister for his insight and
instruction in BJJ. Thanks to Garland Robinette, Amy Holiday, Brent
Underwood, Michael Tunney, for their thoughts and feedback.
Thanks to /r/stoicism on reddit, a great community who answered my
questions and provoked many more. Thanks to New Stoa for their
contributions to Stoicism online over the years.
In addition to the sources, I want to give profound thanks to the
many other people and writers who exposed me to the stories and
bits of wisdom in this book—I transferred much of it to my
commonplace book and was so awed by the lessons that I didn’t
always record attribution. I very much see this book as a collection of
the thoughts and actions of people better and smarter than me. I
hope you read it the same way and attribute any credit deserved
accordingly.
I must thank the National Arts Club, the Los Angeles Athletic Club,
the New York Public Library, the libraries at the University of
California, Riverside, and a bunch of different Starbucks and
airplanes where I wrote or researched this book.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alinsky, Saul. Rules for Radicals. New York: Vintage, 1989.
Aurelius, Marcus. Meditations: A New Translation (Modern Library).
Translated by Gregory Hayes. New York: Modern Library, 2002.
Bakewell, Sarah. How to Live: Or a Life of Montaigne in One
Question and Twenty Attempts at an Answer. New York: Other
Press, 2010.
Becker, Gavin de. The Gift of Fear and Other Survival Signals That
Protect Us from Violence. New York: Dell, 1999.
Bell, Madison Smartt. Toussaint Louverture: A Biography. New York:
Pantheon, 2007.
Bonforte, John. The Philosophy of Epictetus. Literary Licensing, LLC,
2011.
Brodsky, Joseph. On Grief and Reason: Essays. New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 1995.
Carroll, Paul B., and Chunka Mui. Billion Dollar Lessons: What You
Can Learn from the Most Inexcusable Business Failures of the
Last 25 Years. New York: Portfolio Trade, 2009.
Chernow, Ron. Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr. New York:
Random House, 1998.
Cicero, Marcus Tullius. On the Good Life (Penguin Classics).
Translated by Michael Grant. New York: Penguin, 1971.
Cohen, Herb. You Can Negotiate Anything: The World’s Best
Negotiator Tells You How to Get What You Want. New York:
Bantam, 1982.
Cohen, Rich. The Fish That Ate the Whale: The Life and Times of
America’s Banana King. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,

2012.
Critchley, Simon. The Book of Dead Philosophers. New York:
Vintage, 2009.
Dio, Cassius. The Roman History: The Reign of Augustus. New
York: Penguin, 1987.
Doyle, Charles Clay, Wolfgang Mieder, and Fred R. Shapiro. The
Dictionary of Modern Proverbs. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 2012.
Earhart, Amelia. The Fun of It: Random Records of My Own Flying
and of Women in Aviation. Reprint edition. Chicago: Academy
Chicago Publishers, 2000.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo. Nature and Selected Essays. New York:
Penguin, 2003.
Epictetus. Discourses and Selected Writings (Penguin Classics).
Translated by Robert Dobbin. New York: Penguin, 2008.
Epicurus. The Essential Epicurus (Great Books in Philosophy).
Translated by Eugene O’Connor. Buffalo: Prometheus Books,
1993.
Evans, Jules. Philosophy for Life and Other Dangerous Situations:
Ancient Philosophy for Modern Problems. Novato, CA: New World
Library, 2013.
Everitt, Anthony. The Rise of Rome: The Making of the World’s
Greatest Empire. New York: Random House, 2012.
Feynman, Richard P. Classic Feynman: All the Adventures of a
Curious Character. Edited by Ralph Leighton. New York: W. W.
Norton, 2005.
Frankl, Viktor E. Man’s Search for Meaning. New York: Touchstone,
1984.
Fraser, David. Knight’s Cross: A Life of Field Marshal Erwin Rommel.
New York: Harper Perennial, 1994.
Fronto, Marcus Cornelius. Marcus Cornelius Fronto:
Correspondence, I. translated by C. R. Haines. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1919.
Goodman, Rob, and Jimmy Soni. Rome’s Last Citizen: The Life and
Legacy of Cato, Mortal Enemy of Caesar. New York: Thomas
Dunne Books, 2012.

Graham-Dixon, Andrew. Caravaggio: A Life Sacred and Profane.
New York: W. W. Norton, 2012.
Grant, Ulysses S. Ulysses S. Grant: Memoirs and Selected Letters:
Personal Memoirs of U. S. Grant/Selected Letters, 1839–1865.
New York: Library of America, 1990.
Greenblatt, Stephen. Will in the World: How Shakespeare Became
Shakespeare. New York: Norton, 2005.
Greene, Robert. The 48 Laws of Power. New York: Viking Adult,
1998.
———. 33 Strategies of War. New York: Penguin, 2007.
———. Mastery. New York: Viking Adult, 2012.
Greene, Robert, and 50 Cent. The 50th Law. New York: Harper,
2009.
Greitens, Eric. The Heart and the Fist: The Education of a
Humanitarian, the Making of a Navy SEAL. New York: Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt, 2011.
Hadot, Pierre. The Inner Citadel: The Meditations of Marcus
Aurelius. Translated by Michael Chase. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 2001.
———. Philosophy as a Way of Life: Spiritual Exercises from
Socrates to Foucault. Translated by Arnold Davidson. Malden:
Wiley-Blackwell, 1995.
———. What Is Ancient Philosophy? Translated by Michael Chase.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004.
Haley, Alex. The Autobiography of Malcolm X: As Told to Alex Haley.
New York: Ballantine Books, 1987.
Hart, B. H. Liddell. Strategy. New York: Penguin, 1991.
Heraclitus. Fragments (Penguin Classics). Translated by Brooks
Haxton. New York: Penguin, 2003.
Hirsch, James S. Hurricane: The Miraculous Journey of Rubin
Carter. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2000.
Isaacson, Walter. Steve Jobs. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2011.
John, Tommy, with Dan Valenti. TJ: My 26 Years in Baseball. New
York: Bantam, 1991.
Johnson, Jack. My Life and Battles. Edited and translated by
Christopher Rivers. Washington, DC: Potomac Books, 2009.
Johnson, Paul. Churchill. New York: Viking, 2009.

———. Napoleon: A Life. New York: Viking, 2002.
Johnson, Samuel. The Witticisms, Anecdotes, Jests, and Sayings, of
Dr. Samuel Johnson, During the Whole Course of His Life.
Farmington Hills, MI: Gale ECCO Press, 2010.
Josephson, Matthew. Edison: A Biography. New York: Wiley, 1992.
Kershaw, Alex. The Liberator: One World War II Soldier’s 500-Day
Odyssey from the Beaches of Sicily to the Gates of Dachau. New
York: Crown, 2012.
Lickerman, Alex. The Undefeated Mind: On the Science of
Constructing an Indestructible Self. Deerfield Beach: HCI, 2012.
Lorimer, George Horace. Old Gorgon Graham: More Letters from a
Self-Made Merchant to His Son. New York: Cosimo Classics,
2006.
McCain, John, and Mark Salter. Faith of My Fathers: A Family
Memoir. New York: HarperCollins, 1999.
McPhee, John. Levels of the Game. New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 1979.
———. A Sense of Where You Are: Bill Bradley at Princeton. New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999.
Marden, Orison Swett. An Iron Will. Radford, VA: Wilder Publication,
2007.
———. How They Succeeded: Life Stories of Successful Men Told
by Themselves. Hong Kong: Forgotten Books, 2012.
Meacham, Jon. Thomas Jefferson: The Art of Power. New York:
Random House, 2012.
Millard, Candice. The River of Doubt: Theodore Roosevelt’s Darkest
Journey. New York: Doubleday, 2005.
———. Destiny of the Republic: A Tale of Madness, Medicine and
the Murder of a President. New York: Doubleday, 2011.
Montaigne, Michel de. The Essays: A Selection. Translated by M. A.
Screech. New York: Penguin, 1994.
Morris, Edmund. The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt. New York:
Random House, 2010.
Musashi, Miyamoto. The Book of Five Rings. Translated by Thomas
Cleary. Boston: Shambhala, 2005.
Oates, Whitney J. The Stoic and Epicurean Philosophers: The
Complete Extant Writings of Epicurus, Epictetus, Lucretius,

Marcus Aurelius. New York: Random House, 1940.
Paul, Jim, and Brandon Moynihan. What I Learned Losing a Million
Dollars. New York: Columbia University Press, 2013.
Percy, William Alexander. Lanterns on the Levee: Recollections of a
Planter’s Son. Baton Rouge: LSU Press, 2006.
Plutarch. The Makers of Rome: Nine Lives (Penguin Classics).
Translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert. New York: Penguin, 1965.
———. On Sparta (Penguin Classics). Translated and edited by
Richard J. A. Talbert. New York: Penguin, 2005.
———. Essays. Edited by Ian Kidd. Translated by Robin H.
Waterfield. New York: Penguin, 1993.
Pressfield, Stephen. The War of Art: Winning the Inner Creative
Battle. New York: Rugged Land, 2002.
———. Turning Pro: Tap Your Inner Power and Create Your Life’s
Work. New York: Black Irish Entertainment, 2012.
———. The Warrior Ethos. New York: Black Irish Entertainment,
2011.
Ries, Eric. The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use
Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful
Businesses. New York: Crown Business, 2011.
Roosevelt, Theodore. Strenuous Epigrams of Theodore Roosevelt.
New York. HM Caldwell, 1904.
Sandlin, Lee. “Losing the War.” Chicago Reader. March 6, 1997.
———. Storm Kings: The Untold History of America’s First Tornado
Chasers. New York: Pantheon, 2013.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. Essays and Aphorisms (Penguin Classics).
Translated by R. J. Hollingdale. New York: Penguin, 1973.
———. The Wisdom of Life and Counsels and Maxims. Translated
by T. Bailey Saunders. Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1995.
Scott-Maxwell, Florida. The Measure of My Days. New York:
Penguin, 1979.
Sellars, John. Stoicism. Berkeley: University of California Press,
2006.
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus. Stoic Philosophy of Seneca: Essays and
Letters. Translated by Moses Hadas. New York: W. W. Norton,
1968.

———. Letters from a Stoic (Penguin Classics). Translated by Robin
Campbell. New York: Penguin, 1969.
———. On the Shortness of Life. Translated by C.D.N. Costa. New
York: Penguin, 2005.
Shenk, Joshua Wolf. Lincoln’s Melancholy: How Depression
Challenged a President and Fueled His Greatness. New York:
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2005.
Sherman, William Tecumseh. Memoirs of General W. T. Sherman.
(Library of America). New York: Library of America, 1990.
Simpson, Brooks D. Ulysses S. Grant: Triumph Over Adversity,
1822–1865. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2000.
Smiles, Samuel. Self-Help. Berkeley: University of California
Libraries, 2005.
Smith, Jean Edward. Eisenhower in War and Peace. New York:
Random House, 2012.
Stockdale, James B. Courage Under Fire: Testing Epictetus’s
Doctrines in a Laboratory of Human Behavior. Stanford: Hoover
Institution Press, 1993.
Taleb, Nassim Nicholas. The Bed of Procrustes: Philosophical and
Practical Aphorisms. New York: Random House, 2010.
———. Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder. New York:
Random House, 2012.
Taliaferro, John. All the Great Prizes: The Life of John Hay, from
Lincoln to Roosevelt. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2013.
Vasari, Giorgio. The Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors,
and Architects (Modern Library Classics). Edited by Philip
Jack.Translated by Gaston du C. de Vere. New York: Modern
Library, 2006.
Virgil, translated by Robert Fagles. The Aeneid. New York: Penguin,
2010.
Washington, George. Washington on Courage: George
Washington’s Formula for Courageous Living. New York:
Skyhorse Publishing, 2012.
Watson, Paul Barron. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. New York: Harper
& Brothers, 1884.
Wilder, Laura Ingalls. Writings to Young Women from Laura Ingalls
Wilder—Volume Two: On Life as a Pioneer Woman. Edited by

Stephen W. Hines. Nashville: Tommy Nelson, 2006.
Wolfe, Tom. A Man in Full. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
1998.
———. The Right Stuff. New York: Picador, 2008.
Xenophon. Xenophon’s Cyrus the Great: The Arts of Leadership and
War. Edited by Larry Hedrick. New York: Truman Talley Books,
2006.

THE STOIC READING LIST

S

toicism is perhaps the only “philosophy” where the original,
primary texts are actually cleaner and easier to read than
anything academics have written afterward. Which is awesome
because it means you can dive into the subject and go straight to the
source. I firmly believe everyone is capable of reading these very
accessible writers. Below are my recommendations both on specific
translations and then some additional texts worth looking at.
Meditations by Marcus Aurelius (Modern Library). There is one
translation of Marcus Aurelius to read and that is Gregory Hayes’s
amazing edition for the Modern Library. Everything else falls sadly
short. His version is completely devoid of any “thou’s” “arts” “shalls.”
It’s beautiful and hauting. I’ve recommended this book to literally
thousands of people at this point. Buy it. Change your life.
Letters of a Stoic by Seneca (see also: On the Shortness of Life).
Both these translations by Penguin are fantastic. Seneca or Marcus
are the best places to start if you’re looking to explore Stoicism.
Seneca seems like he would have been a fun guy to know—which is
unusual for a Stoic. I suggest starting with On the Shortness of Life
(a collection of short essays) and then move to his book of letters
(which are really more like essays than true correspondence).
Discourses by Epictetus (Penguin). Personally, I prefer the
Penguin translations, but I’ve tried a handful of others and found the

differences to be relatively negligible. Of the big three, Epictetus is
the most preachy and least fun to read. But he will also from time to
time express something so clearly and profoundly that it will shake
you to your core.
The above translations were the ones I used for this book.
OTHER BOOKS AND AUTHORS

I know this will seem harsh, but I strongly advise steering clear of
most of the other books about Stoicism (and I’ve read them) with one
exception: the works of Pierre Hadot. While all the other academics
and popularizers of Stoicism mostly miss the point or needlessly
complicate things, Hadot clarifies. His interpretation of Marcus
Aurelius in the book The Inner Citadel—that Marcus was not writing
some systemic explanation of the universe but creating a set of
practical exercises the emperor was actually practicing himself—was
a huge leap forward. His book Philosophy as a Way of Life explains
how philosophy has been wrongly interpreted as a thing people talk
about rather than something that people do. If you really want to dive
into practical philosophy, Hadot is the guy to read. (Also his
translations of Seneca, Marcus Aurelius, and Epictetus—which he
does for himself from the originals in his analysis—are quite good.)
Some other great authors/philosophers to read—particularly their
books of maxims or aphorisms, which are in line with a lot of stoic
thinking:
Heraclitus
Plutarch
Socrates
Cicero
Montaigne
Arthur Schopenhauer
Penguin Random House published this book, but even if it hadn’t,
I would recommend starting with the Penguin Classics.
STOIC ARTICLES & ONLINE RESOURCES:

http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2009/04/13/stoicism-101-apractical-guide-for-entrepreneurs/.
http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2012/10/09/stoicism-formodern-stresses-5-lessons-from-cato/.
http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2011/05/18/philosophy-as-apersonal-operating-system-from-seneca-to-musashi/.
http://www.newstoa.com/ (the online stoic registry).
http://www.reddit.com/r/Stoicism (stoicism board on Reddit).
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nLD09Qa3kMk (an amazing
lecture on stoicism).
http://philosophy-of-cbt.com/ (perhaps the best blog about stoicism
out there).
http://philosophyforlife.org/ (the blog of prominent stoicism author
Jules Evans).

READING RECOMMENDATIONS

This book and its stories were a result of the books I’ve been
fortunate enough to come across in my life. Each month I distill what
I read into a short e-mail of book recommendations, which I send to
my network of friends and connections. The list started as about forty
people and is now received and read by 10,000 people from all over
the world. All in all, I’ve recommended, discussed and chatted more
than a thousand books with these fellow readers in the last five
years.
If you’d like to join us and get these recommendations, sign up at
Ryanholiday.net/Reading-Newsletter/.
Or you can just send me an e-mail at ryan.holiday@gmail.com and
tell me you want to get the e-mail (just put Reading List in the subject
line).

* I think Stoicism is a deeply fascinating and critically important philosophy. But I also
understand that you live in the real world, right now, and you don’t have time for a history
lecture. What you want are real strategies to help you with your problems, so that’s what
this book is going to be. If you’d like some additional resources and reading
recommendations on Stoicism, I’ve provided them in the reading list at the back of this
book.

