On Desire:
Why We Want What
We Want

William B. Irvine

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

On Desire

This page intentionally left blank

On Desire
Why We Want What We Want

William B. Irvine

2006

Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that
further Oxford University’s objective of excellence
in research, scholarship, and education.
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With offices in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Copyright © 2006 by William B. Irvine
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Irvine, William Braxton, 1952–
On desire : why we want what we want / William B. Irvine
p. cm. Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-19-518862-2
ISBN-10: 0-19-518862-4
1. Desire. I. Title.
BF575.D4178 2005
128'.3—dc22 2005005938
987654321
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper

For Jamie

This page intentionally left blank

Contents

Acknowledgments
Introduction

ix

1

PART ONE

THE SECRET LIFE OF DESIRE
ONE

The Ebb and Flow of Desire 11
TWO

Other People

31

P A RT T WO

THE SCIENCE OF DESIRE
THREE

Mapping Our Desires

55

FOUR

The Wellsprings of Desire 68
FIVE

The Psychology of Desire 91
SIX

The Evolution of Desire 120

viii

Contents
SEVEN

The Biological Incentive System

145

PART THREE

DEALING WITH OUR DESIRES
EIGHT

The Human Condition

175

NINE

Religious Advice

182

TEN

Religious Advice Continued: Protestant Sects 211
ELEVEN

Philosophical Advice 238
T W E LV E

The Eccentrics 258
THIRTEEN

Conclusions
Notes

279

298

Works Cited
Index 316

309

Acknowledgments

I f the hard drive of my computer can be trusted, I first got the
idea to write a book on desire—succumbed, one might say, to the
desire to write such a book—in September 2000. Between that
time and when the final words were being written in the closing
days of 2004, many people contributed to the book in a variety of
ways. I would like to take this opportunity to thank them.
First, thanks to the students who signed up for the desire
seminars I taught in the winter of 2001 and the winter of 2003;
to Derek Vanhoose and Jason Phillips, who did independent
study with me on desire; and especially to Nicholas Barnard,
Chris Poteet, and Sarah Kaplan, who read the manuscript outside of class. These students were the guinea pigs on whom I
tested my work in progress.
Thanks to my colleagues in Wright State University’s College of Liberal Arts and Department of Philosophy for allowing me to lecture them about desire. Thanks to my colleagues
Scott Baird and Don Cipollini in the Biology Department; Scott
discussed the evolution of desire with me, and Don arranged
for me to give a seminar on the topic. A special thanks to my
colleague James McDougal in the Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology for reading and commenting on chapter

x

A c k n ow l e d g m e n t s

drafts. Thanks also to Bruce LaForse of the Classics Department for answering questions about Greek and Latin, and to
Carlos Lopez of the Religion Department for answering questions about Hinduism and Buddhism.
Thanks to Gary Klein for letting me give a presentation on
the psychology of desire at Klein Associates, and thanks to Terry
Stanard and David Malek at Klein for their feedback on my research. Gary also deserves a special thanks for his encouragement and his assistance in helping move this project forward.
Thanks to Connie Steele and Karen Chamberlain, who took a
special interest in the desire project and offered encouragement.
Thanks also to Elda Rotor and Cybele Tom at Oxford for
their first-rate editorial direction and for reminding me that an
individual’s progress as an author is measured not only in how
many words are written each day but in how many of those
words are subsequently deleted.
Finally, I am grateful for permission to reprint an excerpt
from “Papyrus Chester Beatty I,” from Love Lyrics of Ancient
Egypt, translated by Barbara Hughes Fowler, copyright © 1994
by the University of North Carolina Press. Used by permission
of the publisher.

Acknowledgments

Little is needed to make a wise man happy, but nothing can content a fool. That is why nearly all men are
miserable.
—La Rochefoucauld

xi

This page intentionally left blank

On Desire

This page intentionally left blank

Desire is a subject upon which . . . true views can only
be arrived at by an almost complete reversal of the
ordinary unreflecting opinion.
—Bertrand Russell

Introduction
You are currently experiencing desire; otherwise, you wouldn’t
be reading these words. Even if you are reading them at the
behest of someone else, you are motivated by your desire to
please that person. And if you stop reading, you will do so not
because you have stopped desiring but because your desires
have changed.
We are awash in desire at virtually every waking moment.
If we fall asleep, we temporarily subdue our desires—unless
we dream, in which case our dreams will likely be shaped by
our desires. Our skill at forming desires is truly remarkable.
No one has to teach us how to do it. It is, furthermore, a skill
we can exercise endlessly without tiring. When it comes to
desiring, we are all experts. If there were an Olympics of desiring, we would all make the team. Sickness and old age may
change what we desire, but they do not stop us from desiring.
Try, for a moment, to stanch the flow of desire. You will
have to stop squirming, tapping your fingers, clenching your
toes; you will have to let your tongue go slack in your mouth

2

Introduction

and let your eyelids close; you will have to slouch in your chair—
or better still, lie down; to the extent possible, you will have to
relinquish control of your breathing; you will have to let your
mind go blank. You will, in other words, have to enter what we
call a meditative state. And even then you will not have purged
yourself of desire: you would not remain in this state unless
you had an ongoing desire to do so. It takes desire to attempt,
unsuccessfully, to extinguish desire.
If you try the above experiment, you will discover that it is
almost impossible to keep your mind empty. New thoughts
will arise, many of which express desire. You might notice that
you are hungry and wish to eat, or that you are uncomfortable
and wish to fidget. You might experience anger, which reflects
disappointment of your past desires, or anxiety, which reflects
your desires about the future. This experiment, by the way,
resembles the Zen meditation known as zazen. By performing
this meditation, Zen practitioners gain insight into the insidious process by which desires form within us.
Desire animates the world. It is present in the baby crying for
milk, the girl struggling to solve a math problem, the woman
running to meet her lover and later deciding to have children,
and the old woman, hunched over her walker, moving down
the hall of the nursing home at a glacial pace to pick up her
mail. Banish desire from the world, and you get a world of
frozen beings who have no reason to live and no reason to die.
Some people have far fewer desires than the rest of us. Some
of them lack desire because they are depressed; others lack it
because they have achieved enlightenment. This enlightenment, by the way, is typically the end result of years of con-

Introduction

3

scious effort, brought on by an intense desire to free themselves, to the extent possible, from the grip of desire.
Because we continually experience desire, we are oblivious
to its presence in us. It is like the noise made by the fan of a
computer. The noise is always there, a low whisper, and because it is always there, we stop noticing it. Similarly, we are
usually oblivious to our desires—to their ebb and flow within
us, to the role they play in our lives. It is only when our desires
are intense (like when we fall in love) or when they come into
conflict (like when we want a bowl of ice cream but, because
we are on a diet, simultaneously want not to want it) that we
pay attention to our desires, with a mixture of puzzlement and
vexation. And because we are oblivious to the workings of
desire within us, we are full of misconceptions about it.
One consequence of reading this book may be that for the
first time in your life you pay close attention to the operation
of desire within you. When you do this, you will quickly become aware of the remarkable extent to which your desires
have a life of their own. They pop into your head, seemingly
out of nowhere. Indeed, in many cases, you don’t so much
choose your desires as discover them within you. You will also
come to appreciate the extent to which these unbidden desires
determine how you spend your days and, in the long run, how
you spend your life.
Another thing: once you gain an understanding of how desire works, the desires you form are likely to change. This certainly happened to me over the course of my research. Once I
came to understand the extent to which desires arise within
me spontaneously and not as the result of rational thought
processes, I grew suspicious of my desires. “Where did this
desire come from?” I would ask. “Why do I want this thing

4

Introduction

that I want?” And having asked, I would in many cases end up
discarding the suspect desire. (In many cases, but not in all! I
certainly don’t claim to have mastered desire.)
My goal in investigating desire was to turn it inside out—to
understand how and why desires arise, how they affect our lives,
and what we can do to master them. In pursuing this goal, I
examined what Buddhists, Taoists, Hindus, the Amish, Shakers, and Catholic saints have said about desire, as well as what
ancient Greek and Roman and modern European philosophers
have said. Besides being multicultural, my examination of desire was multidisciplinary. After examining the writings of philosophers and religious thinkers, I investigated scientific
research into how and why we form the desires we form.
Lots of people have thought and written about desire in the
last few millennia. The reader might therefore wonder what, if
anything, is left to say about the subject. As it turns out, this is an
auspicious time for a reexamination of desire. In the last three
decades, evolutionary psychologists have made a number of discoveries concerning why we want what we want. During that
same period, neuroscientists have made discoveries that help us
understand, for the first time ever, the mechanism by which we
desire. This understanding allowed them to develop drugs such
as Prozac that rekindle desire in depressed patients.
In the following pages, I will attempt to reconcile classical
views on desire with the scientific research done in the last few
decades. As we shall see, this research substantially confirms
many of the prescientific observations of philosophers and
religious thinkers about the workings of desire. It also validates much of the advice on mastering desire offered by the
likes of Buddha, Epictetus, and Thoreau.

Introduction

5

The social and economic developments of recent decades
also make this an ideal time to reexamine desire. Around the
world, rising levels of affluence have not translated into increased levels of personal satisfaction. In particular, the citizens of affluent nations enjoy a level of material well-being
unimaginable to their great-grandparents. Even those citizens
labeled impoverished by government statisticians have antibiotics, reliable contraception, CD players, Internet access, and
indoor plumbing. But although they “have it all” compared to
their ancestors, they remain dissatisfied.
Most people spend their days pursuing worldly success—
fame, fortune, and all the things that go with them. (And if
not fame and fortune, at least social status and relative affluence.) They imagine that on gaining this success, they will
also gain satisfaction—they will at last feel satisfied with their
accomplishments, relationships, possessions, and most importantly, with their lives. And with this satisfaction, they think,
will come lasting happiness. What they fail to realize, as I shall
argue in the following pages, is that it is entirely possible to
gain satisfaction without pursuing, much less gaining worldly
success. Indeed, in pursuing worldly success, people generally
impair their chances of gaining personal satisfaction.
People commonly think that the best way to attain happiness is to change their environment—their house, their clothes,
their car, their job, their spouse, their lover, their circle of
friends. But those who have thought carefully about desire—
the people whose views we will examine in the following
pages—have unanimously drawn the conclusion that the best
way—indeed, perhaps the only way—to attain lasting happiness is not to change the world around us or our place in it but

6

Introduction

to change ourselves. In particular, if we can convince ourselves
to want what we already have, we can dramatically enhance
our happiness without any change in our circumstances. It simply does not occur to the typical person that satisfaction can
best be gained not by working to satisfy the desires we find
within us but by selectively suppressing or eradicating our desires. As we shall see, throughout the ages and across cultures,
thoughtful people have argued that the best way to attain happiness is to master our desires, but throughout the ages and
across cultures, ordinary people have ignored this advice.
Perfect mastery of our desires is probably impossible. Even
Buddha did not succeed in extinguishing desire: after his enlightenment, he retained a number of desires—to breathe, to
eat, and most notably, to share with others the source of his
enlightenment. What we should therefore seek is relative mastery: we should learn to sort through our desires, working to
fulfill some of them, while working to suppress others.
How will we know when we have “mastered” desire? We
will experience what, as we shall see, has been the goal of most
of those who have thought carefully about desire—a feeling
of tranquility. This should not be confused with the kind of
tranquility brought on by ingestion of a tranquilizer. It is instead marked by a sense that we are lucky to be living whatever life we happen to be living—that despite our circumstances,
no key ingredient of happiness is missing. With this sense comes
a diminished level of anxiety: we no longer need to obsess over
the things—a new car, a bigger house, a firmer abdomen—
that we mistakenly believe will bring lasting happiness if only
we can obtain them. Most importantly, if we master desire, to
the extent possible to do so, we will no longer despise the life
we are forced to live and will no longer daydream about living

Introduction

7

the life someone else is living; instead, we will embrace our
own life and live it to the fullest.
The remainder of this book is divided into three parts. In Part
One, I consider the secret life of desire. I begin by describing
cases in which people find themselves suddenly and unaccountably in the grip of desire, as well as cases in which the desires
people took for granted—that for decades had shaped their
lives—suddenly abandon them. I also examine our intense need
to interact with and win the admiration of other people.
If we are to win our battle against undesirable desires, it
helps to understand them. It is for this reason that, in Part Two
of this book, I take a look at what scientists have discovered
about desire—about how we form desires and why we form
the desires we do. I begin with a discussion of the structure of
desire and the sources of desire within us. I go on to describe
some of the research, undertaken by neuroscientists and psychologists, on what takes place in the brain when we desire.
Then I speculate on how we evolved the ability to desire and
on what specific desires came to be “hardwired” into us as the
result of our evolutionary past. Because of this wiring, we tend
to form certain desires, but it is by no means clear that by working to satisfy these desires we will have a life that is either happy
or meaningful.
In Part Three, I examine the advice on mastering desire that
has been given over the millennia and across cultures, including religious, philosophical, and what can best be described as
eccentric advice.
Readers should be warned at the outset that I will not, in
the following pages, provide a “magic bullet” with which they
can instantly and effortlessly eradicate unwanted desires. What

8

Introduction

I instead offer is insight into how desire works, the role it plays
in human life, and the connection between desire formation,
desire fulfillment, and human happiness. The hope is that readers armed with this insight will achieve a greater level of personal satisfaction than if they were afflicted, as most people
are, with misconceptions about the workings of desire.
Readers might also benefit from my discussion of the advice thoughtful people have offered, over the millennia, on how
we can prevent undesirable desires from arising within us and
expel them from our minds when, despite our best efforts, they
do arise. Again, I have no magic bullet to offer: following any
of this advice will take time and effort. If we like what the Zen
Buddhists have to say about mastering desire, we might want
to spend hours in silent meditation; if we like what the Amish
say, we might want to join an Amish community (if they will
have us); if we like what the Stoic philosophers say, we might
want to spend time studying their writings. But having said
this, I should add that the time and effort we spend trying to
master desire are probably considerably less than the time and
effort we will expend if we instead capitulate to our desires
and spend our days, as so many people do, working incessantly
to fulfill whatever desires float into our head.

PA RT O N E

THE SECRET LIFE OF
DESIRE

This page intentionally left blank

To think that I’ve wasted years of my life, that I’ve
longed to die, that I’ve experienced my greatest love,
for a woman who didn’t appeal to me, who wasn’t even
my type!
—Marcel Proust

ONE

The Ebb and Flow of
Desire
S

ome desires are formed as the result of rational thought processes. Suppose I want lunch. I conclude that the best way to
get it, given that my refrigerator is empty, is to drive to a nearby
restaurant. As a result, I form a desire to drive to the restaurant
in question. This process is perfectly, admirably rational.
It would be a mistake, though, to suppose that all our desires are formed in this manner. To the contrary, many of our
most profound, life-affecting desires are not rational, in the
sense that we don’t use rational thought processes to form
them. Indeed, we don’t form them; they form themselves
within us. They simply pop into our heads, uninvited and unannounced. While they reside there, they take control of our
lives. A single rogue desire can trample the plans we had for
our lives and thereby alter our destinies.
If we are to understand desire—indeed, if we are to understand the human condition—we need to acknowledge the

12

The Secret Life of Desire

possibility of spontaneous desire. Let us, then, examine some
cases in which perfectly rational people have had their lives turned
upside down by the sudden, inexplicable onset of desire.
Falling in love is the paradigmatic example of an involuntary
life-affecting desire. We don’t reason our way into love, and we
typically can’t reason our way out: when we are in love, our
intellectual weapons stop working. Falling in love is like waking up with a cold—or more fittingly, like waking up with a
fever. We don’t decide to fall in love, any more than we decide
to catch the flu. Lovesickness is a condition brought upon us,
against our will, by a force somehow external to us.
What force is this? Some would, half seriously, point an accusing finger at Cupid. We fall in love because Cupid selects us
as his target without first asking our leave to do so and lets fly
an arrow that infects us with lovesickness. This, I realize, is just
a myth, but it is nevertheless a myth with impressive explanatory power.
Lovesickness, we should note, is different from lust. A lustful
person experiences intense sexual desire that can be satisfied indiscriminately, with any number of people. A lovesick person,
on the other hand, experiences an intense desire, generally sexual
in nature, that has a target—a specific human being.
When we are lovesick, we lose a significant amount of control over our lives. We start acting foolishly—indeed, we become fools for love. Roman Stoic philosopher Seneca described
love as “friendship gone mad.”1 French aphorist François duc
de La Rochefoucauld declared, “All the passions cause us to
make mistakes, but love is responsible for the silliest ones.”2
Freud called lovesickness “the psychosis of normal people.”3

The Ebb and Flow of Desire

13

Humorist Fran Lebowitz sums up the foolishness of lovesickness in the following terms: “People who get married because
they’re in love make a ridiculous mistake. It makes much more
sense to marry your best friend. You like your best friend more
than anyone you’re ever going to be in love with. You don’t
choose your best friend because they have a cute nose, but that’s
all you’re doing when you get married; you’re saying, ‘I will
spend the rest of my life with you because of your lower lip.’”4
Although romantic love has had its ups and downs over the
centuries, lovesickness seems to have been around forever. The
poetry of ancient Egypt describes something indistinguishable
from modern-day lovesickness. One poem, written more than
three thousand years ago, begins as follows:
It’s seven whole days since I
have seen my [love]. A sickness
pervades me. My limbs are lead.
I barely sense my body.
Should physicians come,
their drugs could not cure
my heart, nor could the priests
diagnose my disease.
Should they say, “Here
she is,” that would heal me.5

We can likewise find in Plutarch descriptions of lovesickness
as a medical condition. He tells us that in the third century
B.C., Erasistratus was asked to diagnose Prince Antiochus, the
son of King Seleucus. The symptoms: “his voice faltered, his
face flushed up, his eyes glanced stealthily, a sudden sweat broke
out on his skin, the beatings of his heart were irregular and
violent, and, unable to support the excess of his passion, he
would sink into a state of faintness, prostration, and pallor.”
Erasistratus’s diagnosis: the lad was lovesick.6

14

The Secret Life of Desire

Robert Burton, in his Anatomy of Melancholy, published in
1621, has much to say about lovesickness as a medical condition. He observes that “of all passions . . . Love is most violent.”7 He also offers a cure for lovesickness: “The last refuge
and surest remedy, to be put in practice in the utmost place,
when no other means will take effect, is, to let them go together, and enjoy one another.”8
The symptoms of lovesickness are well known to anyone
who has been afflicted by it. First comes a fixation on a person—
a crush. (The common use of the word crush, by the way, is
syntactically backward: we speak of having a crush on someone, but what really happens is that we feel crushed by them—
we feel as if there were a heavy weight on our chest.) With this
crush, we lose control of part of our thought processes inasmuch as we cannot stop thinking about the object of our desire. We experience what psychologists call intrusive thoughts.
When we are lovesick, our love makes sense to us, much as
our delusions make sense to us when we are in the grip of a
high fever or our nightmares make sense to us while we are
asleep. To our friends and relatives, though, our infatuation
might make no sense at all: “What can he possibly see in her?”
they will ask. And in the same way as a fever can pass or we can
awaken from a nightmare, lovesickness can end, at which point
we might go up to our friends and relatives, bewildered, and
ask, “What did I see in her?” In the words of French philosopher and mathematician Blaise Pascal, “The heart has its reasons, which reason does not know.”9
The departure of love can be as puzzling as its arrival. Philosopher Bertrand Russell, for example, was a happily married
man until, during a bicycle ride along a country road, he sud-

The Ebb and Flow of Desire

15

denly realized that he no longer loved his wife. This realization
came as a complete surprise: “I had had no idea until this moment that my love for her was even lessening.”10 In love, then,
we have a dramatic illustration of the role desire can play in
human life. It can grab us by the scruff of the neck, shake us
for a spell, and then discard us.
Falling in love is only one instance in which we don’t choose
our desires, but they choose us. The same thing can happen
with material desires.
Consider, for example, the predicament of the consumer
who one day detects in himself a desire to own one of those
absurdly oversized cars known as sport utility vehicles. Although SUV buyers attempt to give rational justifications for
their purchase, the justifications rarely ring true—unless the
buyer happens to be, say, a geologist or a fur trapper. The recent popularity of SUVs is particularly puzzling. SUVs have
been around for decades: it has been possible to buy a Chevy
Suburban since the mid-1930s. Why are so many people getting them now? What changed? You can, of course, ask exactly
the same question about any other consumer fad.
At the time of this writing, the consumer craving for SUVs
showed signs of having crested, only to be replaced by an even
more inexplicable automotive craving—to own a Hummer, the
modified version of the vehicle designed to transport soldiers
across war zones. The first consumers who bought Hummers
looked a bit foolish—they weren’t, after all, living in a war zone.
But then a funny thing happened. Like a contagious disease, the
desire for Hummers spread: one by one, the neighbors of Hummer owners found themselves afflicted with Hummer envy.

16

The Secret Life of Desire

Affluent individuals have no end of goods on which to spend
their money. It is possible, for example, to spend $450,000 on a
wristwatch, $15,000 on stereo headphones, and $6,000 on a
Sub-Zero refrigerator. (I recently toured the home of someone who owns one of these refrigerators. “Why do they call it
Sub-Zero?” I asked, thinking that perhaps its interior was unusually cold. “They call it Sub-Zero,” the homeowner replied,
“because that’s what my IQ had to be to spend six grand on a
refrigerator.”) And when people aren’t affluent, they don’t let
this stop them from acting as though they were. They form
and act on material desires with reckless abandon. Consider
the unmarried, unemployed mother of three who, four days
after buying a used Ford Mustang, spent $2,736—over half the
car’s Blue Book value—to replace its plastic hubcaps with
chrome wheels: “Nothing’s worse than plastic hubcaps,” she
explained.11
In America, the insatiable craving for consumer goods is in
large part responsible for more than a million of us going bankrupt each year. It is also responsible for our having, in recent
years, a negative national savings rate, meaning that the average American, in the average month, not only saves nothing
but borrows to finance his lifestyle. All this, even though today’s
Americans enjoy a level of material prosperity that would have
astonished their great-grandparents.
For another example of the sudden onset of desire and how it
can transform our lives, consider the case of Thomas Merton.
Merton was born in 1915. In his college years, he was a typical
student, awash in pleasures of the flesh. He drank hard and
ran around with a fast crowd. He became a father out of wedlock.12 He was, in his own words, “an extremely unpleasant

The Ebb and Flow of Desire

17

sort of a person—vain, self-centered, dissolute, weak, irresolute, undisciplined, sensual, obscene, and proud. I was a
mess.”13 In less than a decade, he was not just a devout Catholic, and not just a monk in a monastery, but a monk in a Trappist
monastery, meaning that he had taken a vow of silence and
agreed to live an ascetic life.
Whenever anyone travels far—in the personal as opposed to
the physical sense—in the course of a lifetime, the interesting
question is, how did that person get from point A to point B? In
the case of most travelers, the motivations for their journey must
remain a mystery to the rest of us since the travelers are either
oblivious to their own motivations or conscious of them but
unable or unwilling to put into words what it was that drove
them down the path their lives took. In the case of Merton, we
are lucky: his autobiographical Seven Storey Mountain lays out
in great detail the psychology of a man in transition.
Let us first consider Merton’s desire to convert to Catholicism. It is a classic example of a spontaneous desire: “All of a
sudden, something began to stir within me, something began
to push me, to prompt me. It was a movement that spoke like
a voice.”14 The voice told Merton to go find a priest and express a desire to become a Catholic. He sacrificed his old amusements in order to take instruction, and before he knew it, he
burned with a desire to be baptized. Conversion, he hoped,
would make him subordinate his desires to God’s will.
For most people, this would have been the end of the story,
but Merton soon came to realize that “there had been another
thought, half forming itself in the back of my mind—an obscure desire to become a priest.”15 After a night of drinking,
Merton and his friends were sitting on the floor playing records,
smoking cigarettes, and eating breakfast, when this “obscure

18

The Secret Life of Desire

desire” revealed itself. “The idea came to me: ‘I am going to be
a priest.’” The desire, says Merton, “was a strong and sweet
and deep and insistent attraction that suddenly made itself felt.”
It was “a new and profound and clear sense that this was what
I really ought to do.”16
After deciding to become a priest, Merton had to decide
which religious order to join. He rejected the Cistercians of
the Strict Observance, commonly known as the Trappists, as
being too ascetic, what with their vow of silence and their vegetarianism. (He says that their very name made him shiver.)
He instead gave the Franciscans a try but found them unsatisfying, inasmuch as their order gave him too much freedom to
form and pursue desires. He decided that perhaps he was not
cut out to be a priest and set out to live the most religious life
a layperson could live.
Not long after this, he was struck with a new desire: “I suddenly found myself filled with a vivid conviction: ‘The time
has come for me to go and be a Trappist.’” He didn’t know
where this desire came from, but it was nevertheless “powerful, irresistible, clear.”17 Why join the Trappists rather than
some other religious order? Because sometime before, in a
moment of crisis, he had opened the Bible randomly, put his
finger down, and read what was there: “Behold, thou shalt be
silent.” Merton took this as a sign. (Cynics might point out
that his decision to join a monastery coincided with his receiving a letter from the draft board; World War II had just begun.)
Merton was not surprised by these sudden onsets of desire
and by his inability to explain them. To the contrary, he
unhesitatingly rejected the claim that our desires—and in particular, our most important, life-affecting desires—are formed
as the result of rational thought. The intellect, he tells us, “is

The Ebb and Flow of Desire

19

constantly being blinded and perverted by the ends and aims
of passion, and the evidence it presents to us with such a show
of impartiality and objectivity is fraught with interest and propaganda.” We are, he says, masters of self-delusion. Our desires
“are fruitful sources of every kind of error and misjudgement,
and because we have these yearnings in us, our intellects . . .
present to us everything distorted and accommodated to the
norms of our desire.”18 As we shall see in later chapters, Merton
is not alone in thinking that reason tends to be the servant
rather than the master of desire.
It is, by the way, instructive to contrast Merton with Bertrand
Russell. When people hear about how Merton’s life was transformed by sudden desires, they are tempted to think that
Merton must have had a mystical side that made him susceptible to this sort of thing. A more rational person, they suggest, would not likewise allow himself to be bandied about by
desire. The thing to realize is that Russell was one of the least
mystical, most analytical persons ever to have walked the earth,
and yet his desires had a secret life. No one, it would seem, is
immune to the sudden onset and equally sudden departure of
desire.
Where do spontaneous desires come from? How do they get
into our heads? Some of our desires are a consequence of our
evolutionary past. We fall in love because, evolutionary psychologists argue, our ancestors who tended to fall in love were
more likely to make babies and raise them successfully than
those who didn’t. Other desires arise because someone has skillfully planted the seeds of desire within us. Why does a consumer
suddenly find himself wanting an SUV? In most cases, advertising plays a role. Advertisers are experts in transforming an

