Immanuel Kant

CRITIQUE
OF JUDGMENT
Including the
First Introduction

Translated, with an Introduction, by

Werner s. Pluhar
With a Foreword by

Mary J. Gregor
Hackett Publishing Company
INDIANAPOLIS/CAMBRIDGE

Immanuel Kant: 1724-1804
The Critique of Judgment was originally published in Prussia in 1790

Copyright () 1987 by Werner S. Pluhar
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
05 04 03 02 01

5 6 7 8 9

Cover design by Listenberger & Associates
Interior design by Dan Kirklin

For further information, please address
Hackett Publishing Company,Inc.
P. O. Box 44937
Indianapolis, Indiana 46244-0937
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
Kant, Immanuel, 1724-1804.
Critique of judgment.
Translation of: Kritik der Urteilskraft.
"Including the first introduction."
Bibliography: p.
Includes index.
1. Judgment (Logic)-Early works to 1800.
2. Aesthetics- Early works to 1800. 3. TeleologyEarly works to 1800. I. Pluhar. Werner S., 1940- .
II. Title.

B2783.E5P581986

121

87-14852

ISBN (}'S722(}()26-4
ISBN D-S722(}()25-6 (pbk.)
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements
of American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984.

~

CONTENTS

xv

Foreword by Mary J. Gregor

xix

Translator's Preface

xxiii

Translator's Introduction

O.
1.

2.
3.
4.

S.
6.

7.
8.

9.
10.
11.

12.

Preliminary Note:
The Scope of the
Critique of Judgment
Kant's Life and Works
The Critique of Pure Reason
The Critique of Practical Reason
The Critique of Aesthetic Judgment:
Background
Kant's Account of Judgments of Taste
as Aesthetic Judgments of Reflection
The Deduction of Judgments of Taste
Beyond the Deduction:
Linking Beauty to Morality
Beauty and Fine Art
Judgments about the Sublime
The Critique of Teleological Judgment:
Background
Kant's Account of Teleological Judgments:
Why They Are Needed
Teleological Judgments about Organisms

V

xxiii
xxvii
xxx
xxxix
xlvii
liv
lix
lxi
lxvi
!xviii
lxxi
lxxvi
lxxvii

vi

CONTENTS

13.
14.

15.

Is Nature as a Whole
a Teleological System?
Moving Beyond Teleological
Cognition of Nature
How the Critique of Judgment
Completes the Critical System

lxxxi
Ixxxiii
Ixxxvi

CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT
Preface

3

Introduction

9

I.

II.

III.

IV.

v.

VI.

VII.
VIII.

IX.

On the Division of Philosophy
On the Domain of
Philosophy in General
On the Critique of Judgment as
Mediating the Connection of the
Two Parts of Philosophy to [Forml
a Whole
On Judgment as a Power
That Legislates A Priori
The Principle of the Formal Purposiveness
of Nature Is a Transcendental
Principle of Judgment
On the Connection of the Feeling of
Pleasure with the Concept of the
Purposiveness of Nature
On the Aesthetic Presentation of the
Purposiveness of Nature
On the Logical Presentation of the
Purposiveness of Nature
How Judgment Connects the Legislations
of the Understanding and of Reason

9
12

15
18

20

26
28
32
35

Division of the Entire Work

38

PART l.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

41

DIVISION I.

ANALYTIC OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

43

ANALYTIC OF THE BEAUTIFUL

43

BOOK I.

First Moment of a Judgment of Taste, As to Its Quality

§ 1.
§ 2.

A Judgment of Taste Is Aesthetic
The Liking That Determines a Judgment of
Taste Is Devoid of All Interest

Vll

43

44
45

VlU

,,-vrli 1 Cl'j

§ 3.

§ 4.
§ 5.

1"

A Liking for the Agreeable Is Connected with
Interest
A Liking for the Good Is Connected with
Interest
Comparison of the Three Sorts of Liking,
Which Differ in Kind

Second Moment 0/ a Judgment of Taste.
As to Its Quantity
§ 6.

§ 7.

§ 8.
§ 9.

The Beautiful Is What Is Presented without
Concepts as the Object of a
Universal Liking
Comparison of the Beautiful with the
Agreeable and the Good in Terms of the
Above Characteristic
In a Judgment of Taste the Universality of the
Liking Is Presented only as Subjective
Investigation of the Question Whether in a
Judgment of Taste the Feeling of Pleasure
Precedes the Judging of the Object or the
Judging Precedes the Pleasure

Third Moment of Judgments of Taste, As- to the Relation of
Purposes That Is Taken into Consideration in Them
§ 10.
§ 11.

§ 12.
§ 13.
§ 14.
§ 15.

§ 16.

§ 17.

47
48
51

53

53

55
57

61

64

On Purposiveness in General
64
A Judgment of Taste Is Based on Nothing but
the Form of Purposiveness of an Object
(or of the Way of Presenting It)
66
A Judgment of Taste Rests on
A Priori Bases
67
A Pure Judgment of Taste Is Independent of
68
Charm and Emotion
Elucidation by Examples
69
A Judgment of Taste Is Wholly Independent of
the Concept of Perfection
73
A Judgment of Taste by Which We Declare
an Object Beautiful under the Condition of
a Determinate Concept Is Not Pure
76
On the Ideal of Beauty
79

CONTENTS

Fourth Moment of a Judgment of Taste, As to the Modality of
the Liking for the Object
§ 18.
§ 19.
§ 20.

§ 21.
§ 22.

BOOK II.

§23.
§24.

§ 25.
§ 26.

§ 27.
B.

§28.
§ 29.

ix

85

What the Modality of a Judgment of
Taste Is
The Subjective Necessity That We Attribute to
a Judgment of Taste Is Conditioned
The Condition for the Necessity Alleged by
a Judgment of Taste Is the Idea of a
Common Sense
Whether We Have a Basis for Presupposing a
Common Sense
The Necessity of the Universal Assent That
We Think in a Judgment of Taste Is a
Subjective Necessity That We Present as
Objective by Presupposing a Common Sense

89

General Comment on the First Division
of the Analytic

91

ANALYTIC OF THE SUBLIME

97

85
86

87
87

Transition from the Power of Judging the
Beautiful to That of JUdging the Sublime
On Dividing an Investigation of the Feeling of
the Sublime

100

On the Mathematically Sublime

103

97

Explication of the Term Sublime
103
On Estimating the Magnitude of
Natural Things, as We Must for the
107
Idea of the Sublime
On the Quality of the Liking in Our Judging of
114
the Sublime
On the Dynamically Sublime in Nature

119

On Nature as a Might
On the Modality of a Judgment about the
Sublime in Nature

119
124

X

CONTENTS
General Comment on the Exposition of
Aesthetic Reflective Judgments
DEDUCTION OF PuRE AEsTHEnc

§30.

§31.
§32.
§33.
§34.

§35.
§36.
§37.
§38.
§39.
§40.
§41.
§42.
§43.
§44.
§45.
§46.
§47.
§48.
§49.
§ 50.
§51.

§52.

JUDGMENTS

The Deduction of Aesthetic Judgments about
Objects of Nature Must Be Directed Not to
What We Call Sublime in Nature but
Only to the Beautiful
On the Method of the Deduction of
Judgments of Taste
First Peculiarity of a Judgment of Taste
Second Peculiarity of a Judgment of Taste
An Objective Principle of Taste Is
Impossible
The Principle of Taste Is the Subjective
Principle of the Power of Judgment as Such
On the Problem of a Deduction of
Judgments of Taste
What Is Actually Asserted A Priori about
an Object in a Judgment of Taste?
Deduction of Judgments of Taste
On the Communicability of a Sensation
On Taste as a Kind of Sensus Communis
On Empirical Interest in the Beautiful
On Intellectual Interest in the Beautiful
On Art in General
On Fine Art
Fine Art Is an Art insofar as it Seems at the
Same Time to Be Nature
Fine Art Is the Art of Genius
Elucidation and Confirmation of the
Above Explication of Genius
On the Relation of Genius to Taste
On the Powers of the Mind Which
Constitute Genius
On the Combination of Taste with Genius in
Products of Fine Art
On the Division of the Fine Arts
On the Combination of the Fine Arts in One
and the Same Product

126
141

141
143
145
147
149
150
152
154
155
157
159
163
165
170
172
173
174
176
179
181
188

189
195

CONTENTS

§53.
§ 54.
DIVISION II.

§ 55.
§56.
§ 57.
§ 58.

§ 59.
§60.

PART II.

§61.
DIVISION 1.

§62.
§63.

§64.
§65.
§66.
§67.

§68.

DIVISION II.

§69.
§70.

Xl

Comparison of the Aesthetic Value of the
Various Fine Arts
Comment

196
201

DIALECTIC OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

209

Presentation of the Antinomy of Taste
Solution of the Antinomy of Taste
On the Idealism Concerning the Purposiveness
of Both Nature and Art as the
Sole Principle of Aesthetic Judgment
On Beauty as the Symbol of Morality
APPENDIX. On Methodology
Concerning Taste

209
210

211

220
225

230

CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

233

On Objective Purposiveness of Nature

235

ANALYTIC OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

239

On Merely Formal, as Distinguished from
Material, Objective Purposiveness
On Relative, as Distinguished from IntrinsiC,
Purposiveness of Nature
On the Character Peculiar to Things
[Considered] as Natural Purposes
Things [Considered) as Natural Purposes
Are Organized Beings
On the Principle for Judging Intrinsic
Purposiveness in Organized Beings
On the Principle by Which We Teleologically
Judge Nature in General as a
System of Purposes
On the Principle of Teleology as a Principle
Inherent in Natural Science

251

DIALECTIC OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

265

What an Antinomy of Judgment Is
Presentation of That Antinomy

265
266

239
244

248

255

257
261

XU

CONTENTS

§71.

§ 72.
§73.
§74.

§75.

§76.
§77.

§78.

ApPENDIX.

§79.
§80.

§ 81.

§82.
§ 83.
§84.
§ 85.
§ 86.

Preliminary to the Solution of the
Above Antinomy
On the Various Systems Concerning the
Purposiveness of Nature
None of the Above Systems Accomplishes
What It Alleges to Accomplish
The Reason Why It Is Impossible to Treat the
Concept of a Technic of Nature Dogmatically
Is That a ~atural Purpose Is Inexplicable
The Concept of an Objective Purposiveness of
Nature Is a Critical Principle of Reason for
Our Reflective Judgment
Comment
On the Peculiarity of the Human
Understanding That Makes the Concept of
a Natural Purpose Possible for Us
How the Principle of the Universal Mechanism
of Matter and the Teleological Principle Can
Be Reconciled in the Technic of Nature

295

METHODOLOGY OF TELEOLOGICAL
JUDGMENT

301

Whether Teleology Must Be Given Treatment
as a Part of Natural Science
On the Necessary Subordination of the
Principle of Mechanism to the Teleological
Principle in Explaining a Thing [Considered I
as a Natural Purpose
On Conjoining Mechanism to the Teleological
Principle in Explaining Natural Purposes
[Considered] as Natural Products
On the Teleological System in the Extrinsic
Relations among Organized Beings
On the Ultimate Purpose That Nature Has
as a Teleological System
On the Final Purpose of the Existence of a
World, i.e., of Creation Itself
On Physicotheology
On Ethicotheology

269
270
273

277

280

283
288

301

303

308
312
317
322
324
331

§87.
§88.
§89.
§90.

§91.

CONTENTS

Xlll

On the Moral Proof of the Existence of God
Restriction of the Validity of the
Moral Proof
On the Benefit of the Moral Argument
On What Kind of Assent There Is in a
Teleological Proof of the Existence of God
On What Kind of Assent Results from a
Practical Faith

336

General Comment on Teleology
Translator's Supplement: First Introduction to the
Critique of Judgment
I.
II.

III.

[v.

v.
VI.

VII.
VIII.
IX.
X.
XI.

XII.

On Philosophy as a System
On the System of the Higher
Cognitive Powers Which Lies at the
Basis of Philosophy
On the System of All the Powers of the
Human Mind
On Experience as a System for the
Power of Judgment
On Reflective Judgment
On the Purposiveness That
[Certain Individual) Natural Forms Have
as so many Particular Systems
On the Technic of Judgment as the Basis
of the Idea of a Technic of Nature
On the Aesthetic of the
Power of Judging
On Teleological Judging
On the Inquiry into a Principle of
Technical Judgment
Encyclopaedic Introduction of the
Critique of Judgment into the System
of the Critique of Pure Reason
Division of the Critique of Judgment

343
351
353
360

369
383
385
391
394
397
399
405
407
409

421
426
431
437

Selected Bibliography

443

Glossary

461

Index

477

FOREWORD

By calling three of his works "critiques," Kant indicated their central
role in the Critical Philosophy. The Critique of Pure Reason, which
determines the limits of theoretical cognition for the human mind, is
the foundation of Kant's mature philosophical thought, and the ideal
approach to his philosophy would, I suppose, begin with the Critique
of Pure Reason and work forward systematically. That is to say, as we
found various kinds of judgments, we would first analyze the sort of
claim to universal assent being made and then attempt to justify that
kind of claim by tracing it to the necessary principles of our mental
activity. But our philosophical development may not parallel Kant's.
If we find ourselves drawn to Kant by an interest in, e.g., ethics or
aesthetics, we can go only so far before we get into difficulties. For
Kant's interest in any problem has two aspects, the substantive and
the critical. The sort of claim we are making can be analyzed in a way
that is intelligible to a wide audience. But the status of that claim
remains problematic until we have investigated our competence to
make it. To justify the principle implicit in our moral judgments, we
shall have to undertake a Critique of Practical Reason,' to justify the
principle implicit in our judgments about beauty, we must resort to a
Critique of Judgment. And our investigation inevitably leads back to
the Critique of Pure Reason.
To the extent that Kant keeps his substantive and his critical
interests more or less separate, some of his writings, or parts of them,
will be widely read. What Kant has to say on substantive issues has
proved to be of perennial interest. But the student who becomes

xv

XVI

FOREWORD

interested in Kant's analysis will be aware that he cannot stop short
with the analytic phase: Kant will have warned him repeatedly that
the validity of these claims is still very much in question. Two courses
are open to the serious student. He can plunge into the Critique of
Pure Reason and work his way forward. In the process he will
probably become a Kant scholar, an affliction that generally proves
incurable. Or he can be content with a more general understanding of
Kant's solution to the critical phase of the problem. which will leave
him free to pursue his broader interests. One of the merits of Professor Pluhar's work is that his translator's introduction provides the sort
of background for the Critique of Judgment that will guide the
student interested in aesthetics and philosophy of science through the
critical phases in Kant's discussion of aesthetic and teleological
judgments.
The combination of Kant's critical and substantive concerns, in
this highly complex work. may well account for the long-standing
neglect of the Critique of Judgment as a whole and the interest
recently shown in some of its parts. In his Introduction to the third
Critique, Kant's interest is primarily critical. On the basis of the first
two Critiques he acknowledges a "chasm" between nature and freedom that is not tu be bridged by way of theoretical cognition. For a
post-Kantian philosopher bent on doing speculative metaphysics, this
acknowledgment indicates the failure of the Critical Philosophy. Not
until nineteenth century idealism had run its course would it seem
worthwhile to consider the more modest task Kant had set himself:
that of making the transition, by way of reflective judgment and its
principle of teleology, from our way of thinking about nature to our
way of thinking about freedom. But even then. the connection between
the Introduction to the Critique and its two parts seemed so tenuous
as to raise doubts about the unity and coherence of the work.
In the meantime, developments in art criticism and aesthetic theory focused attention on Kant's accessible and tightly structured
analysis of our judgments of beauty, the "Analytic of the Beautiful,"
into which we are plunged after the Introduction's prologue in heaven.
The emergence of formalism in art, the collapse of "expressionism"
as an aesthetic theory into a branch of psychology, and the perennial
difficulties of assigning "objective" status to beauty suggest that Kant's
analysis of taste is relevant to contemporary problems. But, after the
analytic, Kant's critical concerns come to the foreground and the

FOREWORD

XVll

course of the argument becomes puzzling. Kant is somehow, here as
in the subsequent treatment of teleological judgments, carrying out
the project outlined in the Introduction. But how? The second merit
of Pluhar's introduction is that it attempts to explain how Kant is
dealing with the problem posed in the Introduction to the Critique.
None of the periodic revivals of interest in Kant has, it seems to
me, approached the magnitude of the present one. This is the appropriate time for an accurate translation into modern English of the
work that has been called "the crowning phase of the critical
philosophy." By including in his translation the original Introduction
to the Critique of Judgment (which Kant replaced by a shorter one),
and by adding his own helpful analysis of Kant's argument. Pluhar has
taken an important step toward securing for the third Critique its
righLful place in the Kantian corpus.
MARY 1. GREGOR
San Diego State University

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

Because there seems to be general agreement that an accurate and
readable translation of the Critique of Judgment, including the First
Introduction, is needed, I shall not argue that point.
The translator's introduction which follows (and, to some extent,
the bracketed footnotes accompanying the text of the translation
itself) serves two main purposes. One of these is to supply important
background materials to readers with only limited prior exposure to
Kant's "critical philosophy": above all, summaries of the Critique of
Pure Reason and the Critique of Practical Reason, including not only
the views but also the terminology from these works which Kant
presupposes in the Critique of Judgment; and summaries of other
philosophers' views to which each of the three Critiques, but especially the Critique of Judgment, responds.' The other main purpose
is to explain the many difficult passages in the work. In particular, the
translator's introduction offers a new interpretation of key elements
in the foundation of both Kant's teleology and his aesthetics and uses
that same interpretation to make new and better sense not only of the
link between these two parts of the work, but especially of Kant's
claims as to how the Critique of Judgment unites the three Critiques
in a system. The translator's introduction makes no attempt, apart
from an occasional remark, to trace the development of Kant's thought.
lOne excellent source of information on these views is Lewis White Beck's Early
German Philosophy: Kant and His Predecessors (Cambridge: Belknap Press, Harvard
University Press, 1969).

XIX

XX

TRANSLATOR' S PREFACE

Any reader should of course feel free to skip those sections in the
translator's introduction which contain material already familiar; and
anyone who finds certain sections too difficult at first try should similarly feel free to set them aside for a while and return to them as
needed to make sense of the Kantian passages they are intended to
explain.
The translation of both the Critique of Judgment and the First Introduction is based on the standard edition of Kant's works, commonly
referred to as the Akademie edition: Kants gesammelte Schriften (Berlin: Koniglich Preu6ische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1902-). The
text of the Akademie edition of the Critique of Judgment comes from
the work's second edition, which was published in 1793 (the first edition appeared in 1790); it was edited by Wilhelm Windelband and is
contained in volume 5 of the Akademie edition. The First Introduction appears in volume 20 (193-251) of the Akademie edition; it was
edited by Gerhard Lehmann. I have considered variant readings
throughout but have indicated them only where I either adopted
them or found them of special interest.
The translation generally follows the Akademie text in the use
of parentheses, quotation marks, typographical emphasis, and paragraphing; occasional changes, all but the most trivial of which have
been noted, were made in the interest of clarity. All material in
brackets, whether in the text or in footnotes, is my own. German
terms inserted in brackets are given in their modern spelling and
(usually) in their standard form (e.g., verbs are given in the infinitive), to facilitate finding them in a modern German dictionary. All
translations given in footnotes are my own, and this fact is not indicated in each such footnote individually.
The pagination along the margin of the text refers to the Akademie
edition; the unprimed numbers refer to volume 5, the primed numbers to volume 20. All references to the work itself and to the First
Introduction are to the Akademie edition; they are given as 'Ak.·
followed by the page number and, as applicable, by the number of
Kant's note ("n.") or of my bracketed note ("br. n."). (Because clarifying the text made it necessary to cut up Kant's inordinately long
sentences and to rearrange some of them, as well as some of the more
convoluted paragraphs, the correspondence between the numbers on
the margins and the pages in the original is only approximate.) References to the translator's introduction are given in roman numerals.

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

xxi

References to works of Kant other than the Critique of Judgment and
the Critique of Pure Reason are to the Akademie edition and are
given as 'Ak.' followed by the volume number and the page number.
References to the Critique of Pure Reason are to the first two editions
of the work and are given in standard form, as 'jI( and 'B' followed by
the page number.
At the end of this work will be found a selected bibliography, a
glossary of the most important German terms in the work along with
their English equivalents, and an index.
I have consulted Bernard's and Meredith's translations of the Critique
of Judgment, Cerf's translation of a portion of the first part of the
work, and Haden's translation of the First Introduction.2 Where my
renderings of key terms break with tradition, I have indicated this in
footnotes at the beginning of major portions of this translation,
explaining my reasons for the change.
I would like to express my appreciation to Professor Lewis White
Beck for having suggested initially that I undertake this massive
translation project and for having given me early guidance pertaining
to translation as well as publication. I am heavily indebted to Professors Mary J. Gregor and James W. Ellington for their careful reading
of drafts of the entire manuscript, for their detailed and highly valuable criticism, for information concerning both the Kantian and the
further background, and for their encouragement. I am grateful to
Hackett Publishing Company for their sophisticated and considerate
handling of the project. My warmest and deepest gratitude goes to my
wife and colleague, Professor Evelyn Begley Pluhar, who has done
vastly more to make this prc;>ject possible than I could hope to
express.
WERNER SCHRUTKA PwHAR

The Pennsylvania State University
Fayette Campus, Uniontown
2J. H. Bernard's translation (New York: Hafner Publishing, 1951) first appeared in 1892,
James Creed Meredith's in 1911 (first part of the Critique) and 1928 (second part)
(Oxford: Oxford University Press), Walter Cerfs in 1963 (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill),
and James Haden's in 1965 (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill). For an earlier translation of
tbe First Introduction, see Immanuel Kant, On Philosophy in General, trans" with four
introductory essays, by Humayun Kabir (Calcutta: The University Press, 1935).

TRANSLATOR'S
INTRODUCTION

o.
Preliminary Note: The Scope
of the Critique of Judgment
The Critique of Judgment contains Kant's mature views on aesthetics
and teleology, and on their relation to each other as well as to the two
earlier Critiques, the Critique of Pure Reason and the Critique of
Practical Reason. It has two parts, the Critique of Aesthetic Judgment and the Critique of Teleological Judgment. The term 'judgment,'
in these headings, means the same as 'power (or "faculty") of judgment'
(Urteilskraft), which is simply OUf ability to make (individual) judgments (Urteile },3
The Critique of Aesthetic Judgment deals mainly with two kinds of
aesthetic judgments: judgments of taste, i.e., judgments about the
beautiful in nature and in art, and judgments about the sublime.
Kant's main concern is with judgments of taste. The problem with
3For my use of 'power,' rather than 'faculty,' see below, Ak. 167 br. n. 3. On
Urteilskraft and Urteil, cf. below, Ak. 167 br. n. 4.

XXlll

XXIV

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

tbese judgments is, roughly, the following. When we call something
'beautiful' we seem to do so on the basis of a certain liking, a certain
feeling of pleasure; and pleasure is something very subjective. And
yet it seems that in such a judgment we say more than 'I like the
thing. • For in using the adjective 'beautiful' we talk as if beauty were
some sort of property of the thing, and hence we imply that other
people, too, should see that "property" and hence should agree with
~ur judgment; in other words, we imply that the judgment is valid not
merely for the judging subject but universally.
Kant's solution to this problem hinges on how he analyzes the
special kind of feeling involved in judgments of taste, Specifically, the
solution hinges on how Kant relates this feeling to, on the one hand,
theoretical knowledge (i.e., knowledge of what is the case, as distinguished from knowledge of what ought to be done), and, on the other
hand, to morality. The key concept (to be explained below: Ivi) in
Kant's analysis of judgments of taste is the concept of nature's subjective "purposiveness" (Z weckmiijJigkeit), as judged aesthetically.
Kant analyzes this concept of nature's subjective purposiveness by
reference to our mental powers, and much of Kant's theory of taste
can indeed be understood in terms of that analysis. Yet Kant's main
line of argument for the universal validity of judgments of taste brings
in not only the concept of nature's subjective purposiveness but also
the concept of something "supersensible" underlying that same
purposiveness. In fact, as my new interpretation of abundant textual
evidence will show, Kant equates (treats as equivalent) these two
concepts. Because this equation seems very perplexing indeed, Kant
should have made it thoroughly explicit and clear. Instead he just
switches mysteriously from the one concept to tbe other, without
informing the reader that the equivalence between them has been
established, even if still not nearly as explicitly and clearly as it should
have been, in the Critique of Teleological Judgment.
Kant goes on to apply his theory of taste to fine art. When we judge
fine art by taste, we judge it as we do nature, viz., in terms of its
beauty. But since, unlike nature, works of fine art are something
created by man, we can judge them also by how much genius they
manifest. Kant's main contribution to the theory of fine art is his
analysis of genius.
The Critique of Teleological Judgment deals with our judgments of
things in nature in terms of final causes, i.e., ends or purposes.

O.

PRELIMINARY NOTE

XXV

A purpose, for Kant, is an object or state of affairs insofar as it is,
or is regarded as, the effect brought about by some cause through a
concept that this cause has of it (cf. Ak. 180 and 408); thus a
nightingale is a purpose insofar as we at least regard it as having been
produced by some cause through the concept that this cause had of a
nightingale. If the object or state of affairs was in fact produced
through a concept that the cause had of it, then it is an intentional
purpose; if we merely regard it as having been produced in this way,
then it is an unintentional purpose. An intention (Absicht), it seems,
is simply the cause's concept of the purpose it pursues, i.e.. the
concept of the object or state of affairs it seeks to bring about.4
Sometimes Kant apparently forgets his definition of 'purpose' and
uses the term, as indeed we often do in English, as synonymous with
'intention.'5
The Critique of Teleological Judgment argues that, while natural
science cannot explain things without appealing to mechanism and
hence to efficient causes, some things in nature, viz., organisms, are
such that we cannot even adequately investigate them unless we
judge them not only in mechanical terms but also in terms of final
causes, i.e., unless we judge them at the same time as purposes.
However, judgments of natural products as purposes do not seem to
share the firm status and justification enjoyed by mechanistic explanations. Worst of all, such "teleological" judgments (from Greek Ti~o'i
[telosl, 'end,' 'purpose') seem to involve us in contradiction. For in
judging the object as a purpose we judge it as contingent, viz.,
contingent on ("conditioned by") the concept of a purpose; and yet,
insofar as we judge and try to explain the same object as an object of
nature, we judge that same object, even the same causal connections
in it, at the same time as necessary.
Kant's solution to this problem hinges again on his analysis of the
concept of nature's purposiveness (the "subjective" purposiveness
with an "objective" one based on it), this time as judged teleologically
rather than aesthetically. Here again Kant equates this concept with
4Although Kant does not define 'Absicht,' this is how he seems to use the term most
of the time. See, e.g., Ak. 383,398, and 400 (line 19).
5See, e.g., Ak. 391,393, and 397. Sometimes Kant seems to use 'Absicht' to mean an
intentional purpose, rather than the concept of such a purpose; in those cases I have
rendered the term by ·aim.' See, e.g., Ak. 484.

xxvi

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

the concept of the supersensible basis of that same purposiveness.
Even here Kant does not make this equation nearly explicit and clear
enough but leaves us to assemble laboriously the various things he
says in different places. But the textual evidence that he does in fact
make this equation is overwhelming. The argument from this interpre·
tation of mine will proceed by pointing to that evidence and tying the
pieces together gradually; it will not be complete until the end of this
introduction.
That argument will connect with a second one. This second argu·
ment has to do with the relation of the Critique of Aesthetic Judgment to the Critique of Teleological Judgment and, above all, the
relation of the entire work to Kant's critical philosophy as a systematic whole. Kant is greatly concerned to show that the Critique of
Judgment is needed to complete the "critical system." Although this
concern is not assigned a special part in the work, Kant brings it up
again and again, especially in his two introductions. I shall devote the
remainder of this preliminary note on the scope of the present (third)
Critique to a rough sketch of that second argument of mine, the
argument regarding the relation of the two parts of the Critique of
Judgment to each other and to the critical system. Anyone not
already familiar with the main views of the first two Critiques should,
for now, feel free to skip the remainder of this note and proceed to the
next section, with which this introduction actually begins.
The Critique of Pure Reason, as Section 2 of this introduction will
explain, had argued that we need the concept of something supersensible as substrate of nature (of nature as it appears to us) if we are to
solve four "antinomies" (seeming contradictions), into which our
reason falls inevitably when it tries to make sense of nature. But this
concept of the supersensible had to be left completely indeterminate,
as merely the concept of "things as they may be in themselves"
(rather than as they appear to us). In the Critique of Practical Reason,
as will be explained in Section 3, another antinomy had arisen. This
antinomy concerned the "final purpose" that the moral law of which
we are conscious enjoins us to pursue, a purpose we must there·
fore regard as achievable although obstacles insuperable for us
finite beings seem to stand in the way. Solving this antinomy required
the assumption that we are immortal souls and that there is a "moral"
God, a God the concept of whom (as, of course, something super-

o.

PRELIMINARY NOTE

XXVll

sensible) is made determinate through attributes derived from the
moral law (and from the final purpose that this law enjoins on us).
Now the Critique of Aesthetic Jodgment and the Critique of Teleological Judgment each gives rise to another antinomy and, as I shan
interpret these antinomies and Kant's solution to them, resolving
these antinomies requires that we equate the concept of nature's
(subjective and objective) purposiveness with the (indeterminate)
concept of some supersensible basis of that purposiveness. Kant
holds that this last concept of the supersensible, i.e., as the basis of
nature's purposiveness, "mediates" between the other two concepts of
the supersensible (respectively, as nature in itself, and as required by
the moral law) so that the three concepts of the supersensible can for
the first time be thought of as applying to the same (i.e., a united)
supersensible. It is through this unification of the supersensible that
the three Critiques, which give rise to the three concepts of the
supersensible, are themselves united to form a whole having the
coherence of a system. What allows the concept of nature's purposiveness to play this mediating role is, as I shall show, precisely
Kant's equation of that concept with the concept of the supersensible
basis of that same purposiveness, combined with the analysis he gives
of the concept of that basis.

1.

Kant's Life and Works
Immanuel Kant was born at Konigsberg. East Prussia, on April 22,
1724. His father was a master saddler of very modest means, his
mother a woman without education but with considerable native
intelligence. According to Kant's own account, his grandfather was
an immigrant from Scotland. Kant was raised, both at home and at
school (at the Collegium Fridericianum at Konigsberg). in the tradition of Pietism. a Protestant movement with a strong ethical orientation and a de-emphasis of theological dogma.
Kant attended the University of Konigsberg from 1740 to about

xxviii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

1746. After that he served as a tutor in several aristocratic families in
different parts of East Prussia, earning a very modest income. Having
kept up his studies in the meantime, he returned, in 1755, to the
University of Konigsberg, employed as an instructor. He continued in
this position for fifteen years, lecturing in several natural sciences, in
mathematics, and in philosophy. In 1770 he was appointed professor
of logic and metaphysics at the University of Konigsberg. He remained
active in this position until a few years before his death, at Konigsberg,
on February 12, 1804.
Kant's first publication (on a topic in Leibnizian physics) appeared
in 1747, when he was still a student. For the next fifteen years, most of
his writings were in the natural sciences, but some were in philosophy.
Two of these philosophical works were (roughly) in the philosophy of
religion (the more important of these is The Only Possible Basis of
Proof for Demonstrating the Existence of God. 1763); another was
the Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime, 1764,
Kant's only publication, apart from the Critique of Judgment. that
touches on aesthetics. (It discusses the subject from the point of view
of social psychology; not untit a few years before publication of the
third Critique did Kant believe that an aesthetic judgment about the
beautiful or sublime had validity for persons other than the subject
making it.) The Inaugural Dissertation of 1770 (which was written in
Latin), On the Form and Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible
World. marks the beginning of Kant's so-called "critical period" (as
distinguished from the "precritical period"), because here for the first
time Kant treats space and time as he does in the first Critique: as
forms of sensibility (forms of "intuition"), i.e., as something that the
subject contributes to the world of experience, which is therefore
only a phenomenal world. (Kant does not yet assign such a contributory role to any concepts.)
By then Kant's publications had already won him a considerable
reputation in learned circles in Germany; and the publication of
Kant's most important work, the Critique of Pure Reason. was eagerly
anticipated. It took Kant about a decade to complete the work. When
it finally appeared, in 1781, it was met with enthusiasm by some, by
others with consternation. Kant rewrote portions of the work for the
second edition, of 1787; but first he published, in 1783, the Prolegomena
to Any Future Metaphysics. a greatly simplified and shortened
restatement of the main positions and arguments of the first Critique.

1. KANT'S LIFE AND WORKS

xxix

Kant reversed this procedure in publishing his practical philosophy:
the Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, a simplified introduction to the subject. appeared in 1785, the Critique of Practical Reason
in 1788. Between the two, in 1786, appeared the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science.
The third Critique, the Critique of Judgment, was published in
1790. An essay pertaining to teleology. On Using Teleological Principles in Philosophy, had appeared in 1788, but teleology as well as
theology were of great concern to Kant throughout his life and are
discussed in many of his works, in some extensively (see the bracketed
footnotes in the text). While Kant was preparing the third Critique
for publication, he wrote (late in 1789 or early in 1790) an introduction,
which later he decided was too long. He replaced it with a shorter
introduction, and this was published with the first edition, with the
second edition of 1793, and with later editions as well as translations ever
since. The First Introduction was not published in its entirety until
1914, when it appeared in the Cassirer edition (vol. 5) of Kant's
works.
In 1793 Kant published Religion Within the Bounds of Reason
Alone. In the following year, the Prussian authorities informed Kant
that the king, Frederick William II, had been displeased for some
time with Kant's teachings and writings on religion, which the authorities found too rationalistic and unorthodox. Kant was ordered to
desist from disseminating his views on the subject, and he did not
return to it until the king died in 1797. In 1795 appeared Perpetual
Peace, in 1797 the Metaphysics of Morals, and in 1798 Kant's last
major work, the Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View.
Kant's style in these many works varies greatly. from the easy flow
and almost conversational tone in some of his early works to the
ponderous and scholastic presentation, with its often artificial structure,
in the works he saw as most scientific. But the breadth of Kant's
interests and learning, intellectual and cultural generally, is evident
throughout his works.
As regards Kant's personality, what is most familiar to the general
public is the caricature of Kant as a pedantic and puritanical Prussian,
by whose regular afternoon walks the housewives of Konigsberg
would set their clocks, and so on. But some persons, persons who
knew him, described him as sprightly (even as an old man), as witty,
cheerful, and entertaining, even in his lectures. He had a circle of

xxx

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

friends, with whom he dined regularly. Kant never married. Physically,
he was never robust. Just over five feet tall and hollow-chested, he
was able to avoid major illnesses until his final years. Although Kant
was greatly interested in the rest of the world (he greeted the French
Revolution with enthusiasm and listened to and read with eagerness
the accounts of other people's journeys), he himself never traveled
outside East Prussia.

2.
The Critique of Pure Reason
'Critique,' in Kant's sense of the term, consists in examining the scope
and limits of our cognitive powers ('reason,' in the broadest sense in
which Kant uses this term) in order to decide to what extent, if any,
metaphysics is possible for us human beings. Metaphysics consists in
the discovery of truths (true propositions) about the world that are
not empirical (dependent on experience), in which case they would
be contingent, but are necessary and hence a priori (knowable
independently of experience). If such propositions not only are a
priori but do not involve even an empirical concept (e.g., the concept
of change, or of matter), then Kant calls them "pure."6 Hence the
Critique of Pure Reason tries to decide to what extent, if any, our
cognitive powers permit us to discover a priori (and especially pure)
truths about the world: about objects, space and time, the order in
nature, ourselves, freedom of the will and the possibility of morality,
and perhaps a God. (The first Critique discusses all of these to some
extent.) Without such prior critique of our cognitive powers, Kant
maintains, either affirming or denying the possibility of metaphysics is
sheer dogmatism: dogmatic rationalism assumes that our reason is
capable of metaphysics, and dogmatic empiricism assumes the opposite.
Kant himself had been trained in the rationalistic metaphysical
6See the Critique of Pure Reason. B 3, and cf. Konrad Cramer, "Non·Pure Synthetic
A Priori Judgments in the 'Critique of Pure Reason,''' Proceedings of the Third
International Kant Congress (Dordrecht: D. Reidel. 1972).246-54.

2.

THE CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON

xxxi

tradition of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716) and his disciple,
Christian Wolff (1679-1754). Leibniz (especially in his earlier years)
and Wolff regarded the world as, in principle, knowable a priori. They
held, moreover, that aU a priori truths must, at least in principle, be
"truths of reason;' i.e., derivable from logic.
But Kant came to doubt that the assertions made a priori by these
philosophers about the world could be justified. Worst of all, it
seemed that the rationalistic principles of Leibniz and Wolff inevitably led reason into antinomies, i.e., pairs of propositions that seemed
to contradict each other and yet were "provable": on these principles,
Kant argues in the Critique of Pure Reason, one can "prove" that the
world is limited in space and time and that it is not; that composites
consist of simple (irreducible) parts and that they do not; that there
are first causes (causes that initiate a causal series) and that there are
not; that there is a necessary being and that there is not. Clearly, then,
dogmatic rationalism had failed to secure metaphysics, and along
with it whatever presupposes it: natural science, morality, and religion.
Kant's doubts about dogmatic rationalism arose in good part through
his exposure to (German translations of) some of the works of the
empiricist David Hume (1711-76), whom he credits with having
awakened him from his "dogmatic slumber."? Hume (in the Enquiry
Concerning Human Understanding, which Kant readS) agreed with
the rationalists that a priori truths must be derivable from logic; they
must be "analytic" truths, to use Kant's term. But logic, Hume went
on, has to do only with the relations among our ideas (i.e., with
analysis of our concepts) and can tell us nothing about the world. Our
only access to the world is not a priori but a posteriori (empirical),
i.e., through experience. It follows that whatever we discover about
the world is contingent rather than necessary, and that even such
modest metaphysical propositions about the world as 'Every event
must have a cause,' or 'All properties must inhere in some substance,'
cannot be justified in any way at all. Because in the strict sense of the
term 'know' we can know only whatever is necessary. we do not (in
this sense) know nature at all, let alone anything beyond nature.
(Indeed, in view of the problem of induction, we do not even know it
7Proiegomena, Ak. IV, 260.
8Kant did not know Hume's Treatise of Human Nature.

XXXll

o

a

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

in the weaker sense of the term, which implies mere probability
rather than necessity.)
Although Kant agreed with Hume that dogmatic rationalism
had failed to establish a metaphysics, Hume's skepticism (denial of
knowledge) seemed to him equally dogmatic, and utterly implausible
as well. Newton undeniably had discovered some basic laws of nature.
These laws were clearly not analytic, not derived from reason alone,
but were discovered through experience. On the other hand, if they
were laws then they could not be wholly contingent but must imply
something with necessity. But how, Kant asked, can there be propositions that are not analytic- Kant called such propositions "synthetic"but that nevertheless imply something with necessity, and hence a
priori? As Kant puts it: How are synthetic judgments possible a
priori?9 That they were possible a priori was suggested strongly by
Newton's success in natural science. But the decisive evidence seemed
to lie in mathematics, above all in geometry. Geometry, Kant argued,
describes the space of nature and does not just spell out "relations of
ideas," as Hume assumed. For example, Kant argued that no analysis
of the mere concept of a triangle can teach us that the angles of every
triangle must add up to two right angles; hence this proposition must
be synthetic. Yet no experience could possibly falsify this proposition;
it is not contingent but necessary. and therefore a priori. Hence at
least in geometry we have judgments that describe the world we
experience but that are nevertheless a priori. How is that possible?
Kant's answer is that there is only one way in which we can have a
priori knowledge of spatial relations that is nevertheless not knowledge of the relations of our mere concepts: it must be knowledge of
relations involving something else that we have in the mind and that
we use in experiencing the world: intuition (Le., roughly, visualization),
sensibility. In other words, s{)ace must be a/orm of our intuition: we
experience the world in terms 01 space, we structure it in terms of
space, by contributing space to experience. That is why the spatial
relations asserted by the principles of geometry apply a priori and
necessarily to whatever experience we can have of the world, and
why we can intuit and know these relations a priori. On the other
hand, by the same token, that spatial world is only phenomenal. is
only appearance: the world as we experience it. Hence, in order to
~

9Critique of Pure Reason. B 19.

2. THE CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON

xxxiii

account for the possibility of synthetic a priori propositions we must
deny that they tell us anything about the world as it is in itself. 10
Kant's treatment of time is roughly similar: time is also a form of
intuition, and hence is present in any experience. Hence, like space,
time can also be intuited and known a priori as a necessary feature of
the world as appearance.
Kant goes on to offer comparable arguments that there are, similarly,
a priori concepts (categories), forms of thought that we have in our
understanding and that we "build," as it were, into the world. They
are twelve in number and make up four groups (of three categories
each) under the headings of quantity, quality, relation, and modality.
For example, two of the three categories under the heading of "relation"
are substance (and accident, i.e .• roughly, property inhering in a
substance) and causality, i.e., (efficient) cause and effect. These two
categories, just like our forms of intuition, also allow us to make
synthetic a priori judgments. They allow us to judge and know a
priori, and hence with necessity, such universal principles as that all
properties in nature (i.e., in the world as it appears to us) must inhere
in substances, and that every event in nature must have its cause.
These principles are "universally valid" (hold for everything) in the
phenomenal world (the world as it appears), i.e., in nature, simply
because our understanding makes it so. The remaining categories
give rise to more such a priori principles of nature. Hence we can
have a "metaphysics" in the sense of a science of the a priori principles of all possible objects of experience. On the other hand, as with
space and time, no such synthetic a priori judgments are possible
(Le., justifiable) as regards the world as it may be in itself, i.e., the
world considered as supersensible (or "intelligible" or "noumenal,"
Le., merely thinkable).
However, only some of our synthetic judgments about nature are a
priori; the rest are empirical. In order to make an empirical judgment
we must have an empirical intuition. Whereas a priori intuition involves
no sensation but consists in visualizing purely in terms of space and
llYfhe distinction between a phenomenal world and a world in itself was already used
by Leibniz and Wolff. But for them the phenomenal world was simply the world in itself
as perceived through sensation, which they construed as being merely a confused,
rather than distinct. kind of thought. Kant insists that sensibility is not reducible to
thought at all but is different in kind. but this view does have the consequence that we
have not even a confused perception of the world in itself.

XXXIV TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

time, empirical intuition does involve sensation. Through sensation
we discover in an object what further features it may have beyond
those imposed on it by our forms of intuition and our categories.
Those features of an object of our intuition which are "given" to us
(i.e., are "data") in sensation are what Kant calls the 'matter' of
intuition. As these data are received, they are structured-automatically,
as it were-in terms of space and time by the forms of intuition. The
result is an empirical intuition, or "perception."
But making an empirical judgment about the world as we experience it involves more than merely an empirical intuition with its
structure in terms of space and time: in making such a judgment we
also connect that empirical intuition with the thought of a certain
object. An empirical judgment consists in our awareness that an
empirical intuition we are having matches a certain concept. (Kant
uses the generic term 'presentation' !Vorstellung, traditionally rendered
as 'representation': see below, Ak. 175 br. n. 17] to stand for both
intuitions and concepts, as well as for still further objects of our direct
awareness: see below, Ak. 203 br. n. 4.) For example, when we make
the judgment, 'This is a dog; this judgment consists in our being
conscious that our empirical intuition matches a concept we already
have in our understanding, viz., the concept of "dog." Our judgment
thus makes our empirical intuition determinate, by turning it into the
experience of a dog, or, which comes to the same, a dog as experienced (a dog as "appearance"). The judgment is therefore called
'determinative' (or 'constitutive'); for it determines (or "constitutes")
the dog.
Now suppose that we are intuiting a dog but that we do not already
have the concept of "dog" but have only the concept of "animal." In
that case we can acquire the concept of "dog" by expanding the
concept of "animal": we do this by matching the empirical intuition
with the concept of "animal," so that we are experiencing an animal.
while also taking note of whatever further particular features in this
experienced animal distinguish it from other animals. (We can take
note of such further features even if we do not already know the word
'dog.') Such a judgment will determine not only an animal, but, more
specifically, a dog. because in taking note of those distinguishing
features we abstract them from our experience of the animal and add
them to the concept of "animal," thus expanding that concept. This
newly acquired empirical concept ("dog") is more determinate, has

2. THE CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON

xxxv

more "determinations" (predicates describing attributes). Similarly,
we acquired the (empirical) concept of "animal" by expanding some
other concept we already had in our understanding; and so on. In this
way all empirical concepts are the result of our expanding concepts
already present in our understanding.
Now the only concepts present in our understanding before all
experience (from which new empirical concepts are acquired by
abstraction) are the categories. Hence the categories form part of
(enter into) all empirical concepts. This holds not only for the concepts of individual objects but also for the concepts of causal relations.
For example, in judging the swelling of some brook as caused by a
heavy rain that preceded it, we may be matching the empirical
intuition of this sequence of events with a concept we already have of
a causal relation between events of this kind; but we may, alternatively,
be expanding a more general concept which will in tum have resulted
from our expanding a still earlier one, and so on, until we get to the
category of causality, i.e., cause and effect.
If an empirical judgment consists in the awareness that an empirical intuition matches some concept, how did that match come about?
The data we receive passively through sensation are structured in
terms of space and time and thus become an empirical intuition. If
this intuition is to match a concept, we must have an active power or
ability to structure the particular features of that intuition in accordance with the structure of the concept; this power is what Kant calls
our 'imagination.' The imagination "apprehends" (takes up) what is
given in intuition and then puts together or "combines" this diversity
(or "manifold") so that it matches the concept. In this way the
imagination "exhibits" (darstellen, traditionally rendered as "to
present"U) the concept, i.e., provides it with a matching or "corresponding" intuition.
Some concepts, e.g., those of geometry, can be exhibited in a priori
intuition, i.e., in intuition that includes no sensation. A priori exhibition of a concept is called the concept's 'construction.'12 A priori
exhibition, like exhibition in empirical intuition, can result in the
expansion of the concept exhibited, viz., if we abstract from that
liMy reasons for abandoning 'to present' as translating 'darstellen' and for reusing it to
render 'vorstellen' are given at Ak. 175 br. n. 17.
12ef. below, Ak. 232 hr. n. 51.

XXXVI

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

exhibition. and add to the concept, whatever further features we
discover in intuiting the object (e.g., a triangle) a priori. When we are
aware that our imagination is exhibiting a concept by means of a
matching a priori intuition, this awareness is what constitutes a
(theoretical and synthetic) a priori judgment. (A theoretical judgment
is a judgment about what is the case, as distinguished from a judgment about what ought to be done. This distinction will be discussed
more fully in the next section.)
However, something further is still needed to make it possible for
any intuition to match a concept. A concept groups together many
instances (of things or events) in terms of the attributes they share as
instances of the same kind. It does not include all the attributes of the
instances that fall (i.e., can be "sllbsumed") under it, but omits the
particular attributes with reference to which the instances may still
differ from one another. In other words, all concepts abstract from
some of the particular; the categories are the most abstract concepts
of all: they are universal and they abstract from everything particular.
An intuition, by contrast, is concrete in the sense that it contains the
particular omitted in the concept. How, then, can an intuition possibly
be turned into an image that will match a concept, let alone our a
priori concepts, the categories? Something is needed to mediat£
between intuition in general and the categories, viz., a rule or "schema"
that stipulates what conditions the intuition must meet so that it can
match a category. In the case of causal relation, the schema is the rule
that the effect must follow the cau.se in time. Indeed, all schemata
connect the categories with time; the reason for this is that time is the
only form of intuition that applies to any intuition whatsoever, even to
the inner intuition we have of ourselves, whereas space applies merely
to all outer intuitions. Strictly speaking, the category of causality is
already a temporalized, "schematized," category; for if the time condition is removed, the relation of cause and effect is nothing but the
logical relation of ground and consequent. The same holds for the
category of substance, which is not merely the thought of a thing, but
the schematized thought of a thing that endures in time.
It is in fact these schematized categories which give rise to such
principles as 'Every event must have its cause' and 'All substances
have permanence.' Now since these principles, like the categories on
which they are based, apply to any experience we can have of the
world, they are universal laws of nature (of nature as appearance). As

2. THE CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON

xxxvii

such they form part of the mechanism studied by natural science,
insofar as that mechanism (which deals with efficient causes) is a
priori and hence necessary. Since these laws are based on the catego-ries which our understanding contributes to nature, they are laws that
are "given" to nature, i.e., prescribed or legislated to nature, by our
understanding. These universal laws in tum have certain applications,
viz., the (also mechanistic) laws ()f motion discovered by Newton.
These laws are only "applications" of the former laws because, unlike
them, they are not pure: they involve some empirical concepts (e.g.,
the concept of matter); yet they too hold - to the extent to which they
are mathematical-for all possible experience and hence are themselves still a priori and universal. 13
Any regularity or "lawfulness" in nature that is not based on the
categories or their universal applications must, consequently, pertain
to what is particular (rather than universal) in nature. Since such
lawfulness is not the result of our understanding's legislation to nature,
it can become known to us only empirically. Hence such lawfulness
must always be contingent, i.e., lacking the strict necessity ("apodeictic"
necessity, as found in a demonstration) that characterizes both the
categorial principles (the principles based on the categories themselves)
and the universal applications of these principles.
Kant calls the universal applications of the categorial principles
metaphysical principles. The categorial (and pure) principles themselves, which involve no empirical concept and hence are presupposed
by any experience whatsoever, he calls transcendental. On the other
hand, if we use these transcendental principles to make judgments
about something supersensible, something beyond all possible experience, then our use of them is transcendent; as so used, they cannot
give rise to knowledge, but remain nothing more than mere thought.
The distinction between the transcendental and the transcendent
marks the boundary between theoretical knowledge (i.e., knowledge
of what is the case) and mere thought, as the Critique of Pure Reason
IlThe distinction between these two kinds of universal laws is not drawn explicitly in
the Critique of Pure Reason (see. e.g .• A 691 = B 719, A 273 = B 329); but we do find it
so drawn in the Critique of Judgment (AI<. 181). as well as in the Metaphysical
Foundations of Natural Sciellce (Ak. IV, 469-70). See also James W. Ellington's transla·
tion of the latter work, in conjunction v.ith the Prolegomena, as Immanuel Kant,
Philosophy of Material Nature (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 1985). Translator's
Introduction to the Prolegomena, xi-xvi.

XXXVlll

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

draws it by deciding what our mental powers can and cannot do: our
understanding is able to know a priori in nature whatever laws it
prescribes to nature. Beyond all possible experience, we cannot have
theoretical knowledge but can only think.
The concepts we use in thinking about what may lie beyond
nature, beyond our understanding, are called by Kant 'rational ideas'
or 'ideas of reason' (or simply 'ideas'). 'Reason' here no longer means
our cognitive power as a whole, as it does in the title of the first
Critique, but is used in a narrower sense. In this sense of the term,
reason is the power that tries, using its ideas, to do more such
structuring as understanding does by supplying the concepts that turn
mere intuitions into experiences. Reason tries to combine these experiences themselves and the laws they contain into larger unified
wholes, ultimately into a unity that includes everything, a totality.
For example, reason seeks to unify various dog experiences by regarding them as appearances of some one thing underlying all these
appearances, some (supersensible) thing in itself, whatever it may be,
a thing that we cannot know because we cannot get beyond the
appearance. In the same way, the general idea of a world in itself is
the idea of something supersensible that unites all our experiences of
nature. But since the structure that reason seeks to introduce by
means of these ideas is a supersensible structure, a structure beyond
all possible experience, reason can do no more than try: it can use
these ideas only to regulate our experience of objects; it cannot use
these ideas to constitute objects and so give rise to what would be a
theoretical knowledge by reason. The world considered (theoretically)
as it may be in itself, i.e .• as supersensible rather than phenomenal, is
for us a world of mere noumena, things we can only think. Our
rational desire to unify our diverse experiences is so great that reason
easily strays beyond the bounds ~ithin which theoretical knowledge
is possible for us and consequently involves itself in seeming contradictions (the "antinomies" mentioned above). If we are to avoid such
straying by reason, we must let our own critique remind us of lhe
limits of our cognitive powers. We must let it remind us that the
transcendent metaphysics of dogmatic rationalism is impossible, and
hence we must restrict ourselves to immanent metaphysics; in other
words, we must settle for a metaphysics that confines itself to the
synthetic a priori principles (along with their universal applications)

2. THE CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON XXXIX

that are presupposed by, and hence stay within the range of, what
experience is possible for us.
Hence immanent metaphysics, which the Critique of Pure Reason
shows us to be capable of, will be a metaphysics of nature. Such a
metaphysics cannot tell us anything about the supersensible: about
objects in themselves, about a God, or even about ourselves as
subjects in themselves (souls), as distinguished from how we appear
to ourselves through our "inner sense"; in particular, it cannot tell us
whether, despite the necessity inherent in nature's universal laws (the
mechanistic laws regarding efficient causes), our will has the kind of
freedom that is needed for morality. All we can do, as far as the
Critique of Pure Reason goes, is think a "nature in itself," a God, and
such freedom. For by regarding all of these as supersensible, we
eliminate not only the need to provide theoretical justification (e.g.,
in the case of God, by means of the alleged theoretical "proofs" for
God's existence), but we eliminate the antinomy between freedom
and the necessity in nature by attributing the necessity to nature as
appearance while thinking of freedom as pertaining to a supersensible (noumenal) self, a self of which we can know only the appearance.
Thus the Critique of Pure Reason pays the price of renouncing
claims to theoretical knowledge where it was sought most eagerly, but
it does at least rescue immanent metaphysics, and with it natural
science, from dogmatic rationalism with its unjustifiable and contradictory claims, and from the skepticism of dogmatic empiricism.

3.
The Critique of

Practical Reason
The second Critique examines again what reason can do, this time
not in relation to theoretical knowledge, but in relation to action, i.e.,
as practical reason. It argues that reason not only enables us to
achieve some particular purpose we happen to be pursuing, or satisfy
some natural inclination; rather, the Critique argues, reason can be

xl

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

practical on its own, as completely independent from nature, i.e., as
pure. In this role, reason is able to impose obligations (a moral law)
on us, and to carry them out in freedom from natural necessity. Kant
argues that we can "cognize" as well as "know" both this moral law
and that freedom, although only "from a practical point of view." Let
us pause here for an explanation of this terminology. 14
Knowledge (Wissen), for Kant. is assent (Furwahrhalten 15 ) that is
adequate not just subjectively but objectively, i.e., adequate to convince not just oneself but everyone. 16 Theoretical knowledge, discussed in the preceding section, is knowledge of what is the case
(rather than knowledge of what ought to be done). Such knowledge
arises from "theoretical cognition."
Theoretical cognition consists in determining (making determinate)
an object17 in the sense of establishing what the object's attributes
are. If we take these attributes merely from the analysis of some
concept, such cognition is conceptual,18 or analytic; otherwise it is
synthetic.1 9 In synthetic cognition, the attributes determining the
object are taken not from a concept but from intuition. If that
intuition is a priori, then the cognition is a priori as well; if the
intuition is empirical (i.e., if it is perception, which includes sensation),
then the cognition too is empirical.20 Empirical cognition is the same
thing as experience. 21 As we saw in the preceding section, experience consists in turning empirical intuitions into determinate objects
(as appearances) by means of concepts; if such experience results in
our acquiring a new empirical concept by "expanding" some concept
(or concepts) we already had, then our cognition provides us with
new knowledge.
Just as theoretical knowledge is knowledge of what is the case, the
14For further details and references, see below, Ak. 467 incl. hr. n. 75. and 475 inel. hr.
n. 96; and d. Ak. 174-76.
15Literally, 'considering true:

16S ee the Critique of Pure Reason. A 822 = B 850.
17Cf. ibid.• B 166.
18Cf. ibid.. A 320 = B 377-78.
19Ibid.• A 151-52
2o/bid., A 176

=

=

B 191.

B 218.

21/bid.• B 147, 165-66,234,277.

3. THE CRITIQUE OF PRACTICAL REASON

xli

theoretical cognition yielding this knowledge is cognition of what is
the case, as distinguished from cognition of what ought to be done,
which is called 'practical cognition.'22 Only theoretical cognition is
"insight."23 (Cf. the etymology of 'theoretical.') Kant also uses the
term 'cognition' in a second sense, according to which theoretical
cognition is knowledge, rather than the process that yields it.
Let us turn now to practical cognition, i.e., cognition of what ought
to be done. In practical cognition, or "cognition from a practical
point of view," we again determine an "object," but here we do so by
means of practical determinations taken from our moral consciousness.
That is why practical cognition, like morality itself, involves "oughts,"
i.e., commands or "imperatives."24 As we shall see in a moment, one
such "object" of our practical cognition is the moral law itself; another
is the freedom of the will that this law presupposes. As we shall also
see, our cognition of these "objects" holds for everyone; as such, it
yields (or, in the second sense of 'cognition,' is) objectively adequate
assent, i.e., (practical) knowledge. But, because this cognition or
knowledge is practical, it is not insight.
Our practical cognition is not limited to the moral law itself and
what this law presupposes, viz., our freedom; we also cognize practically what this moral law commanth. As I shall spell out more fully in
a moment, the moral law commands that we try to achieve the "final
purpose," and achieving the final purpose presupposes two things
that we must, therefore, assume as "postulates": that there is a God
and that we are immortal souls. According to Kant, we have practical
cognition of the final purpose, of God, and of the immortality of the
soul inasmuch as these three "objects" of our thought are made
(practically) determinate by what the moral law commands. On the
22/bid., A 633

=

B 661.

23See the Critique of Practical Reason, Ak. V, 4. When Kant speaks simply of
"cognition," he ordinarily means theoretical cognition, rather than both it and practi·
cal cognition (which I am about to discuss). Sometimes the omission of 'theoretical'
gives rise to seeming contradictions. See, e.g., the Critique of Practical Reason, Ak. V,
4, where 'theoretisch' appears in line 19 but is omitted in line 15, so that line 15 seems
to contradict what Kant says at Ak. V, 137 concerning our cognition of God. Correcting
for the omission removes the seeming contradiction, provided we use different terms to
render 'erkennen' (cognize) and 'wissen' (know); rendering them by the same term
results in another seeming contradiction between Ak. V,4 and 137.
24See the Logic, Ak. IX, 86.

xlii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

other hand, as these (supersensible) objects, unlike our freedom, are
presupposed not by the moral law itself but only by what it commands,
our practical cognition of them is not knowledge (as our practical
cognition of the moral law itself and of freedom is). Rather, it is a
rational faith, which is assent that is adequate not objectively but only
subjectively, i.e., adequate only to convince oneself.2S
With these distinctions in mind, we can now return to the task of
the second Critique. The Critique of Pure Reason had indeed established that we can think the previously mentioned supersensible
things, i.e., it had established that they are logically possible; but the
Critique of Practical Reason argues that we can cognize them, even if
only practically. Thus the second Critique rescues morality and religion,
not only from the restrictive conclusions drawn by the first Critique,
but above all-once again-from the much more damaging views that
made the Critique necessary: dogmatic rationalism and dogmatic
empiricism.
The dogmatic rationalism of Leibniz and Wolff had tried to derive
moral obligation from our alleged knowledge of the supersensible:
from God's will as manifested in the perfection of the world, a
perfection that we can know through reason although not through the
senses. Moral obligation lies in working toward this perfection by
striving away from the confusion (indistinctness) inherent in our
senses and toward the distinct intellectual "knowledge" of the supersensible world as it not only ought to be but in fact is. To have the will
to act in this way is, for Wolff, nothing more than a somewhat more
distinct awareness of this perfection that our senses present to us only
indistinctly_ We already know Kant's objection to these rationalistic
claims to knowledge of the supersensible. But Kant, following (the
Pietist) Christian August Crusius, also disagreed with the view that to
know the good is the same as to will it. Above all, however, neither
Leibniz nor Wolff could adequately explain how the world could
already be perfect, through God's choice, and yet have room for
human freedom.
Dogmatic empiricism restricted itself to the observations of empirical psychology about human motivation. Accordingly, Hume construed ethical judgments as seeking merely to influence people's
motivation. One of Kant's objections to this approach was that these
2SCritique of Pure Reason. A 822 = B 850.

3. THE CRITIQUE OF PRACTICAL REASON

xliii

empirical observations couLd yield only contingent judgments, whereas
genuine moral obligation must be absolute, not conditioned by this or
that particular purpose we happen to be pursuing. But his main
objection was that empirical observations can tell us only what is the
case, never (as Hume in fact acknowledged) what ought to be done,
as a moral judgment must.
The key premise for Kant's own position is that we do, as a fact of
reason revealed to us a priori, have a moral consciousness. 26 We are
conscious of ourselves as obligated by an a priori moral law. That law
commands us to fulfill our duty even where doing so requires that we
struggle against circumstances in nature or against our natural
inclinations. Hence the law commands absolutely or "categorically,"
rather than hypothetically, i.e., rather than with an if-clause specifying the condition ("hypothesis"), such as this or that natural circumstance or inclination, under which we ought to act in a certain way.
This moral law is thus a "categorical imperative." The categorical
imperative puts a restriction on the kind of "maxim," i.e., subjective
rule devised by ourselves, that we may follow in our acts. It says: ''Act
in such a way that the maxim of your willI could 1 always hold at the
same time as a principle laying down universal law."27 In other
words, we ought to act only on maxims that are universalizable and as
such do not cater to this or that inclination or excuse us from our
duty when circumstances make it difficult for us to perform it. What
we know practically, this fact of reason, is the moral law itself,28 a
synthetic a priori proposition, and not merely that we are conscious
of such a law: for if I think of this law as obligating me then it is
obligating me. 29 Hence what makes this synthetic proposition "possible" a priori is that it describes a fact of reason: it is not derived
from experience, yet it applies to all experience, has "objective reality,"
2&Critique of Practical Reason. Ak. V,31.
27Ibid.• Ak. V, 30.

211er. ibid.• All. V, 31 and 42.
Ak. IV, 448n.

cr. also the Foundation of the Metaphysics of Morals.

29'fhis claim hinges on the fact that the moral law demands of our maxims only that
they be universalizable, and hence is a purely formal law. In the case of a more specific
rule, such as 'Keep your promise to X. ' my mere consciousness of the rule would not
establish that the rule obligates me, for I could be mistaken in believing that I had
made such a promise.

xliv

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

as we can discover through our own acts as manifested in experience
(below, Ak. 468).
This fact of reason presupposes another: that we have a will that is
free in the sense that it can indeed act independently of natural
influences. Hence, because we have both practical cognition and
knowledge of the moral law, we also have practical cognition and
knowledge of what this law presupposes: our supersensibLe freedom,
the freedom that the first Critique had established only as logically
possible. But the will's freedom as presupposed by the moral law must
be more than mere independence from the efficient causes of nature;
for such mere independence would leave our "acts" random, not our
acts at all. This freedom must be, rather, an ability of the will to give
laws to itself (be "autonomous") and to obey (or disobey) such laws
independently of nature. The will considered as. autonomous, as
giving its own law, is called simply (pure) practical reason; the same
will (practical reason) considered as the ability to choose freely
between obeying or disobeying this law is called the power of choice.
As free from nature's efficient causes, this will can, through its
choice, act "spontaneously"; i.e., it can initiate (be the "first cause"
in) a new series of efficient causes in nature. Hence freedom, as we
cognize and know it practically through the moral law, is itself a
special causality.
Respect for the moral law, together with our awareness that we
have the freedom to obey or disobey it, is what Kant calls 'moral
feeling' (cf. below, Ak. 267).
We saw that the moral law commands us to act only on universalizable maxims. Hence in obeying that law our reason imposes
on nature a universality, and this universality is a form that is supersensible inasmuch as nature as object of our sensibility (i.e., nature as
appearance) does not already have it. But our reason imposes this
form on nature not theoretically, as our understanding, by its legislation,
imposes on nature the form of the categories, but imposes it practically,
i.e., by prescribing a moral law and initiating in nature a causal series
that will add that supersensible form to the categorial form through
free action. In this way. once tile moral law, when obeyed, has
"determined" the will (i.e., has induced it to act as it does), the will's
action "determines" practically something in the world, i.e., gives it
additional formal attributes.
How can the categorical imperative, which is a purely formal law

3. THE CRITIQUE OF PRACTICAL REASON

xlv

(it commands only that our maxims be universalizable), have (practical)
application in nature with all the particular that nature includes?
Something like a schema is needed, as it was for the categories, that
will "mediate" between the universal moral law and the particular
effects which, in conformity with it, we produce in nature. This
mediator cannot be a schema, for a schema mediates the imagination's
exhibition of a concept and the categorical imperative, which is a
rational idea, cannot be exhibited, i.e., cannot structure a given
intuition to make it match the idea. The only possible mediator
between this moral law and those particular effects (which we bring
about through reason as helped by understanding) is what Kant calls
the typus of the moral law: the same law regarded as a law of
nature. 30 The only cognition we can have of the moral law is practical,
but the typus can be cognized theoretically. can be understood;
hence the typus mediates between reason and (not imagination but)
understanding.
As free, i.e., as determinable by its own moral law, the will is our
"higher power of desire" (the lower being merely the will's ability to
be influenced by incentives of sense, "inclinations").31 Any object of
such higher desire is a purpose, in the sense given above. 32 Now if we
consider together all the purposes we could pursue under all the
maxims that would satisfy the categorical imperative, they will form a
kind of hierarchy, some of them being pursued for other purposes,
these for others still. and so on. At the very top of this hierarchy is the
''final purpose"; this is the one purpose that is unconditioned, i.e., not
a means to (or "condition" of) any further purpose. The final purpose
at which, as the moral law commands, all our acts are to aim is the
highest good in the world: our own virtue (which lies in the will's
obedience to the moral law), and happiness for everyone to the extent
that he or she is virtuous and thus worthy of such happiness.
This final purpose, as enjoined on us by the moral law, is not
something we can achieve in this life, because we are beings encumbered by sensibility, by certain obstacles which nature outside us and
especially nature within us puts in our way and to which we too easily
JOCritique of Practical Reason, Ak. V. 69.

3Ief. ibid., Ak. V, 9n and esp. 22~25.
32S ee above, xxv. and cf. the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. VI, 384-85.

xlvi

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

succumb. Therefore the final purpose can never be manifested in
experience, and hence cannot be known, even practically. Yet the
final purpose can be cognized practically; for the concept of it does
have "practical reality" (is not empty): the final purpose is achievable
in principle, because the moral law commands it and the moral law is
a matter of fact (fact of reason). Because, with our weak wills, we can
only approach this final purpose by an infinite progression, while yet
we must conceive of it as achievable because the moral law commands us to pursue it, we are forced to make two assumptions
("postulates"), which are thus also based on the moral law. One of
these is that we are not temporally finite, but are immortal souls. The
other assumption is that there is a God who has the infinite knowledge,
power, and benevolence required to make nature cooperate with our
infinite endeavor: for if the final purpose is to be achieved, nature
within us must cooperate with our endeavor to be virtuous, and
nature in general must cooperate with our endeavor to bring about
happiness for everyone in proportion to his or her virtue. As prerequisites ("conditions") of the final purpose, which the known moral law
establishes as not illusory, the immortality of the soul and the existence of such a moral God can thus also be cognized practically; but,
like the final purpose of which they are the conditions, they cannot be
known, even practically; they are not matters of fact, but are matters
of faith, of a rational faith that is justified a priori by the moral law.
Thus the Critique of Practical Reason establishes what neither
dogmatic rationalism nor dogmatic empiricism had been able to
establish: we can have rational cognition, although practical rather
than theoretical, of all the important things that the Critique of Pure
Reason had to relegate to the merely regulative ideas. It establishes
that we can have practical knowledge of the moral law as obligating
us a priori, from which we can then derive a "metaphysics of morals,"
i.e., a system of all a priori maxims satisfying the categorical imperative,
and establishes that we can have practical knowledge of our will as a
supersensible causality free from the necessity of natural causation. It
also establishes that we can have practical cognition of the final
purpose with its presuppositions of immortality and God. The first
Critique had established these features of the supersensible as logically possible, by construing the world of nature as mere appearance,
but it had to leave the idea of this supersensible completely indeterminate. The second Critique, as Kant puts it, makes the idea of the

3. THE CRITIQUE OF PRACTICAL REASON

xlvii

supersensible determinate (and hence makes the supersensible cognizable practically): through the final purpose as enjoined on us by the
known moral law, the concept of the supersensible is determined as
the concept of a nature in itself, including ourselves as immortal
souls, as created by a moral God in terms of the final purpose.
Kant restates much of this when, in the Critique of Teleological
Judgment, he discusses how teleology relates to theology, and how
the Critique of Judgment "mediates" between the first two Critiques
and so unites the three in a system.

4.
The Critique of
Aesthetic Judgment:
Background
As did the first two Critiques, the Critique of Judgment again examines our cognitive powers, this time in order to decide what justification,
if any, is possible for aesthetic judgments, above all judgments of
taste, and for teleological judgments. As regards judgments of taste,
the problem is this: How, if at all, is it possible to judge something in
nature (or in art) as beautiful on the basis of something very subjective,
a feeling of pleasure, and yet demand for our judgment a universal
assent? That we do demand such assent is implicit in the very fact
that we use the predicate 'beautiful,' as if beauty were a property of
things (which everyone ought to see). If these judgments do have
some kind of universal validity, they must "contain some necessity"
(claim something with necessity) and hence must be to some extent a
priori. And yet they are clearly not analytic but synthetic. How then,
if at all, are these synthetic propositions possible a priori, despite
their dependence on pleasure? Here again Kant's answer can best be
understood as a reaction against the views of the dogmatic rationalists
and dogmatic empiricists. I have selected the key figures, and shall

xlviii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

now set out their views somewhat more elaborately than I did for the
background to the first two Critiques.
Leibniz and Wolff maintained that we have two ways of knowing or
cognizing the world, a lower and a higher cognitive power. (In Leibniz
and Wolff 'cognize' means "know" or "come to know.") The lower
cognitive power is sense perception, the higher is thought. Yet the
distinction they drew between thought and perception by the senses
made the two different not in kind but only in degree. Using Descartes's
terminology, as refined by Leibniz, of "clear" and "distinct" ideas.
Leibniz and Wolff held that the sale difference between sensation and
thought is that thought is distinct, while sensation is confused, though
both can be clear (rather than obscure). An idea is clear if we can
(without doubt) distinguish it from all other ideas, though we may not
know by what characteristics we do so. An idea is distinct if it is clear
in all its parts (characteristics) and their combination, so that it can be
distinguished from all other ideas explicitly, by abstraction (from the
sensible detail) and definition. Sense perception cannot be made
distinct without turning it into thought; lower cognition is only a
preliminary stage of the same knowledge. By the same token, sense
perception can have no perfection of its own, and hence no rules of
its own to govern such perfection. The rules that apply to it are simply
the rules of all thought: the principle of contradiction, and the
principle of sufficient reason (which is the principle that God followed
in making this the best of all possible worlds).
Moreover, just as Wolff construed willing the good as mere knowledge of the good. Leibniz and Wolff construed beauty and the pleasure we take in it in cognitive terms: beauty is perfection as cognized
through sense perception, and hence indistinctly; and the pleasure
we take in it is, at bottom, identical with that perception of the
perfection. Art too is construed in cognitive terms: Art presupposes
this cognition and makes it possible through its creations; art "imitates
nature" in the sense that it produces the best examples of perfection
of which nature (the world as phenomenon, i.e., as perceived by the
senses) is, ideally, capable. Art pleases to the extent that it teaches us
through such examples.
The first major innovation in this view concerning beauty and art
comes from Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten (1714-62), the disciple
of Wolff to whom we owe the term 'aesthetic' in a sense close to the
current one. Baumgarten collaborated in his work with his former

4. THE CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

xlix

student, Georg Friedrich Meier (1718-77). Although the two differ on
certain points, it is not always easy to determine which of the two
contributed what to their published works. However, their views are
similar enough to be left undistinguished here.
Baumgarten and Meier33 took over from Leibniz and Wolff the
view that sense perception and thought are, respectively, lower and
higher cognition, and the view that sense perception is confused
while thought is distinct. But they denied that sense perception can
be perfected only by making it distinct and thereby turning it into
thought. Sense perception, they maintained, can have a perfection of
its own, a perfection whose standard is not that of logic (although it is
analogous to that standard). Moreover, it is this standard peculiar to
sense perception which must be met if we are to perceive beauty.
Hence there are two different kinds, rather than just stages, of cognition (knowledge), and two kinds of theory (or "science") of knowledge:
logic and aesthetics. Aesthetics in the broad sense is the science of
sense knowledge. (This is how Kant uses the term in the first Critique,
when he speaks of the "transcendental aesthetic": A 19-49 = B
33-73.) Aesthetics in the narrow sense (the modern sense, which we
find in Kant's third Critique) deals with the standards of perfection
that sense perception must meet in order for us to perceive beauty; it
is the science (or art) of the beautiful and of taste, i.e., of the power to
cognize beauty.
Perfecting sense perception in order to turn it into thought requires
that we make it more distinct, which we do by abstracting from the
individuality and singularity (Le., from the detail and concreteness) it
presents to us. On the other hand, giving sense perception the perfection peculiar to it involves emphasizing what individuality and singularity it presents to us in an example. The standard of this perfection
is richness and vividness of detail ill the singular perception; here the
perception must be indistinct, confused (i.e., fused with others, rather
than explicitly distinguished from them). This richness and vividness
of an image or idea is called its "extensive" clarity, as distinguished
33'J'he following sketch has been distilled mainly from Baumgarten's Aesthetica
(Aesthetics) of 1750-58 (Hildesheim: Georg Holms Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1961) and
Meier's Anfangsgriinde aller schOnen WisselUchaften (FoundatioIU of all Fine Sciences I
of 1754 (Hildesheim and New York: Georg Holms Verlag, 1976).

1

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

from the clarity, now called "intensive" clarity, of Descartes, Leibniz.
and Wolff.
According to Baumgarten and Meier. when our sense perception
has this perfection peculiar to it, this perfected perception allows us
to perceive perfection in the world (all perfection is multiplicity in
unity): the perfection of things, but above all the moral perfection of
persons. To perceive beauty is to perceive such perfection by sense
(as itself perfected by being made extensively clear); beauty is perfection insofar as we cognize this perfection not rationally and hence
distinctly, but by taste. i.e., extensively clear sense perception. Aesthetic pleasure is the result of cognizing perfection by sense as perfected
by being made extensively clear.
Because perfection (goodness) implies a standard. there are rules
of perfection; hence. there are also rules of beauty, which can be
derived from the rules of perfection in general. Thus we have two
kinds of rules for "beautiful cognition" in general: rules about the
cognition itself, and rules about the perfection of the objects we can
cognize in this way.
In addition to these rules, there are the practical rules that apply
those other rules to art. The aim of art is not simply to imitate nature,
not even by selecting the most perfect examples of which nature
is ideally capable. but to create a perfect whole out of indistinct
images (or, in the case of poetry, indistinct ideas) made extensively
clear, a whole that can then be judged in the same way as beauty in
general can. Hence the fine arts, as informed by such rules, are at the
same time "fine sciences"; and aesthetics, which is itself an art,
similarly becomes a science, the science of the beautiful, to the
extent that it offers higher-order rules (principles) for those other
rules.
Kant accepted and defended the major innovation offered by
Baumgarten and Meier: their insistence that sense perception is not
the same as thought and can be perfected without turning it into
thought. But Kant objected to the cognitive analysis that Baumgarten
and Meier offered for our perception of beauty (Ak. 207-(9). He
objected to it because the analysis turns beauty into a property. viz., a
perfection that something has by reference to a purpose as expressed
by some concept, and because the analysis treats the perfection of
the sense perception itself ("extensive clarity") as merely a prerequisite for perceiving the perfection of something else by means of

4. THE CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

Ii

sense. If judgments about beauty were conceptual, Kant argued, they
could be proved by rules (just such rules as Baumgarten and Meier
bad tried to devise); yet this cannot be done (Ak. 284-85). By
the same token, there can be no "fine science" but only fine art,
and aesthetics cannot be a "science" of the beautiful but only
critique.34
Hence, while the dogmatic rationalists had indeed offered an account
of the universality of aesthetic judgments, viz., by construing them as
conceptual and as cognitive judgments about a property, this very
account assimilated judgments about beauty to judgments about the
good (Ak. 346) and hence failed to explain their aesthetic and therefore subjective character. Some analysis of aesthetic judgments must
be found that would preserve their universality without assimilating
them to judgments of cognition, theoretical or practical. Such an
analysis is just what the empiricists tried to provide.
Kant's own Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime of 1764 were empirical, but they were not empiricist: they
offered no theory, as Kant did not yet think that an aesthetic theory
was possible. Instead the work consists of amateur social psychology;
it discusses beauty and sublimity in relation to the differences between
people, ages, sexes, nationalities, temperaments. Even in the Critique
of Pure Reason (both first and second editions) Kant says that
Baumgarten's attempt to bring the rules for judging the beautiful
under rational principles is futile. because these rules are merely
empirical. (A 21n = B 35n.)
As for the theories of beauty and art of the British empiricists, a
number of them were available in German translation by the time
Kant wrote the third Critique. Kant was probably familiar with the
Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue (1725) of
Francis Hutcheson (1694-1747);35 he was in general familiar with
Hume's views, although it is not clear that he had read "Of the
Standard of Taste" (1757);36 and he was clearly familiar with the
Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and
34See Ak. 304 and 355. That critiq~e, on the other hand, can be scientific: Ak. 286.

An Inquiry Concerning Beauty. Order. Harmony.
Design. ed. Peter Kivy (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 1973).

35S ee, e.g .• Francis Hutcheson,

J6See, e.g., David Hume, Of the Standard of Taste and Other Essays, ed. John W. Lenz
(Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. 1965).

Iii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

Beautlful (1757) of Edmund Burke (1729-97),37 to whom he responds
by name.38
According to Hutcheson. beauty is not a quality of things; the term
'beauty' stands for the idea that certain qualities of things evoke in the
mind. Our natural power to receive the idea of beauty when confronted
by such qualities is analogous to perception: it is a "sense" of beauty.
Perceiving such qualities by this sense produces an immediate (i.e .•
direct) delight. One such quality is formal: the compound ratio of
uniformity in variety; if either of these is kept constant, "beauty"
varies with the other. Art imitates, but its "beauty" is not that of the
original; it is based on the unity found in the conformity of the work
with the original. Another quality that arouses the idea of beauty is
moral virtue. Moral virtue can be perceived by the moral "sense," but
it can alsu produce aesthetic delight. (Vice can be represented beautifully as well, but only insofar as the representation manifests unity in
its conformity with the original.) The standard of taste, the standard
for judging beauty, is empirical: it is our common human nature, the
sensibility we have for appreciating uniformity in variety; if we do not
find universal agreement regarding judgments of taste. it is only
because we become prejudiced by making irrelevant associations.
Hume. treating judgments of taste as he does moral judgments,
also denies that beauty is a quality of things, and speaks of a "sense"
or "feeling" of beauty, an ability to receive pleasure from the perception of certain qualities of things. or from association with such
qualities. Hume is not specific about what these qualities are; they
involve structural relations between parts and whole, or a thing's
utility as it appears to us. The standard of taste is again human nature,
but as subject to more qualifications than Hutcheson had spelled out.
A qualified perceiver must not only be impartial (unprejudiced): the
perceiver must be calm, as well as experienced in judging beauty,
especially beauty in art. By abstracting the common features of
objects that have pleased the sense of beauty of such qualified persons over the ages. we may be able to tell what qualities in general
(e.g., what formal properties of objects) are capable of producing this
pleasure. If we fail in this attempt, we can still use such persons
37A

modern edition is that edited by James T. Boulton (London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul,1958).

38Ak. 277. The following sketch is distilled mainly from the works just mentioned.

4. THE CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

liii

(including ourselves, insofar as we fulfill the same criteria) as our
standard for judging. Human nature does not vary so much that such
persons would greatly disagree, even though perhaps some disagreement, e.g., that due to differences in temperament, cannot be resolved.
Burke again holds that all there is, as far as beauty is concerned, is
our idea of it. We have a "feeling" of beauty, and we call an object
beautiful if it evokes a certain idea, a certain feeling: love without
interest. To this account Burke adds an explanation, in terms of the
physiology of the day, as to how the object evokes this feeling (cf. Ak.
277 incl. br. n. 51). Burke does not say much as to what qualities in
objects arouse the idea of beauty. As for a standard of taste, Burke
seems to have assumed that taste is the same in all human beings.
The empiricist analysis of beauty by reference to a kind of "sense"
or "feeling," as combined with the denial that beauty is a property of
things, accounted well for the aesthetic and subjective character of
judgments of taste. Kant's complaint against the empiricist analysis is
that it fails to account for the fact that judgments of taste demand
everyone's assent and hence claim a universality and necessity (Ak.
237), which presupposes some necessary and hence a priori principle.
"Scouting about for empirical laws about mental changes" cannot
yield this necessity (Ak. 278), nor can "gathering votes and asking
other people what kind of sensation they are having" when facing a
beautiful object (Ak. 281), even if as a matter of empirical fact many
people happen to agree on a judgment of taste because "there is a
contingent uniformity in the organization of idifferent] subjects" (Ak.
345-46). Hence the empiricist analysis cannot adequately distinguish
between judgments of taste and judgments about the merely agreeable (Ak. 346), which are also subjective but imply no universality.

s.
Kant's Account of
Judgments of Taste as
Aesthetic Judgments
of ReflectIon
Kant's main concern in the Critique of Aesthetic Judgment is judgments of taste, i.e., judgments about the beautiful,39 above all about
the beautiful in nature. 40 A paradigm would be the judgment, 'The
rose at which I am looking is beautiful' (cf. Ak. 215), provided that
this judgment is made without using the concept (or "thought") of the
rose, hut is made, rather, with the mere intuition, i.e., with the rose as
"given" (Ak. 230). Although the fact that in such a judgment we use
the adjective 'beautiful' suggests that beauty is a property, beauty is
not a property: "apart from a relation to the subject's feeling, beauty
is nothing by itself" (Ak. 218). Hence it is this "feeling" that must be
analyzed in such a way as to account for the judgment's claim to
universality (universal validity). Because even judgments of taste have
reference to the understanding (Ak. 203 n.1), the categories play some
role in them. Accordingly, Kant explicates these judgments by reference to four "moments," which are based on the four category headings: quality, quantity, relation, and modality. (I shall not follow
Kant's order here.)
"Beautiful is what, without a concept [such as the concept of the
good], is liked universally" (Ak. 219). This universality is the aesthetic
quantity of a judgment of taste (second moment) and is what distinguishes it from judgments about the agreeable. (In logical quantity,
a judgment of taste is singular: Ak. 215.) But this universality is only
"subjective": the judgment demands that all subjects give their assent
to the judgment. By the same token, the judgment's "necessity"
(fourth moment, as to modality) is not apodeictic (as the necessity in
39Judgments about the sublime will be discussed below. See Section 9.
40In sketching Kant's account, I shall largely disregard his own artificial and unhelpful
division of the Critique of Aesthetic Iudgment into an ''Analytic'' and a "Dialectic."

liv

5. KANT'S ACCOUNT OF JUDGMENTS OF TASTE

Iv

a demonstration) but only "exemplary" (Ak. 237): we demand universal assent to a judgment that we make as an example of a certain
unstatable universal rule (Ak. 237). To make this demand is to claim
that we speak with a "universal voice" (Ak. 216) and to presuppose a
priori that taste and the feeling by which it judges is common to
everyone and hence is a sensus communis, a "common sense" (Ak.
238). To justify this claim and presupposition is therefore to justify the
claim to subjective universality. Before we turn to this justification,
we must complete the analysis of judgments of taste.
ludgments about the agreeable and judgments about the beautiful
are both aesthetic judgments. But the former are aesthetic judgments
of sense: the pleasure (or "liking") we feel in a judgment about the
agreeable is interested, viz., interested in the existence of some object
as related to sense. In judgments of taste, on the other hand, the
liking is "disinterested" (first moment, as to quality): "beautiful is
what we like in merely judging it" (Ak. 306). Judgments of taste are
aesthetic judgments not of sense but of "reflection."41
Reflective judgments in general, aesthetic as well as teleological,42
are judgments that are not "determinative," i.e., they do not determine objects. We saw above (xxxiv) that the judgment, 'This is a dog,'
determines the dog (as appearance) by having the imagination structure
a matching empirical intuition in terms of the concept of "dog," i.e.,
by subsuming the intuition under that concept. Hence determinative
judgments subsume a particular under some universaL. We also saw
(xliv) that judgments about the good (practical judgments) are determinative as well: they too use a concept to determine (give attributes to)
experience; but here the determination is not performed simply by
the understanding's legislation, but instead practically, by the will and
its action. (The concept may be empirical, as when we produce some
object, or may be a priori, as in morality.) On the other hand,
reflective judgments, including aesthetic ones, do not give attributes
to objects and hence are not determinative. Though Kant will talk
about judgments as being "determined" by a feeling or a concept
(At. 221) and will even say such things as "a judgment of taste
4(Judgments about the sublime are the other kind of aesthetic judgments of reflection.
They will be discussed in Section 9 below.
42Teleological reflective judgments will be discussed in later sections of the Translator's
Introduction. See esp. Sections 10-13.

lvi

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

determines the object ... with regard to liking and the predicate of
beauty" (Ak. 219), and so on, yet in the strict and relevant sense of
'determinative' judgments of taste are not determinative. For they do
not determine an object in the sense of giving it an attribute, because
beauty is not an attribute (not a property), even though grammatically
the term 'beauty' functions as a predicate. Moreover, judgments of
taste do not use a determinate concept, as do cognitive judgments,
theoretical or practical. The reason for this is that reflective judgments,
including aesthetic ones, have no determinate concept available to
them, no universal under which to subsume the particular that is
given to us in intuition: rather, they try to find such a universal.
If this search for a universal is to succeed, it must be pursued not
haphazardly but on some principle; and since in this case the power
of judgment has no determinate concept available that could serve it
as such a principle, it must itself have a concept, though only an
indeterminate one, that can serve it as such a principle (Ak. 1~81,
and cf. Ak. 340-41).
This indeterminate concept is the concept of nature's "subjective
purposiveness," i.e., nature's purposiveness for our (the subject's)
power of judgment: and the principle of judgment to which this
concept gives rise is simply the assumption that nature in its particular (as we find it in empirical intuition) is "subjectively purposive,"
i.e., purposive for our power of judgment in the sense of lending itself
to being judged by us (Ak. 193). (Since judgment is a function of
understanding, Kant will also speak of nature's purposiveness for our
understanding or for our cognitive power: Ak. 187; 184,186.)
The difference between the concept of such subjective purposiveness
and the concept of a purpose (see above, xxv) is precisely that the first
concept is indeterminate, the second determinate. In order for nature's
particular to be purposive for our power of judgment it must manifest
a certain regularity (order, lawfulness). This regularity is not determinate, like the regularity that an intuition must have in order to
match a determinate concept; rather, it is an indeterminate regularity,
viz., the regularity that we need in general in order to match an
empirical intuition with -a concept so as to give rise to empirical
cognition. Since the particular in nature is contingent (because not
subject to our understanding's legislation), nature's subjective purposiveness consists in the regularity or "lawfulness" that the contingent must have (Ak. 404. 217') in order for us to cognize it. Accordingly,

5. KANT'S ACCOUNT OF JUDGMENTS OF TASTE

lvii

the principle of judgment is the assumption that nature manifests a
cognizable order not only in its (transcendental and metaphysical)
universal laws (which are based on the categories) but in terms of its
particular (and contingent) laws as well: Nature makes its universal
laws specific (Ak. 186) in such a way that the particular laws will not
be too "heterogeneous" (Ak. 188) for us to have coherent experience
even in terms of them (Ak. 180). Thus judgment assumes that nature
forms a hierarchy (Ak. 213', 185) of genera and species (each genus
and species representing a grouping and hence a "law"), and of
empirical laws in general (including particular causal laws), and hence
manifests simplicity and parsimony.43 On this assumption, it is "as if'
nature's order had been given it (legislated to it) "by some understanding, even if not ours" (Ak. 180). This assumed lawfulness, though
indeterminate, is one that matches understanding as such, i.e., understanding considered indeterminately, apart from any specific concept.
Hence it is also one that matches the form that imagination as such
must have (as it apprehends, in general, something in empirical
intuition) in order to harmonize with understanding as such so that
cognition may arise. By the same token, the same assumed indeterminate lawfulness is one that matches the form of the power of judgment as such, i.e., it matches the harmony (which itself has that form)
between imagination as such and understanding as such that is required
for all (empirical: Ak. 190-91) judgment and cognition.
This principle of the power of judgment, that the power of judgment presupposes for its reflection, is itself a reflective judgment.
Insofar as we only think this principle (rather than apply it directly to
intuition), it is a logical judgment: the indeterminate principle of
reflection as such. The two kinds of reflection, aesthetic and teleological. are both based on that principle. 44 Teleological judgments
are indeed reflective and presuppose judgment's principle; yet in
them the subjective purposiveness merely underlies an objective and
"material" purposiveness, because teleological judgments are made
41Ak. 182. The Critique 0/ Pure Reason discusses reflection in fairly similar terms (A
260-92 = B 316-49), but attributes the concern and search for this unity of the
particular to reason (A 648-62 = B 676-90).

44The principle is not really a third kind of reflective judgment, as Paul Guyer seems
to consider it: Kant and the Claims of Taste (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1979),61-64. It is simply judgment's principle itself which underlies both aesthetic and
teleological reflective judgments.

Iviii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

by reference to a determinate concept of a purpose (the "matter" of
purposiveness), so that there the purposiveness is a purposiveness
with a purpose. By contrast, in aesthetic reflective judgments the
purposiveness is not based on a concept (Ak. 220) and hence also not
on the concept of a purpose; so it is merely subjective, a "purposiveness
without a purpose" (third moment, in terms of the relation "of the
purposes we take into consideration").45
We saw that in aesthetic reflective judgments we judge the subjective purposiveness that nature displays in the empirical intuition (of
something apprehended by the imagination) and that we judge this
purposiveness without a determinate concept. Hence in such judgments,
imagination and understanding harmonize without the constraint that
a determinate concept would introduce and thus are in "free play."
Moreover, since the apprehended form is not compared (matched)
with a determinate concept, its purposiveness is not cognized but can
only be felt. This feeling (of pleasure) is nothing more than our
nonconceptual awareness (awareness without a Ideterminate) concept)
of the form's purposiveness for our cognitive power as such, i.e.,
purposiveness for the harmony of imagination as such with understanding as such. (Ak. 222.) Anything in nature, as long as our imagination can apprehend it in an intuition, can be judged aesthetically: it
could be a rose, or it might be some larger part of nature, such as a
certain order among species and genera; but in the first case we must
judge without the concept of a rose, in the second case without a
(single determinate) concept of such order among species and genera.
Judgment's principle of nature's purposiveness embodies a constant
expectation in accordance with an "aim" we have (Ak. 187), viz.,
our aim (or "endeavor," as at Ak. 187) to cognize nature in an
experience that coheres even in the particular. Hence when we
actually find such order in nature, whether in the rose or in some
larger but still intuitable part, then we feel a pleasure, as equated by
Kant with our nonconceptual awareness of that purposiveness for our
cognitive power as such (Ak. 184). This is why the natural scientist
will frequently feel such pleasure upon discovering, and when judging
aesthetically (i.e .. without as yet having and using a Isingle determinate I concept for this), an indeterminate (subjectively) purposive
4SAk. 219. The purposiveness as we merely think it in judgment's principle itself is la
subjective purposiveness) neither with nor without a purpose but covers both possibilities.

5.

KANT'S ACCOUNT OF JUDGMENTS OF TASTE

lix

order in parts of nature that he had, until then, conceptualized only in
terms of a multiplicity of determinate concepts of species and genera. 46
If the scientist ceases to notice the pleasure, this is only because he is
concerned mainly with cognition of such purposive order and therefore tends to focus on that cognition and hence to make no attempt to
distinguish from it his nonconceptual awareness of such order (Ak. 187).
It is precisely this analysis of judgments of taste by reference to
cognition as such (though not by reference to determinate cognitions,
since then the judgments would be cognitive rather than aesthetic),
which enables Kant to provide a "deduction," i.e., a justification, for
them and their claim to universality and hence for their presupposition of a "common sense" (sensus communis).

6.
The Deduction of
Judgments of Taste
In a judgment of taste we connect a noncognitive "predicate," a
feeling, with the mere intuition of an object (Ak. 288), and to this
extent the judgment is (singular and) empirical (Ak. 289). What needs
a justification ("deduction") is only the a priori claim of the judgment,
the claim that the pleasure (and to this extent the judgment as well)
has universal validity (Ak. 289). Since a judgment of taste obviously is
not analytic but synthetic,47 what the deduction tries to show is that
and how this kind of synthetic judgment is possible a priori (Ak. 289).
It does this as follows (Ak. 289-90).
In a judgment of taste the liking is not connected with the sensation (through which the "matter" of intuition would be given us: see
46Cf. the connection Kant makes between beauty and "orienting" oneself in the
immense diversity of nature at Ak. 193.
47"We can readily see that judgments of taste are synthetic; for they go beyond the
concept of the object, and even beyond the intuition of the object, and add as a
predicate to this intuition something that is not even cognition: namely, [al feeling of
pleasure (or displeasure)": Ak. 288.

Ix

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

above, xxxiv) as it is when we judge something (e.g., ice cream) to be
agreeable; nor is it connected with a concept as it is in judgments
about the good. In other words, in a judgment of taste the liking
involves no interest in an object's existence, whether as related to
sense (as in the case of something agreeable) or in terms of some
purpose (as in the case of the good). Rather, in a judgment of taste the
liking is disinterested: it is connected with the mere judging of the
form of the object. Hence this liking can be nothing but (our awareness
of) the form's purposiveness for the power of judgment.48 As the
power of judgment is not directed to the sensation or to a concept, it
can be directed only to the subjective conditions of (empirical) judgment as such: the harmony of imagination and understanding that is
needed for all (empirical) cognition. These subjective conditions of
(empirical) judgment as such. i.e., the harmony of the cognitive
powers, can be assumed to be the same in everyone. Hence the liking
is nothing but (our consciousness of) the form's purposiveness for that
harmony, a harmony that can be assumed to be the same in everyone.
Therefore the liking has universal subjective validity, i.e., it is indeed
a sensus communis (a "common sense"), viz., taste, by which we can
judge given forms as to whether they have such purposiveness without a purpose.
Kant's key premise in this deduction is that the subjective conditions of (empirical) judgment as such (the harmony of the cognitive
powers) can be assumed to be the same in everyone. He does not
argue for that premise in the deduction. because he has already done
so elsewhere: provided merely that (in accordance with the first
Critique) we reject skepticism, we can assume that our ordinary
(empirical) cognitions and judgments are universally communicable
(Ak. 238-39); in other words, we can assume that what we call
'common understanding' (not the sensus communis but what we
ordinarily call 'common sense,' viz., sound judgment in everyday
matters) is indeed "common," i.e., shared by everyone, and hence can
assume that the cognitive powers presupposed by this common understanding are shared universally as well (Ak. 292-931.
What makes it possible for this harmony to serve as a standard of
48{ am inserting in parentheses what Kant often omits but regards as understood. He
clearly does identify this pleasure with the consciousness of the purposiveness (of the
form of an object) in the play of the cognitive powers: Ak. 222.

6. THE DEDUCTION OF JUDGMENTS OF TASTE

Ixi

taste, i.e., a standard for judging form (as to its beauty), is that,
although in any particular cognition the harmony varies (according to
the concept and intuition involved), the same does not hold for the
indeterminate harmony as such (which, like the purposiveness it
matches, cannot be cognized but can only be felt [Ak. 219]): since
understanding as such has whatever structure it has, and imagination
can harmonize with that structure only by adopting it, there must be a
harmony (having that same structure), an "attunement," that is optimal
for empirical cognition as such (Ak. 238-39). On the other hand, we
must still make sure that we use that standard correctly. We must be
certain that our judgment is indeed disinterested, a judgment of
reflection rather than a judgment based on a concept or on a mere
sensation (cf. Ak. 216, 290-93). In other words, we must be certain
that the pleasure is indeed based on nothing but the (indeterminate)
sUbsumption of our imagination as such (as it apprehends a form in
intuition) under our understanding as such (Ak. 287).

7.
Beyond the Deduction:
LinkIng Beauty to Morality
Extensive debates have been carried on among scholars as to whether
the deduction, as just sketched in accordance with Kant's presentation of it in § 38 (Ak. 289-90), is complete: some (e.g .• Crawford)
have argued that linking beauty to morality is still part of the deduction,
whereas others (e.g., Guyer) have argued that it is not. 49
On the one hand, Kant's presentation certainly suggests that the
deduction is completed in § 38, even before the Comment that starts
just after it. The section is entitled simply 'Deduction of Judgments of
Taste'; the beginning of the Comment, 'What makes this deduction so
easy ... ' (Ak. 290), clearly implies that the deduction is finished; and
49Donald W. Crawford. Kant's Aesthetic Theory (Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press, 1974), 142-59. Guyer, Kant and the Claims of Taste. 373-89.

Ixii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

the explanation that the Comment offers for that remark, as to why
the deduction is "so easy," is entirely in terms of the material in § 38.
Moreover, the point of the deduction was to justify the demand of
judgments of taste for universal assent; and establishing that we do
have a "common sense" (sensus communis), a taste that all subjects
must have (and can use correctly), is indeed sufficient to justify us in
demanding that anyone else who judges the same object reflectively
should agree with our judgment. This is why Kant says explicitly,
... [S lomeone who feels pleasure in the mere reflection on
the form of an object ... rightly lays claim to everyone's
assent, even though this judgment is empirical and a singular
judgment. For the basis of this pleasure is found in the
universal, though subjective, condition of reflective judgments,
namely, the purposive harmony of an object ... with the
mutual relation of the cognitive powers (imagination and
understanding) that are required for every cognition (Ak. 191).

In other words, the conflict between the subjectivity of judgments of
taste and their claim to universality is solved by means of the indeterminate concept of nature's purposiveness for our cognitive power.
On the other hand, when Kant presents the same conflict again, as
the "antinomy concerning the principle of taste" (Ak. 338-39), he
seems to have changed his mind. He now claims that the only way to
solve the antinomy and "save [the I claim [of a judgment of taste] to
universal validity" is by means of the indeterminate concept of the
supersensible (Ak. 340). Similarly, Kant says that "our liking for [the
beautiful] include[ s I a claim to everyone else's assent ... only because
we refer the beautiful to ... the intelligible" (Ak. 353), i.e., to the
supersensible. Now, the concept of the supersensible which according
to Kant will make the (seeming) contradiction in the antinomy
"disappear" and which "make[sl the judgment of taste valid for
everyone" is the indeterminate concept of the supersensible that
underlies nature's purposiveness for our cognitive power (Ak. 340).
Hence it seems that Kant, by switching to this indeterminate concept,
is suddenly equating (treating as equivalent) the indeterminate concept of nature's purposiveness for our cognitive power with the indeterminate concept of the supersensible basis of that same (subjective)
purposiveness. I shall argue, from textual evidence, that this is just

7. BEYOND THE DEDUCTION

lxiii

what Kant is doing. Kant does not explain the equation at this point.
The explanation can be found in the Critique of Teleological Judgment,
where the same equation is made. Although Kant does not offer a
clear explanation even there, the evidence that he is making the
equation is overwhelming. I must delay my argument concerning this
point until the last section of this introduction. I shall refer to this
problem as 'Problem 1.' In the meantime, I shall simply anticipate the
conclusion and ask the reader to (l$sume that, however perplexing it
may seem. the two concepts are indeed equivalent.
However, the way in which Kant introduces the supersensible at
this point raises a further difficulty. Just before he calls it the supersensible underlying nature's purposiveness for our cognitive power, he
says that it is the supersensible "underlying the object (as well as
underlying the judging subject) as an object of sense and hence as
appearance" (Ak. 340). Moreover, Kant also says that the "intelligible"
(i.e.. supersensible) which "taste has in view" and by reference to
which we demand universal assent to our judgments of taste is the
"morally good" (Ak. 353), and "the pleasure that taste declares valid
for mankind as such ... must indeed derive from this [link to moral
ideas J and from the resulting increase in our receptivity for the feeling
that arises from moral ideas (and is called moral feeling)" (Ak. 356).
This last supersensible is the one that "the concept of freedom [and
hence the moral law J contains practically" (Ak. 176), viz., "the final
purpose ... the appearance of which in the world of sense ... ought
to exist" ;50 in other words, it is our supersensible freedom and a
supersensible substrate of nature tnat will make nature as appearance
(especially the appearance of what nature we have within us: Ak.
196, 340), cooperate, through the agency of a moral God, with our
endeavor to achieve the final purpose.
This difficulty, the fact that Kant seems to introduce, in order to
solve the antinomy of taste, three supersensibles rather than just one,
has an easy solution: what we have here are three ideas of the
supersensible, but they are all ideas of the same supersensible. (Ak.
346.) The idea of the supersensible as required to solve the antinomy
of taste is the idea of the supersensible as underlying nature's
~OAk. 195-96. Actually, Kant says, 'the final purpose which (or the appearance of
which in the world of sense),' but in order f()r the morally good (the highest good) to be
supersensible. we need the second disjunct. 'the appearance of which.'

lxiv

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

purposiveness for our judgment: but the supersensible to which this
idea refers is aU of this: the substrate of objects and of ourselves as
subjects,51 the substrate of nature's purposiveness for our judgment,
and the supersensible that "the conceptoffreedomcontainspractically."
What, however, justifies regarding the "three" supersensibles as
one? Kant's answer is this: it is the way in which the supersensible as
underlying nature's subjective purposiveness "mediates" the "transition"
between the other "two" and hence between the domains of nature
and of freedom (Ak. 176, 196-97). The idea of the supersensible as
mere substrate of nature was left wholly indeterminate by the Critique
of Pure Reason; the Critique of Practical Reason, on the other hand,
made the idea of the supersensible as contained practically in the
concept of freedom determinate (and hence made it possible for us to
cognize this supersensible); and it is the idea that the Critique of
Judgment provides of the supersensible underlying nature's subjective purposiveness which, although itself indeterminate and incapable
of giving rise to cognition, nevertheless makes the idea of the supersensible determinable (Ak. 196). How the indeterminate idea of the
supersensible basis of nature's subjective purposiveness can make the
idea of the supersensible determinable (capable of being determined
by practical reason) is a problem-I shall call it 'Problem II'-whose
solution hinges on the solution of Problem I and hence must also wait
until the last section of this introduction.
But while the indeterminate concept that unites the "three"
supersensibles, and thus also unites the three Critiques in a system, is
the concept of reflective judgment in general, i.e., aesthetic as well as
teleological, Kant singles out aesthetic reflective judgment as special
(even) for this mediation role: the concept of nature's subjective
purposiveness is made "suitable" for that mediation role by the
"spontaneity in the play of the cognitive powers, whose harmony with
each other contains the basis of [the J pleasure [that we feel in judging
the beautiful)" (Ak. 197). How the spontaneity makes the concept
"suitable" for this is what I shall caJl 'Problem III; and this problem
too must be left for the last section of this introduction.
We are now in a position to resolve the seeming conflict between
those of Kant's comments implying that the deduction is complete
51Sometimes Kant calls it simply 'the supersensible in us' (e.g .• Ak. 341). I shall have

more to say about this in n. 101 below.

7. BEYOND THE DEDUCTION

lxv

and those that suggest otherwise. First, a correct analysis of judgments of taste, i.e., an analysis of them that avoids the antinomy of
taste, must indeed link beauty to the supersensible-to the supersensible as basis of the subjective purposiveness of nature. The concept
of this supersensible is indeed needed to "save [the J claim [of judgments of taste I to universal validity," i.e., this link is needed for the
justification of these judgments. But this link does not take us beyond
the deduction; it is already implicit in the deduction, because-as the
solution of Problem I will show-a fuller analysis of the concept of
the subjective purposiveness of nature reveals it to be equivalent to
the concept of the supersensible basis of that same purposiveness.
Second, beauty is linked to the supersensible as substrate of objects
and of ourselves only indirectly, viz., only insofar as the three ideas of
the supersensible all refer to the same supersensible; the idea of the
supersensible as mere substrate of objects and of ourselves is as yet
utterly indeterminate and hence could not justify judgments of taste
at all. The idea of the supersensible as underlying the subjective
purposiveness of nature, although still indeterminate as well, is-as
we shall see in the last section of this introduction-not utterly
indeterminate but has just enough content to justify a claim to universal subjective validity, by the same token that it can make the concept
of the supersensible determinable (by practical reason). Third, the
link of beauty to the supersensible as thus determined, and hence
cognized, by practical reason not only is again indirect but must be
indirect. For otherwise, despite Kant's repeated and express insistence to the contrary, his account of judgments of taste would become
cognitive after all and judgments of taste could be established a
priori, viz., practically. It is because the link of beauty to this last
supersensible is only indirect that Kant, in discussing the link between
beauty and morality, no longer speaks of justification or deduction.
Instead he speaks of "explanation" (Ak. 296) and "interpretation"
(Ak. 301). Moreover, this explanation or interpretation comes about
in a way in which justification of what these judgments claim would
never be possible, viz., through the mere analogy between beauty and
morality, i.e., through the mere fact that beauty is the "symbol" of
morality (Ak. 353, cf. 301). This ex.planatory or interpretive link can
at most provide our taste with "guidance" (Ak. 297-98). Hence beauty
as such does not "gain" from morality, nor the other way round (Ak.
231). By the same token, although we do tend to take an interest in

lxvi

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

the existence and judging of the beautiful, an interest which is moral
"in terms of its kinship" (Ak. 3(0), our liking for the beautiful remains
nonetheless independent of all interest (Ak. 3(0); and even the interest itself that we take in beauty is due not to the link between beauty
and morality but to "beauty's own characteristic of qualifying for
such a link, which therefore belongs to it intrinsically" (Ak. 302).
Only in this limited sense do we "refer" the beautiful to "the intelligible"
that "the concept of freedom contains practically," i.e.• the supersensible as made determinate practically; and only in this limited sense is
aesthetic reflective pleasure "derived" from the link of beauty to
morality; hence it is still "not practical in any way" (Ak. 222). as of
course it would be if the link were justificatory rather than merely
explanatory or interpretive.
Therefore, while the link of beauty to an as yet indeterminate
"supersensible" is part of, but is also already implicit in, the deduction
of judgments of taste as given in § 38, the link of beauty to morality is
not needed for the deduction and would in fact take the deduction
too far by making beauty cognizable. Taste, according to Kant, is not
based on the supersensible as determined (practically), but only "has
it in view" (Ak. 353), viz., insofar as both nature's subjective purposiveness and the supersensible basis of that purposiveness are
analogous to that supersensible and thus capable of making it
determinable.

8.
Beauty and Fine Art
There is "free" or "vague" beauty, Kant says, and "accessory" or
"fixed" beauty, beauty fixed by the concept of the thing's purpose, the
concept of what the thing is (meant) to be (Ak. 229-32). Judgments
of taste about free beauty are pure, those about fixed beauty are
applied judgments of taste and are partly conceptual, partly "intellectual" (Ak. 229-32). For example, beauty of which there can be an
"ideal" (Ak. 231-36) must involve a concept of the purpose of the

8. BEAUTY AND FINE ART

lxvii

beautiful thing; Kant argues that only man is capable of an ideal of
beauty, and this ideal involves the concept of man's moral purpose.
Since all fine artS2 (indeed, all art in generalS3 ) involves the
concept of a purpose,54 all beauty in fine art is fixed beauty, and
hence judgments about this beauty are "logically conditioned" (Ak.
312), because we are also judging how perfect the object is in terms of
that purpose (Ak. 311). But although the artist is thus proceeding by
an intention (the intention to produce an object in accordance with
the concept he has of it), the intention must not show in the work: the
work must look like nature even though we are aware that it is art
(Ak. 306-07). In other words, beauty in art is the same beauty as
beauty in nature, except that it is restricted to the concept of the
thing's purpose. By the same token, nature is beautiful if it also looks
like art; the beauty of nature is not fixed, however, because nature, as
judged in aesthetic reflective judgments, only "looks like" art, and we
do not judge that it is art.55
Producing fine art, as distinguished from merely judging it by
means of taste, requires genius (Ak. 307), although taste is needed as
well: taste is needed to discipline genius, make it civilized by holding
it within determinate rules (which we need in order to achieve a
purpose: Ak. 310), and so keep it from producing nonsense (Ak. 319).
But genius is a talent that does not simply follow rules but is original
(Ak. 307-08); i.e., genius gives its own rule to art and hence produces
works that are models and therefore exemplary (Ak. 308). But even
the artist himself does not know what this rule is by which he
connects his ideas (Ak. 308), and by which he then hits on a way of
expressing them that communicates the "mental attunement" produced by these ideas (Ak. 317). This latter talent (of hitting on the
right expression) Kant calls 'spirit' (Ak. 317). Spirit in an aesthetic
52-Fine' in this sense and 'beautiful' are the same term in German (schon), which is
used in both the classificatory and the laudatory senses.
51Kant distinguishes fine art from art in various other senses of the term at Ak.
303-{)4.
54Since "otherwise the product cannot be ascribed to any art at all, but would be a
mere product of chance··: Ak. 310.
55Crawford's "paradol" about this reciprocal relation between nature and art seems
to arise mainly because, in both cases, he quotes Kant as saying 'is like' rather than
'looks like': Kant's Aesthetic Theory. 134.

lxviii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

sense of the term is the "animating principle of the mind" (Ak. 313),
and is the ability to exhibit (darstellen, traditionally rendered as 'to
present'56) aesthetic ideas (Ak. 313-14). An aesthetic idea is an intuition57 that "prompts much thought" (Ak. 314); it is the "counterpart"
of a rational idea: Just as no intuition can be adequate to an idea of
reason, so there is no (determinate) concept that would be adequate
to an aesthetic idea (Ak. 314).
Kant goes on to offer a classification of the various fine arts, and to
discuss their similarities, differences, interrelations, and relative
"aesthetic value" (Ak. 320-36).

9.
Judgments about the Sublime
Judgments about the sublime are the other kind of aesthetic reflective
judgments. In analyzing them, Kant focuses on the sublime in nature,
"since the sublime in art is always confined to the conditions that lart]
must meet to be in harmony with nature" (Ak. 245). All sublimity
involves vast magnitude; and nature, Kant says, is most sublime in its
"chaos," in its "wildest and most ruleless disarray and devastation"
(Ak.246).
In Baumgarten and Meier, the notion that is closest to Kant's
"sublimity" is "aesthetic magnitude," in a sense that includes largeness
as well as greatness. But for Baumgarten and Meier this aesthetic
magnitude is one of the necessary ingredients in beauty (another is
aesthetic richness, and both of these are needed to convey "truth"
aesthetically, i.e., needed for aesthetic "cognition"). A species of
aesthetic magnitude is indeed called 'sublimity,' but in a rather older
and narrower sense, as meaning 'grandeur,' 'splendor,' 'loftiness.'
Hence both this "sublimity" and that "aesthetic magnitude" are treated
cognitively, as beauty is. Kant rejects this cognitive analysis (Ak. 268)
56See above, xxxv.
57Actually, Kant says 'presentation' (Vorstellung, traditionally rendered as 'representation': see below, Ak. 175 br. n. 17.)

9. JUDGMENTS ABOUT THE SUBLIME

lxix

as he did in the case of beauty, offering instead an analysis of the
sublime in terms of reflection and a universaUy valid feeling.
Kant had discussed the sublime, along with the beautiful, empirically
in his Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime of
1764, but only, as I have already mentioned, in terms of amateur
social psychology. The most important empiricist account of the
sublime is that of Edmund Burke, with which Kant was familiar. 58
Burke analyzes the sublime along the same lines as the beautiful. We
merely call objects sublime; we do so if they evoke a certain idea, a
certain feeling. Here the feeling is one of "astonishment," a certain
degree of "horror," but a horror that we feel only as we contemplate.
without being in any actual danger. To this psychological account
Burke again adds a physiological explanation as to how objects evoke
this feeling. Kant quotes parts of Burke's analysis (see Ak. 277 incl. br.
ns. 48 and 50), but rejects all such empiricist accounts of the sublime
for the same reason he rejected empiricist accounts of the beautiful:
judgments about the sublime claim universal validity and necessity,
and this "lifts them out of [the reach ofl empirical psychology" (Ak.
266), which can never provide us with more than contingent propositions about what is (rather than ought to be) the case.
According to Kant, the sublime, like the beautiful, is an object of
our liking (feeling of pleasure), and a judgment about the sublime is
again an aesthetic judgment that is reflective and disinterested (we
like the sublime, too, for its own sake: Ak. 244) and claims universal
validity and necessity. But in the case of the sublime the pleasure is
indirect and negative (Ak. 245): it presupposes a displeasure (At..
260). In other words, the pleasure we take in the sublime is (an
awareness of) a (subjective) purposiveness that presupposes (an
awareness of) a (subjective) contrapurposiveness (Ak. 245) or "unpurposiveness" (Ak. 260).
Kant distinguishes two kinds of sublimity: mathematical and
dynamicaL In the mathematically sublime the vast magnitude is
58He must also have known the account given by his friend, Moses Mendelssohn:
eber das Erhabene und Naive in den schonen Wis.f(!IIschaften (On the Sublime and
Naive in the Fine Sciences), 1758; in Moses Mendelssohn, kthetische Schriften in
Auswahl (Selected Writings on Aesthetics), ed. Otto F. Best (Dannstadt: Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, 1974). Mendelssohn's account has some similarity to Burke's.
Mendelssohn did in fact read Burke, but not until after his DWn theory had been
formulated: see Lewis White Beck, Early German Philosophy, 324-26.

lxx

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

above all one of size (largeness), as in the case of "shapeless mountain
masses" (Ak. 256). (Greatness is also included, but I shall set it aside
here.) In the dynamically sublime the vast magnitude is one of might.
as in the case of the "boundless ocean heaved up" (Ak. 261).
The sublime is (subjectively) contrapurposive because our imagination tries to apprehend the object of vast magnitude (in size or might)
but fails. When we judge such an object. "this judging strains the
imagination !as it tries to exhibit the object] to its limits, whether of
expansion (mathematically) or of its might over the mind (dynamically)"
(Ak. 268). Any attempt to exhibit something vast brings in reason,
and reason (in accordance with its idea of totality) demands that
imagination exhibit the object as an absolute whole (Ak. 257), an
absolute magnitude (Ak. 268), i.e., a magnitude beyond all comparison (Ak. 250). Yet nature as appearance can never have more than
comparative magnitude (Ak. 250); in other words, imagination (which
must structure empirical intuition so that it can become nature as
appearance) can exhibit only comparative magnitude. Therefore,
imagination cannot fulfill reason's demand, and hence we feel a
displeasure, i.e., we are aware of the object's contrapurposiveness for
the imagination and hence for our cognitive power.
On the other hand, this very failure makes the sublime (subjectively)
purposive at the same time. For, "finding that every standard of
sensibility [i.e., imagination] is inadequate to the ideas of reason is
[subjectively\ purposive and hence pleasurable" (Ak. 258), because
this discovery "arouses in us the feeling of our supersensible [moral]
vocation" (Ak. 258) and of a "supersensible power" we have (viz.,
freedom as causality) for pursuing it (Ak. 250). in other words, the
feeling of our "superiority over nature" (Ak. 261), our ability to cross
(with a moral aim) "the barriers of sensibility" (Ak. 255). Hence the
sublime is judged subjectively purposive with regard to moral feeling. 59
By the same token, "when we speak of the sublime in nature we
speak improperly" (Ak. 280); properly speaking, only the mind is
sublime (Ak. 245). More specifically, what is sublime is the mind's
"attunement" in judging the sublime (Ak. 256). In speaking of the
sublime "in nature" we merely attribute this sublimity of the mind to
certain objects in nature (Ak. 247), viz., those which make us aware of
the mind's sublimity (Ak. 280). The mind, insofar as it is superior to
59Ak. 268. For "moral feeling," see above. xliv

9. JUDGMENTS ABOUT THE SUBLIME

lxxi

nature, is reason. Hence judgments about the beautiful and judgments about the sublime both refer the imagination to our "power
[Le., faculty \ of concepts" (Ak. 244). In the case of the beautiful
this power is understanding; in the case of the sublime, reason
(Ak.256).
Because in judgments about the sublime "it is not the object itself
that is judged to be purposive 60 •.. [but what is purposive is the I
relation of the cognitive powers" (Ak. 280), i.e., imagination in relation to reason and our moral vocation, the exposition (analysis) of
these judgments is at the same time their deduction (Ak. 280). For the
will (which we know a priori through our moral consciousness)
presupposes a priori this harmonious relation (Ak. 280), because the
will is our "power of [carrying out] purposes [in nature)" (Ak. 280).
Hence in the case of the sublime the link to morality is not, as it is in
the case of the beautiful, merely explanatory or interpretive. Here
this link justifies the claim of judgments about the sublime to universal validity, on the (legitimate) presupposition that man does in fact
have moral feeling (Ak. 266).

10.

The Critique of Teleological
Judgment: Background
It was generally accepted in Kant's time that natural science had to
include, or be supplemented by, judgments in terms of purposes,61
"final causes," i.e., teleological judgments; only then could natural
science make sense of the striking order found in nature, above aU in
organisms. On the other hand, natural scientists since the Renaissance had come to de-emphasize teleology, partly because it did not
seem empirical enough and partly because Aristotle's physics, which
6C-[his fact "turns the theory of the sublime into a mere appendix to our judging of the
purposiveness of nature": Ak. 246.
61For this term, as used by Kant, see above, xxv.

lxxii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

was teleological, had turned out to contain serious errors.62 They
emphasized, instead, observation and experimentation, careful measurement and the search for discoverable regularities that would
allow prediction and explanation in terms of mechanical laws governing
the sizes and shapes of particles (ultimately, atoms) and the forces of
these particles that made them move in certain ways. On the other
hand, it was generally agreed that all attempts to explain the purposelike
things in the world (above all, organisms) mechanistically had met
with little success: mechanistic causal relations were indeed found in
these things, but they were not nearly sufficient to explain such things
as wholes. In addition, it was commonly held that even if the physical
universe were entirely mechanistic, this universe as a whole still
required explanation, which therefore had to be sought beyond nature.
For both of these reasons, explanation in terms of final causes seemed
indispensable.
Kant shared all of these concerns throughout his career. Even in
his earliest works we find him stressing the importance of investigating nature in terms of mechanism but also the need to go beyond
mechanism and to teleology.63 Hence the questions arose for Kant:
How much can teleology do? Can it explain? Can it give us knowledge?
Answering these questions requires a critique that will examine the
scope and limits of our cognitive powers once again, this time in
regard to teleological judgments. As happened in the case of all the
critiques already discussed, Kant's Critique of Teleological Judgment
again leads him to a position between dogmatic rationalism and
dogmatic empiricism. Hence it will again be informative to discuss
representative examples of these positions. fi4
Leibniz and Wolff (and Baumgarten, too) used the Cartesian version of the ontological argument in an attempt to establish the existence of a God with all, and hence also the moral, perfections. This
God then served as the basis of their teleology as well: such a God
must have created the best possible world, a world of rich detail
62For some examples, see Andrew Woodfield. Teleology (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1976). 3-9.
63See, e.g., Dreams ofa Spirit-Seer (1766), Ak.U, 331. For a passage in the Critique of
Pure Reason which emphasizes the purposiveness in the world. see A 622 = B 650.
641 shall set aside here the views that expressly deny that there are in nature final
causes distinct from matter and the efficient causes governing it (see Ak. 390-93).

10. THE CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

lxxiii

harmoniously ordered to form a unity. The order of the world is one
in terms of final causes. The material world. as governed by efficient
causes, is simply that same world as it appears to us, i.e., as it is
cognized through the indistinct perception of our senses. Hence
whatever order we find in the world, including the purposelike order
in organisms, can be "explained" by saying that God must have had a
"sufficient reason" for choosing this order.
Kant has various objections against this kind of teleology. First, we
cannot explain the purposelike order in the world by reference to
causes that act intentionally unless we have insight into (i.e., theoretical cognition of) such causes (Ak. 394). But we do not have such
insight (Ak. 459-60). All the arguments that traditionally have been
offered as bases for such insight are inadequate. For his refutation of
the ontological argument in its Cartesian form and of the cosmological
argument, Kant refers us (Ak. 476) to the Critique of Pure Reason. 65
The teleological argument 66 is criticized in the third Critique as
well. For one thing, Kant says. this argument would establish, at best,
the existence of an "artistic understanding" that could provide us with
"sporadic purposes"; it cannot establish the existence of a wisdom
that would order these and all of nature in terms of a final purpose
(Ak. 441). Moreover. the argument can "establish" even that much
only subjectively, for our limited power of judgment; it cannot do so
objectively ("dogmatically"), because then it would have to prove
what it cannot prove: that mechanism cannot account for the
purposelike order in the world (Ak. 395). Such dogmatic claims have
no place in physics (Ak. 383): not only will they make reason too
slothfu167 to try to explain this order in natural terms (Ak. 382), but.
worst of all, reason moves in a vicious circle if it tries to explain this
order in the world by reference to a God whose existence it tries to
prove from this very order (Ak. 381).
Another rationalist, Baruch (Benedict) Spinoza (1632-77), construed God not as cause of the world but as the sole and simple
substance (with its two attributes, thought and extension) in which
everything in the universe (which this substance is), including organisms,
MSee A 583-620

=

B 611-48.

oDIn the Critique of Pure Reason. see A 620-30
67Critique of Pure Reason. A 689-92

=

=

B 717-20.

B 648-58.

lxxiv

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

"inheres" as accident. Hence Spinoza had no need to argue for the
existence of a God apart from the universe, although he did argue for
the necessary existence of the universe (i.e., God) by appealing to the
nature of "substance." Kant's objection to this view (Ak. 393-94), as
regards teleology, is that, though inherence in one substance does
amount to a kind of unity (order), this sort of unity is not sufficient to
account for the purposive unity found in organisms.
On the empiricist side. Kant was closer to Hume than to Locke.
John Locke (1632-1704) argued68 for the existence of a perfect God
on the ground that the self-evident existence of oneself. as a mind
capable of perception and knowledge (which cannot arise from mere
matter), presupposes such a God. For "whatsoever is first of all things
must necessarily contain in it, and actually have, at least, all the
perfections that can ever after exist. ..... Moreover, because God
made this mind, he made also the "less excellent pieces of the
universe."69 Locke compared some of these, organisms, to watches
(although he regarded them as superior to watches in certain ways),
whose organization allows them to serve a "certain end."7o
Kant agreed that one's own existence, as given in self-consciousness,
requires that something or other exists necessarily (Ak. 476), but he
argued that the step from this something or other to a supreme
being 7! presupposes the (fallacious) ontological argument. 72 Moreover, Kant added. it is inconsistent for Locke, as an empiricist, to
argue to the existence of something beyond the bounds of all
experience. 73
Hume, on the other hand, rejected all arguments for the existence
of God (as he rejected, in contrast to Locke, claims about the existence of substances in general, even in the case of objects and of
oneself as subject): existence is a matter of fact and hence is not
derivable a priori from the relations among our ideas. Hume's objec68An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Bk. IV, ch. x.

691bid.. 12.
701bid. Bk. II, ch. xxvii, 5.
711 am refraining from capitalizing this expression. For my reasons, see below, Ak. 273

br. n. 43.
72Cri(ique of Pure Reason, A 605-09

731bid.. A 854-55

=

B 882-83.

=

B 633-37.

10. THE CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

lxxv

tions against the teleological argument, which is a posteriori, are
similar to Kant's own (Ak. 438 incl. br. ns. 32 and 33, and 455 br. n.
49). As for teleology in general, Hume held that there is no basis for
distinguishing final causes from efficient causes: our idea of causal
"efficacy" is derived from the constant conjunction of two objects,
and hence it is already the idea of an efficient cause. 74 Moreover,
there is not even a (legitimate) basis for the idea of any causal efficacy
or "power": all (legitimate) ideas are derived from impressions and we
have no impression of causal efficacy and hence no (legitimate) idea
of causal efficacy.75 The idea of a necessary causal link between two
objects (and similarly for causal necessity in general) comes from my
mind's habit of expecting an object because I have come to associate
it with another object.76 On Hume's view, then, our teleological
judgments cannot give us genuine explanations of any kind.
Kant agrees that teleological judgments do not explain objectively.
He argues, however, that they do explain "for us." Although this view
is largely compatible with Hume's position, Kant seems to have
thought that Hume denied it, and he criticizes Hume accordingly.77
On the other hand, Hume would have denied that teleological judgments involve any kind of a priori principle or that they could yield
cognition.

74A Treatise of Human Nature, Bk.

1. Part III. Section xiv.

75lbid. The parenthetical insertions are my own. Hume does hold, as the other
paraphrases show, that we have some sort of idea of causal efficacy. an idea that is
based on a mere mental habit (and hence is not legitimate).
76lbid.
77Ak.

420-21. Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural ReligIOn appeared in German
translation in 1780. Evidence that Kant had read the work can be found in the Critique
of Pure Reason (see, e.g., A 745-46 = B 773-741, but in the Prolegomena of 1783 Kant
refers to the work explicitly: Ak. IV, 358. II is not clear, however, to what exlent Kant
was influenced by Hume in this area of philosophy.

11.
Kant's Account of
Teleological Judgl11ents78 :
Why They Are Needed
If our investigation of nature is to be scientific, and thus capable of
providing explanation (Le., "distinct and determinate derivation from
a principle": Ak. 412), then it must-so reason requires-consist of a
system of cognitions, not a mere "rhapsody" of them; it must (ideally)
be just as systematic as organisms are, e.g., an animal body.79
Now the a priori concepts (categories) of the understanding do
provide nature with its universal laws (Ak. 186, 187), transcendental
as well as metaphysical, and thus with a certain (minimal) systematicity
(Ak. 203',208'). As these laws are universal, there can be no natural
science without this systematicity. But the legislation of the understanding does not extend to nature's particular (as particular: Ak.
404), which must be given empirically; hence in terms of nature's
universal laws, any order in the particular, as particular, is contingent,
as far as we can see. so For example, the universal principle of cause
and effect tells us a priori that every event must have its cause, but it
leaves contingent what causes what.
Yet the principles based on the categories, and the concept of
nature we form by means of them, do imply that nature as a whole,
which includes the particular, is systematic. For they imply that all of
nature can be cognized and that, consequently, it has an order that
permits us to acquire empirical concepts (Ak. 180,359,208'). On the
other hand, those principles and the concept of nature tell us nothing
further about the systematicity of nature as a whole.
Now a demand (of reason) for a cognizable order of nature as a
7SI shall largely disregard Kant's own artificial and unhelpful division of the Critique
of Teleological Judgment into an "Analytic," a "Dialectic." and a "Methodology."
79C,itique of Pure Reason, A 832-33

=

B 860-61.

SOAk. 183, 406. In the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. of 1786. Kant
does say that "science proper" must have apodeictic certainty. and hence must be a
priori (Le.. transcendental or metaphysical): Ak. IV. 468.

lxxvi

11.

KANT'S ACCOUNT OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENTS

lxxvii

whole (including the particular) is indeed embodied in the principle
of the power of judgment (cf. Ak. 185). For this principle presupposes
that nature is lawful even in the contingent (Ak. 404, 217') and hence
is purposive subjectively, i.e., for our cognitive power: judgment's
principle presupposes that nature forms a hierarchy (Ak. 213', 185) of
genera and species and of empirical laws in general (including particular causal laws).
But this principle is still not sufficient for natural science. It is
reflective and based on an indeterminate concept (the concept of
nature's subjective purposiveness); hence it cannot itself provide
cognition, much less explanation. It is a heuristic maxim by which we
merely presuppose parsimony and simplicity in the particular in
nature. Even if we do find such order in nature and form empirical
concepts accordingly, the order in the particular (as particular) will
still b~ contingent (as far as we can see: Ak. 184), and so will be the
order of nature considered as a whole. Above all, the principle of
judgment by itself does not allow us to cognize, let alone explain, an
organism, even a mere blade of grass (Ak. 400, 409), any more than
does the concept of nature (Ak. 194, 359), or the universal laws of
nature. Rather, the principle of judgment permits and prepares us to
make judgments that go beyond that principle (Ak. 218', 193-94):
teleological judgments, which use the (determinate) concept of purposes (Ak. 193), "final causes" (Ak. 380).

12.

Teleological Judgments
about Organisms
Teleological judgments use the determinate concept of a purpose.
They are logical reflective judgments about a purposiveness that is
objective and material: objective as opposed to subjective, as is the
purposiveness in aesthetic reflective judgments as well as in the
principle of judgment itself; material as opposed to objective and
formal. as is the purposiveness of geometric objects (Ak. 362-66). In

lxxviii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

other words, teleological judgments are logically reflective judgments
about a purposiveness that is based on a purpose. 8 ! Although the
principle of judgment (of nature's subjective purposiveness) permits
and prepares us to make teleological judgments, these judgments
themselves do not use (but only presuppose) the power of judgment's
own indeterminate concept of nature's subjective purposiveness but
use only (reason's) determinate concept of a purpose (cf. Ak. 243'-44').
By the same token, the teleological power of judgment, unlike the
aesthetic power of judgment, is not a special power but only the
reflective power of judgment as such (Ak. 194). The Critique of
Judgment includes it only in order to determine what the full range of
the principle of judgment is (Ak. 244').
Natural science needs teleological judgments above all for organisms,
beings that are "organized" in the sense that the idea of the whole is
what allows us to judge and cognize aU the parts in their systematic
combination (Ak. 373), and hence to judge and cognize the "inner
possibility"82 of this being. An organism has a purposiveness that is
not only objective and material but also intrinsic. as distinguished
from the extrinsic (or "relative") purposiveness (which is also objective and material) that a thing has insofar as it is a means to something
else (Ak. 425, and cf. 366-69). Since organisms are judged as purposes
but also as products of nature, Kant calls them natural purposes (Ak.
374), as distinguished from "purposes of nature," which implies an
(intentional) final purpose for nature as a whole (Ak. 378).
These judgments. though reflective, are cognitive (Ak. 221 '). In
the first place, we cognize the organism. a material whole, in mechanical terms, as the product of its parts and their forces and powers for
combining on their own (Ak. 408); this is ordinary theoretical cognition and involves only our understanding. But since the matter in an
organism is organized (Ak. 378) and forms a whole that is a natural
purpose (Ak. 408), its form is contingent in terms of mechanism and
hence cannot be judged by understanding alone, on which mechanism is based: a concept of reason (the concept of a purpose) must
III At. 364. Sometimes Kant equates objective material purposiveness simply with
purpose Ak.366.
S2At. 408. Even though 'intrinsic' renders the German term 'inner' better in most
contexts dealing with natural purposes, it cannot be used to modify 'possibility' here,
because 'intrinsic possibility' means something else, viz., 'possibility in principle.•

12. TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENTS ABOUT ORGANISMS

lxxix

come in as well (Ak. 370). The idea of reason restricts the object to a
particular form for which "nature itself" (mechanism) contains no
basis whatsoever (Ak. 422). This particular form is the form of a
system: in an organism the parts produce one another (are cause and
effect of one another) and thereby produce a whole the idea of which
(as the idea of this whole as a purpose) could in turn, in a being
capable of acting on ideas, be the cause of such a whole (Ak. 373).
Only if we use reason's concept of a purpose can we judge and
cognize, even empirically, the form of an organism in all its causal
relations (Ak. 370), because only through elaborate observation,
as guided by this concept, can we cognize the object's objective
purposiveness (Ak. 194, and cf. 221', 192, 383,398, 400). Hence
teleological judgments are made by understanding and reason combined (Ak. 193,233',243'. and cf. 386).
Our teleological judgments about organisms, then, use a determinate concept. However, they are reflective rather than determinative,
for a determinative teleological judgment about organisms would
construe natural purposes as purposes of nature, i.e., as intentional,
and hence would be a transcendent judgment of reason (Ak. 236'). As
a consequence, these judgments do not explain objectively, but explain
only for us, subjectively,83 i.e., only according to the character of
our understanding and reason (Ak. 413, and cf. 388). Hence they give
us no insight into how organisms are produced (Ak. 418, and cf. 411);
rather, they belong merely to the description of nature (Ak. 417).
Teleological judgments are therefore mere maxims that reason imposes
on judgment (Ak. 398, and cf. 379), maxims by which reason tells
judgment how it must think about organisms (Ak. 389). Hence reason's
idea of a purpose is used regulatively by the power of judgment in its
concept of a natural purpose (Ak. 375, 237').
Although we think natural purposes by a remote analogy with
technically practical reason (Ak. 383), i.e., our causality in terms of
purposes (Ak. 375), teleological judgments of reflection must be
distinguished from judgments about practical purposiveness (Ak.
243'). For natural purposes are products of nature (Ak. 376), and we
83Ak. 379 and 413. Sometimes Kant omits the qualification 'subjective' and does
speak simply of explanation: Ak. 383, 412, 414, 236'. Similarly. instead of saying that
mechanism cannot explain organisms for us (d. Ak. 413, and cr. 389), he sometimes
says or implies that mechanism cannot account for them: Ak. 369,411.

lux

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

observe no intention as underlying them (Ak. 399); hence we must
look for the purposive causality in nature itself (Ak. 382) rather than
outside it, as we would if nature were more than remotely analogous
to art (Ak. 374). On the other hand, even thinking of organisms
by analogy (even by remote analogy) with practical reason involves
the use of the concept of an intention (Ak. 398); but although
we thus speak of nature as if the purposiveness in it were intentional (Ak. 383), we are not attributing an intention to nature
(Ak. 236'). Similarly, when Kant calls nature's causality in terms
of purposes an "intentional" technic and equates an "unintentional
technic" with mechanism (Ak. 390-91), all he means is that, although
in mechanism we do not even think an intention, in nature's causality
in terms of purposes we do. But although teleological reflective
judgments about organisms do not attribute an intention to nature,
they also do not deny that the objective purposiveness in organisms
is intentional. If these judgments either attributed or denied an
intention to nature, they would be determinative and transcendent
(Ak. 236'-37').
The only objective explanation of which we are capable is in terms
of mechanical laws (Ak. 218'), above all the laws of motion (Ak. 390).
If we are to have insight (theoretical cognition) into something, we
must gain it through mechanism (Ak. 387,410), because we ourselves
use mechanism when we produce things and hence have complete
insight only into mechanical production (Ak. 384). Now it may indeed
be possible (noncontradictory) for organisms to be produced in
terms of mechanism alone and hence possible for some understanding (a superhuman understanding) to explain organisms in terms
of mechanism alone (Ak. 408). But for us, given the (unchangeable)
character of our cognitive power, explaining organisms in terms of
mechanism alone, or even getting to know them in terms of their
inner possibility, is completely impossible and will forever remain so
(Ak. 400), even though we should nevertheless try to explain all
natural products mechanically as long as there is some probability of
success (Ak. 418).
Hence objective explanation of organisms is impossible for us on
mechanical as well as teleological principles, even though we do
judge organisms in terms of both. Hence both principles are to this
extent, i.e., as applied to organisms, mere maxims and hence merely

12. TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENTS ABOUT ORGANISMS

lxxxi

regulative. 84 We judge the connection among an organism's parts in
terms of efficient causes and then judge this same connection as causation through final causes (Ak. 373), trying to gain as much insight as we
can in terms of mechanism, while using the teleological principle heuristically in order to discover all the characteristics of the organism and
what forms it has that (as far as we can see) go beyond mechanism (Ak.
389,4(0). How it is possible to judge the same connections both in terms
of the principle of mechanism (which implies necessity) and in terms of
the principle of final causes (which implies a contingency) is the problem addressed by the Dialectic, which will be discussed in Section 15.

13.

Is Nature as a Whole
a Teleological System?
Once we judge organisms teleologically, Kant says, the concept of a
natural purpose leads us necessarily to the idea of all of nature as a
system in terms of the rule of purposes (Ak. 378-79), a "teleological
system" (Ak. 429). We then express that systematicity in the maxim:
Everything in the world is good for something or other; nothing in it is
gratuitous; !everythingj is purposive in [relation tol the whole (Ak.
379). What prompts us (Ak. 414) to think nature as a whole as such a
system is the "example" of organisms (Ak. 379), because this example
shows that nature has the ability to produce organisms (Ak. 380).
Hence the idea of nature as a system in terms of purposes is reasonable (Ak. 427) and justified (Ak. 380).
How systematic is nature as a whole? If nothing in nature were
gratuitous and everything in it were purposive in relation to the
whole, nature would have the same systematicity that an organism
has. If nature had that degree of systematicity, we could judge it, too,
84Ak. 386. 387. It is not mechanism as such that is regulative. I shall return to this
point in the context of the antinomy of teleological judgment: see Section 15.

lxxxii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

as a natural purpose and look for the purposive causality within
nature (although, as we shall see in the next section, the purpose of
the existence of nature as a whole would still have to lie outside
nature). But it is simply not true for nature as a whole, as it is for an
organism, that its parts "produce one another." It seems that all we
have (beyond the categories) for nature as a whole is the principle of
judgment, the maxim according to which nature must be thought as
purposive subjectively, i.e., purposive for our cognitive power, and
that the higher degree of systematicity we find in organisms is not
present in other parts of the universe.
Kant does in fact acknowledge that the products of nature do not
all have the same degree of (objective) purposiveness (Ak. 415). Only
organized matter must be judged by means of the concept of a
purpose (Ak. 378); mechanical laws (and what can be accounted for
in terms of them alone) do not (Ak. 414). Hence as applied to the
whole of nature the teleological maxim of judgment is "not indispensable," as it is for organisms, because "nature as a whole is not
given us as organized (in the strictest sense of organized . .. )" (Ak. 398).
What, then, entitles us to judge everything in nature as belonging
to a teleological system, even those products that do not have to be
judged in terms of purposes? (Ak. 380-81.) We are entitled to do this
because nature's ability to produce organisms already leads us to the
idea of the supersensible (Ak. 381): the mere thought of an intention,
as an intention in some cause beyond nature, is implicit in the
concept of a purpose even as that concept is used to cognize natural
purposes as natural. (This point will be spelled out somewhat more
fully below.) Moreover, we must judge nature as a whole as a system
of purposes because this maxim "may well allow us to discover many
further laws of nature that would otherwise remain hidden from us"
(Ak. 398). In other words, we must do so because reason demands
that our cognitions form, not a mere "rhapsody," but a system (see
above, Lxxvi).

14.
Moving Beyond Teleological
Cognition of Nature85
We have seen that there are two kinds of objective material purposiveness in nature: the intrinsic purposiveness of organisms, and the
extrinsic or "relative" purposiveness that something has insofar as it is
a means to something else. Now in order for us to judge some natural
thing as a means, we must judge it as serving (at least mediately, i.e.,
indirectly) an (intrinsic natural) purpose, an organized being (At.
425). Moreover, once we think of a natural product as a natural
purpose (which involves the thought of an intention), we must also
think of the natural product'S existence as (having) a purpose (At.
426). For example, we may judge that plants (a kind of organized
being) exist for the sake of herbivores, these for the sake of predators,
and predators for the sake of man (Ak. 426), so that we arrive at a
chain of purposes (Ak. 435). If this chain is not to go on forever but is
to be complete (Ak. 435), then there must be some purpose that does
not have yet another purpose as its condition, i.e., there must be a
final purpose (Ak. 434). But this final purpose cannot be in nature,
because everything in nature is always conditioned in turn (Ak. 435,
426). The last natural member in the chain of purposes Kant calls the
"ultimate" purpose (Ak. 426). That ultimate purpose of nature, Kant
argues, is man (Ak. 426-27). But man is this ultimate purpose subject
to a condition: he must "have the understanding and the will" to
pursue the final purpose (Ak. 431) enjoined by the moral law, i.e., the
highest good in the world; this highest good is man's virtue, and man's
happiness to the extent that he is virtuous (d. above, xlv). Subject to
the condition that we pursue this final purpose, nature's ultimate
85This move is the task of the "methodology" of teleological jl1dgment (Ak. 416), as
distinguished from the "elementology." Wllereas the elementology (cf. Ak. 354) provides the materials for the edifice (system) of cognitions, the methodology provides the
plan for it (Critique of Pure Reason, A 707-08 = B 735-36). Hence the methodology of
teleological judgment has the task of deciding how the science of teleology relates to
natural science and to theology. (There can be no methodology of aesthetic reflective
judgment because there can be no science of the beautiful: Ak. 354-55.)

lxxxiii

lxxxiv

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

purpose is to cooperate and make it possible for man to pursue the
final purpose, viz., through the cultivation of man's nature, the cultivation (or "culture") of skill and discipline (Ak. 431-34).
Because all purposes in nature, including this ultimate purpose,
are thought of as intentional, they are thought of as purposes pursued
by an understanding as cause of that nature. Thus our teleological
cognition of the purposes in nature leads us to the thought of an
intelligent cause of the world (a cause of the world which has
understanding) and to the thought of a final purpose. It does not
enable us to cognize this cause, nor that final purpose (Ak. 378); it
does not even allow us to inquire into the final purpose (Ak. 437).
Teleology as taken beyond the cognition of nature becomes moral
teleology (Ak. 455), teleology from a practical point of view (Ak.
460). Indeed, once we think of an intelligenL cause of all that objective purposiveness, we cannot help asking what objective basis in this
cause determines it to create those purposes, and that basis would be
the (idea of) the final purpose (Ak. 434-35). Although natural purposes prompt the idea of this final purpose (Ak. 485), only reason can
have and use this idea (Ak. 454-55). One use of this idea is as the
highest point in the chain of causes (Ak. 390). But the most important
use of the idea of the final purpose is the one already outlined in the
sketch of the Critique of Practical Reason (above, Section 3): since the
moral law (and freedom) is a matter of fact and is known practically,
the idea of the final purpose enjoined on us by the moral law is also
determinate, and hence we have practical cognition of this final
purpose and its achievability as a matter of rational faith. As a
consequence, we also have practical cognition of the two matters of
faith whose idea is in turn made determinate by the idea of the final
purpose: immortality of the soul and the existence of a God as moral
author of the world in itself, i.e., the world as substrate of objects and
of ourselves as free subjects. This "moral proof' of the existence of
God does not give us theoretical cognition, and knowledge,86 of God
as he is in himself (Ak. 456, 457). But what it does give us is fully
adequate for theology (Ak. 484-85) and for religion (Ak. 474, 48n
For it gives us practical cognition of God, as a matter of rational
faith, in terms of an idea of this supersensible being87 that the idea of
80For this terminology, see above, xl-xlii.
87Cf. above, n. 71.

14. BEYOND TELEOLOGICAL COGNITION OF NATURE

lxxxv

our own freedom (as a supersensible causality) can, by analogy (At.
484-85), make determinate: the idea of God as he relates (practically)
to the final purpose, the object of our practical reason (Ak. 457), in
other words, as a moral being who makes this final purpose achievable (Ak. 457). Teleology alone, on the other hand, could establish
only the existence of some understanding as cause of the world but
would be unable to make this concept any more determinate, especially in moral terms (Ak. 477). Hence teleology can serve only as a
propaedeutic to theology proper (Ak. 485); and to base religion on
this indeterminate concept of God would be to pervert religion (Ak.
460,481).
Yet teleology does help. For it shows that from a theoretical point
of view the idea of God has some determination, some "reality"
(more than the completely empty idea of the supersensible as mere
possible substrate of nature), viz., the attribute 'some understanding
as cause of the world.' By showing that the idea of God has some
theoretical reality, teleology supports the reality that the idea of God
has, through the analogy with our own practical reason, from a
practical point of view (Ak. 456) and thereby confirms the moral
argument (Ak. 479). (Teleology similarly confirms our practical cognition of the final purpose, by leading at least to the thought of such a
purpose.) As I have indicated before, it is the power of judgment that
mediates the transition from the completely indeterminate supersensible as substrate of nature to the morally determined supersensible,
and hence from the realm of nature of the first Critique to the realm
of freedom of the second Critique (Problem II: see above,lxiv). The
power of judgment, especially th.e aesthetic power of judgment
(Problem III: [xiv). performs this mediation by means of its indeterminate concept of nature's subjective purposiveness, as equivalent to the
indeterminate concept of the supersensible basis of this purposiveness
(Problem I: lxii-lxiil). It thereby unites the three Critiques in a system. I
shall now address these three outstanding problems.

15.
How the Critique of Judgment
Completes the Critical System
As regards aesthetic and teleological judgments (of reflection) as
analyzed by the two parts of the Critique of Judgment, two points are
beyond dispute: these judgments are indeed made, and they do make
certain claims that call for such analysis. Kant can take these two
points for granted and hence does not have to argue that the third
Critique is in fact needed. On the other hand, the justification that
Kant offers for these judgments involves assertions that he does not
expect to be accepted so readily: assertions about specific mental
powers and their interrelations, and, above all, assertions about at
least our ideas of the "supersensible." Yet all of these assertions are to
be as scientific as the subject matter permits. Hence Kant must
establish that they are indeed far from arbitrary. He does so by
showing that everything these assertions claim is required as part of a
system and cannot be removed without destroying that system (cf.
Ak. 168); and he shows that something is required as part of a system
by pointing to already familiar parts of the system and showing how
the less familiar part is required as a "mediator" between them. We
have in fact already encountered, in the summaries of the first two
Critiques (Sections 2 and 3 above), two examples of this sort of justification procedure. In the first Critique, Kant introduces the schema by
arguing that it is needed to mediate between the pure concepts of the
understanding and imagination (intuition). In the second Critique.
Kant similarly introduces the typus as needed to mediate between
reason's moral law and understanding.
In the Critique of Judgment, the same justification procedure
appears again. Kant justifies his treatment of judgment as (to some
extent) a cognitive power in its own right partly by showing how it
mediates between the other two higher cognitive powers, understanding and reason (Ak. 168, 179): in a syllogism the power of judgment
subsumes the particular under some universal (i.e., under some
principle) supplied by understanding and thereby enables reason to
make an inference from that universal to the particular (Ak. 201 '). In

lxxxvi

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT ...

Ixxxvii

the same way feeling must, according to Kant, be considered an
independent member among the three general mental powers because
it mediates between the cognitive power (in general) and the power of
desire (Ak. 178); feeling mediates between the other two mental
powers insofar as both the lower power of desire (the will as influenced by sense) and the higher (the will as determinable by its own
morallaw)88 connect a pleasure with nature: the lower connects this
pleasure with nature cognized as it already is; the higher, with nature
cognized as it (morally) ought to be (Ak. 178-79). Thus Kant establishes
a twofold systematicity: among the higher cognitive powers and among
the mental powers in general. Moreover, because understanding legislates in the domain of the concept of nature (i.e., in the domain of the
[theoretical] cognitive power) and reason legislates in the domain of
the concept of freedom (Le., in the domain of the power of desire),
Kant can enhance that twofold systematicity further if he can establish that judgment, the mediator of the higher cognitive powers,
similarly legislates to feeling, the mediator of the mental powers in
general (Ak. 168, 177-79).
Now Kant's "deduction" of judgments of taste (Section 6) established the universal subjective validity of the feeling of pleasure in
these judgments, i.e., the universal subjective validity of the state of
awareness in which we are when we are judging, without a determinate concept, nature's purposiveness for our power of judgment, for,
Kant argued, this feeling cannot be directed to anything but the
conditions of (empirical) judgment as such (harmony of imagination
and understanding), and these conditions can be presupposed to be
the same in everyone. To this extent, then, Kant has already established that the power of judgment, with its indeterminate concept of
nature's subjective purposiveness, governs, or "legislates to," feeling;
hence to this extent he has already enhanced the mentioned twofold
systematicity among the mental powers. On the other hand, such
systematicity among the mental powers, including the higher cognitive (and legislative) powers, would mean very little if there were no
similar systematicity among the "worlds" with which these powers
deal; and as Kant's account of aesthetic and teleological judgments
(of reflection) involves claims about the supersensible, Kant cannot
complete the (full) justification of that account by pointing to such
8l!Cf. above, xlv.

lxxxviii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

systemattclty unless he can show that there is such systematicity
among those "worlds" even as they are in themselves, i.e., as supersensible. Now understanding and the (theoretical) cognitive power
deal with the "world" of appearance as it is but tell us nothing
about the "world" underlying it, the supersensible "world" in itself,
except that it is logically possible. Reason and the (higher) power of
desire deal with the "world" of appearance as it ought to be and also
tell us about the supersensible conditions of making it so: supersensible freedom, immortality of the soul, and God. As Kant sees it, he
has not (fully) justified his claims about the supersensible, and the
three Critiques cannot form a system (and thus be scientific), unless
not only the mental powers but also those "worlds," especially as they
are in themselves, are shown to form a system. That is why it is
especially important for Kant to show not only that the power of
judgment, just like understanding and reason, also points to a supersensible, viz., the supersensible basis of nature's subjective purposiveness, but also that this supersensible mediates between the other
"two" supersensibles and thus unites the "three" supersensibles in
one.
The key to this mediation among the supersensibles lies in the
solution to Problem I (see above, lxii-lxiiz), concerning Kant's equating
(treating as equivalent) judgment's indeterminate concept of nature's
subjective purposiveness and the indeterminate concept of the supersensible basis of that same purposiveness. I shall now show how, in
the Dialectic of teleological judgment, this equation arises from the
antinomy of teleological judgment, how this equation (as well as the
antinomy itself) applies not only to teleological judgments but to
judgments of taste as well. and hence to the principle of judgment
as such.
As Kant presents the antinomy of teleological judgment initially. it
is a (seeming) conflict between these two maxims: the thesis that all
production of material things and their forms must be judged possible
in terms of merely mechanical laws, and the antithesis that some
products of material nature cannot be judged possible in terms of
merely mechanical laws but that judging them requires a quite different causal law, that of final causes (Ak. 387). It then seems as if this
"conflict," which (as becomes clear from the way Kant addresses it
throughout the remainder of the Dialectic) actually turns out to be a
conflict between judging the same object in terms of both a necessary

IS.

HOW THE CRITIQVE OF JUDGMENT ...

lxxxix

mechanism and a contingent purposiveness,89 is resolved by Kant's
pointing out that the two principles are indeed only maxims, i.e., only
regulative: they regulate our judgments of reflection and do not
assert, for determinative judgment, that all objects are, or that they
are not, possible on mechanism alone (Ak. 387-89). This has led a
number of commentators to suppose that Kant solves the antinomy
by construing both mechanism and the principle of final causes as
regulative principles. 9o But, first, Kant is by no means revoking the
89Kant seems to have thought that the conflict must be stated in a form that at least
looks propositional. In the third antinomy of the first Critique (cf. also the second and
fourth antinomies) he states the conflict between causal necessity and freedom in terms
of propositions that are interestingly similar to the ones under consideration here. See
A 444-45 = B 472-73.
9()For a Jist of such commentators and their works. along with the specific references,
see John D. McFarland, Kant's Concept oj Teleology (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 1970), the n. on 12G-21. More recently, this view has been defended by
Robert E. Butts in his Kant and the Double Government Methodology (Dordrecht:
D. Reidel, 1984),272-73. As Butts puts it. "regulative principles.... [u[nlike ... declarative
sentences, ... cannot logically oppose one another...... "They [can conflict[ only ... in
the sense that it would be irrational to adopt both for the same purpose," i.e., in the
same '·context." (Ibid.. 262, as applied to 272.) It is true that in the strict sense of
'contradiction' two principles can contradict each other only if they are declarative. It
is also true that Kant must have this strict sense of ;contradiction' in mind when he says
that the thesis and antithesis contradict each other only if taken as determinative but
not if taken as regulative (§ 70, Ak. 387) Moreover, he presumably means such a
contradiction again when. near the end of § 71 (Ak. 389), he says. roughly, that any
semblance of an "antinomy" arises only when we forget that the two principles are only
maxims. That Kant's use of the term 'antinomy' in this remark must be a slip is clear
not only from what he does in the (sizable) remainder of the Dialectic, but also from
the fact that the remark is still part of the "preliminary" to the solution of the antinomy.
Now the antinomy itself. i.e., the conflict between judging the same object in terms of
both a necessary mechanism and a contingent purposiveness. does indeed not involve a
contradiction in that strict sense; if it did, it could not be solved. What it does involve,
however, as I am about to show, is the threat of a contradiction, even if not one
involving declarative sentences, between our judging both mechanisticaUy and teleologically in the very same Hcontext." Judging in contradictory terms would indeed be
"irrational," but in so serious a sense of this term that neither Kant nor we could accept
such "irrationality". our "judgments" would cancel each other; i.e., we would in fact
not be judging at all. Hence we must reject. as McFarland does, the kind of interpretation put forward by Butts and by the commentators McFarland lists, according to
which Kant "solves" the antinomy of teleological judgment by making both mechanism
and the teleological principle regulative. As for McFarland's own interpretation of how
Kant ;'solves" the antinomy of teleological judgment, it also seems to me untenable, as
[ shall explain below: xcix-c.

XC

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

central doctrine of the first Critique, according to which the universal laws of nature-in particular, the principle of necessary efficient
(mechanical) causality-are legislated to nature by our understanding
and hence are constitutive and determinative, not regulative. 91 Rather,
the maxims involving mechanism that are here said to be regulative
concern merely the sUfficiency or insufficiency of mechanism for
judging objects in general (including organisms). Second, the fact that
the section that comes after the presentation of the antinomy offers a
"preliminary" to its solution (Ak. 388) makes it clear that the solution
has not yet been given. 92 Above all, third, the conflict between a
necessary mechanism and a contingent teleological principle, as I
shall now explain, cannot be resolved by turning the two into maxims,
and Kant will in fact come up with a quite different93 and rather
sophisticated solution.
When we judge an object (an organism) as a natural purpose, we
are judging it in terms of both mechanism and final causes: in terms
of mechanism insofar as the object is a product of nature, in terms of
final causes insofar as it is a purpose. Now mechanism involves the
necessity implicit in the principle of causality which is based on the
categories; on the other hand, we cannot think of an object as a
purpose without thinking of it as contingent, viz.• contingent in terms
of the universal natural laws (Ak. 398). Hence it seems that we are
judging as both necessary and contingent "one and the same product"
(Ak. 413), indeed, even the same causal connections within that
product (Ak. 373. and cf. 372-73). Hence we are contradicting ourselves
(Ak. 396) unless we can reconcile the two principles (Ak. 414). Only
if we reconcile the two principles can we actually judge an object in
terms of both of them, i.e., only then is the concept of a natural
purpose a possible concept (Ak. 4(5) rather than a contradiction in
terms. The fact that we are using these principles as mere maxims, as
91 Butts argues that actually Kant does, even in the first Critique. revoke that doctrine
and construe the categories as regulative. I shall offer some brief comments on this
view below, n. 107.

92The single piece of counterevidence is a remark at the end of § 71 (Ak. 389) which I
just mentioned in n. 90. All the remainder of the evidence, including the title of that
section and everything else Kant does in the rest of the Dialectic, seems to me to
require that we discount this one remark rather than all that other evidence.
93The solution differs both from the one jllSt rejected and from the one suggested by
McFarland: see below, xcix-c.

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT. . .

XCI

merely regulative, does not resolve this conflict at all: if the concepts
that the two maxims use contradict each other, then we have not
even a concept of a natural purpose; for the concepts and maxims
will cancel each other, so that we shall not be "judging" at all. This is
precisely why Kant himself points out that in order for the "conflict"
between the two principles to be merely a seeming conflict we must
have assurance that the two principles can be reconciled objectively
too.94 (It is mechanism and the causality in terms of purposes that
must be reconcilable objectively; the determinative versions of the
thesis and antithesis as Kant states them initially are not reconciled
by Kant's solution of the antinomy and could not be reconciled by
anything whatsoever, as Kant himself points out at Ak. 387.)
Kant solves the antinomy between the necessary mechanism and
the contingent teleological principle as he solves all his antinomies:
by invoking the supersensible (d. Ak. 344-46). In the present case the
supersensible is introduced as follows. Our understanding, Kant argues
(see Section 2 above), has the peculiarity of being discursive, conceptual; and all concepts abstract (to some extent) from the particular:
hence our understanding does not determine (legislate) the particular
but determines only the universal, leaving the particular contingent (Ak.
406). As for our a priori intuitions, they too cannot determine all the
particular that understanding leaves contingent. If they could, then
the form (or "unity") of mere space (our a priori intuition which
applies to all appearances in nature outside us) would be able, in
conjunction with the categories, to determine completely and thus
constitute (and in that sense give rise to) an organism; yet clearly the
form of space is not sufficient for this (Ak. 409).95 On the other hand,
the very awareness that our human understanding has the peculiarity
of determining the universal while leaving the particular contingent
94Ak. 413. In other words, it must be at least possible that the "necessity" is not in fact
a necessity or that the "contingency" is not in fact a contingency. Kant says 'objectively,'
rather than 'determinatively,' because for the same object or the same causal connections to be determilled as both necessary and contingent would imply that they in fact
are both necessary and contingent, which would indeed be contradictory and hence
WQuid not be possible.
95As Kant puts it, space with its unity "is not a basis Iresponsible I for the reality of
products but is only their formal condition.... " The determination being denied here
would not involve the concept of a purpose; this determination would be theoretical
rather than practical.

XCll

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

implies the idea of a possible different understanding (Ak. 405), viz.,
an understanding that is not discursive (i.e., does not omit the particular in its legislation) but is intuitive (Ak. 406). Such an understanding
would legislate a "synthetic" universal, i.e., a universal in the sense of
a whole that includes determination of the particular in that whole
(Ak. 407). An intuitive understanding would thus be an understanding
that simply determines. and hence would be an understanding "in the
most general sense" (Ak. 406); for, while any understanding requires
intuition (to supply the particular needed for cognition: Ak. 406), we
are not entitled to assume that any understanding must have, as ours
does, an intuition which is separate from it and through which the
particular is merely given (empirically) rather than legislated along
with the universal (Ak. 402-03).
Such an understanding's intuition would thus not be a mere
receptivity (which is passive), and hence not a sensibility as our
intuition is, but would be an intellectual intuition, a complete
spontaneity (i.e., it would be completely active): it would determine
objects completely. It would not require for this determination (and
cognition) a harmony between itself and some other, separate cognitive power (an imagination dealing with a passive intuition), but
would determine objects in terms of the harmony within this understanding itself.
Moreover, because an intuitive understanding would Dot require
that the particular be supplied from elsewhere but would itself supply
the particular along with the universal, it would constitute its objects
as complete, as things in themselves, not as mere appearances. It
would constitute these objects through its theoretical legislation rather
than "produce" (or "create") them, for it would not bring objects
about practically and hence as contingent, i.e., conditioned by the
concept of a purpose (i.e., by an intention) (Ak. 407), but would bring
them about without an idea as producing cause (Ak. 408): nature in
itself would simply be the intellectual (supersensible) intuition of this
intuitive understanding, just as our world of experience simply is the
experience that consists of our empirical intuition as structured in
harmony with our categories. By the same token, such a supersensible
understanding with its supersensible intuitions cannot be called a
God; rather, the idea of it is utterly indeterminate, negative, the mere
idea of an understanding that "is not discursive" (Ak. 406).
With this mere idea of an "intuitive understanding," Kant can now

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT...

xciii

solve the antinomy of teleological judgment. As an intuitive understanding would necessitate even the particular, the mere idea of such
an understanding permits us to think of the "contingency" of the
particular as being only a seeming contingency, a "contingency for"
our understanding with its peculiarity, but as in fact being a necessity.
A merely seeming contingency that is in fact a necessity does not
conflict with the necessity implicit in mechanism. Hence "objectively
too" it is at least possible to reconcile the mechanistic principle with
the teleological (Ak. 413), for it is at least possible that the causal
connections that we have to judge in terms of purposes and hence as
contingent are in fact legislated theoretically and are therefore
necessary. The laws covering those necessary but yet particular causal
connections would then either have the same basis as mechanism
(viz., the intellectual intuition of that intuitive understanding) or
would perhaps even be identical with the mechanism familiar to
us-identical in the sense of forming part, along with the mechanism
familiar to us, of some broader, ideal mechanism (Ak. 390), in which
case even organisms would be possible on this (ideal) mechanism
alone. Since we human beings do not have insight into the basis of the
mechanism familiar to us (Ak. 395, 398)-that basis might be such a
supersensible intuition, or it might not-we cannot tell if it forms part
of such an ideal mechanism, and hence we are incapable of establishing
whether organisms (can or) cannot come about mechanically (Ak.
395); a higher understanding, on the other hand, might be able to
account for organisms in mechanistic terms (Ak. 406,418).
Now although this antinomy is called the antinomy of "teleological"
judgment, both it and its solution (as just sketched) actually apply to
reflection in general. Kant does indeed discuss the antinomy mainly
by reference to organisms, i.e., natural purposes, and hence by reference to objective purposiveness, i.e., purposiveness with a purpose.
Yet the antinomy of "teleological" judgment and its solution apply
just as much to the subjective purposiveness of nature which is claimed
in the principle of reflective judgment itself, for this purposiveness too
is clearly contingent in terms of mechanism and yet is a purposiveness
of nature and as such is subject to nature's necessity. Hence it too can
be thought without contradiction only if we think of the "contingency"
it implies as in fact being a necessity legislated by an intuitive understanding with its intellectual intuition. Indeed, when Kant introduces
the antinomy of teleological judgment, the purposiveness he first

XCIV

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

mentions is the subjective purposiveness of nature (Ak. 386). Similarly,
although Kant does of course apply the solution of this antinomy to
organisms and the contingency we find in them, he does not confine it
to organisms; rather, he clearly applies it (Ak. 406, 407) to all the contingency in all the particular in nature (even though nature as a whole
does not have the same high degree of systematicity that organisms
have and hence is not itself a natural purpose: cf. Section 13 above):
"I S Jince universal natural laws have their basis in our understanding, ...
the particular empirical laws must ... be viewed in terms of such a
unity as Ithey would have J if they too had been given by an understanding (even though not ours) so as to assist our cognitive powers ... "
(Ak. 180,181, and cf. 184). Moreover, Kant says (Ak. 345) that apart
from the antinomies of the first and second Critiques, there is, in the
Critique of Judgment, "an" (i.e., one) antinomy. In other words, he
implies that the antinomy of aesthetic judgment and the antinomy of
teleological judgment are merel)' two manifestations of the same
antinomy.96
Furthermore, since the antinomy of teleological judgment, along
with its solution, applies not only to objective but also to subjective
purposiveness of nature, it clearly applies, a fortiori, to nature's
subjective purposiveness as judged aesthetically, i.e., to nature's
"purposiveness without a purpose."97 For, this purposiveness too
implies a contingency, while yet, as a purposiveness of nature, it also
implies necessity; hence it too can be thought without contradiction
only if we have recourse to the idea of a supersensible intuition as
necessitating the particular. Indeed, when Kant implies that the
antinomy of aesthetic judgment and the antinomy of teleological
judgment are merely manifestations of one antinomy, he calls that
one antinomy an antinomy of reason concerning aesthetic judgment
(Ak.345).
We are now ready to solve Problem I (see above, lxii-lxii,), which
concerns the mysterious switch that Kant, in solving the antinomy of
aesthetic judgment, makes from the concept of nature's subjective
96The four antinomies of the first Critique are similarly referred to collectively as 'the
antinomy' of pure reason: A 405 = B 432. See also the headings of § 69 (Ak. 385) and
§ 70 (Ak. 386), which refer to the antinomy of teleological judgment simply as 'antinomy
of judgment.'
97See also above, n. 45.

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT. . .

xcv

purposiveness to the concept of the supersensible basis of that same
purposiveness. Nature's subjective purposiveness is the indeterminate
form (or "lawfulness," i.e., regularity or order: see [VI) that nature has
in the particular; and the indeterminate concept of this purposiveness
is the indeterminate concept of that form of the particular. But this
concept is contradictory (because of the antinomy) unless we think of
this purposive form as necessitated (a priori) by an intellectual intuition.
Moreover, just as our a priori concepts and intuitions are the forms
that we give to all objects of appearance, so the purposive form that
would be necessitated by this intellectual intuition would simply be
that intuition. (As this form already includes all the particular. the
particular would not be attributable to any "matter," whereas in our
intuition the particular is found in the matter that is given to us in
sensation.) Hence, according Lo our indeterminate concept of this
supersensible intuition, the world in itself would be the completely
determinate form which that intellectual intuition is.98 (The intuitive
understanding, which is merely the power of legislating the form that
this intuition is, would not itself be but would only "have" that form,
just as our understanding has, rather than is, the fonn consisting of all
the categories taken together.) Because, then, in order to think of
nature's subjective purposiveness without contradicting ourselves we
must think of this form as being identical with the form that such
an intellectual intuition would be, and because this intellectual intuition is thought of as the supersensible basis of nature's subjective
purposiveness, we can see how the concept of nature's subjective
purposiveness is indeed equivalent to the concept of the supersensible basis of that same purposiveness: although the two concepts are
not synonymous, because the one refers to the purposiveness and the
other to the "basis" of that purposiveness, the "two" forms to
which the two concepts refer "are" strictly identical. Now this equiva93Actually, the purposive form of nature's particular might be only part of the form
that the intellectual intuition is, the intuitive understanding might through the same
intuition legislate, in addition, in terms of tlte mechanism familiar to us, or in terms of
laws pertaining to both the purposive and the mechanistic fonns in nature, in nature
outside and within us, and perhaps pertaining to our cognitive powers themselves
which are responsible (in part) for nature's appearing to us as it does. But even if the
purposive form of nature's particular were only part of the form that the intellectual
intuition is, it would still be necessitated by, and hence would still be based on and (in
that part) be, that intellectual intuition.

XCVI

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

lence between the two concepts would already suffice to give some
justification to Kant's switch from the one concept to the other;
but the full justification lies in the fact that the concept of nature's subjectively purposive form is contradictory unless the switch
is made. 99 Thus Kant's solution of the antinomy of aesthetic judgment includes the solution of the antinomy of teleological judgment. Accordingly, in order for us to judge. without contradiction,
an object as beautiful, this judgment must be taken to imply (noncognitively) that the object has the kind of form that only a supersensible understanding could have given it through its intellectual
intuition.
Because the concept of nature's subjective purposiveness is indeterminate, it can be equated with the concept of the supersensible
basis of that purposiveness only if the latter concept is indeterminate
as well. Now in certain ways the concept that we human beings can
form of such an intellectual intuition must indeed be indeterminate,IOO
despite the fact that we think of this intuition as one that would
determine objects "completely." For we have no cognition of what all
these determinations in their completeness are. (The concept of an
intuitive understanding with its intellectual intuition is indeterminate
in other ways as well: e.g., it tells us nothing whatsoever about a
"being" that might "have" that understanding.) Hence our concept of
the form that such an intellectual intuition would be and that such an
intuitive understanding would have is indeed indeterminate.1 01
99We may well ask why Kant does not explain this equation in the Critique of
Aesthetic Judgment, but simply takes it for granted when he mysteriously switches
from the indeterminate concept of nature's subjective purposiveness to the indeterminate concept of the supersensible basis of that purposiveness. If he considered the
explanation too long, he could at least have referred us to the antinomy of teleological
judgment. Such a referral would not have made Kant's aesthetics dependent on his
teleology; but perhaps it would somehow have offended against his idea of what the
proper structure of the CritIque of Judgment should be.
looEven if not in all its details, as I shall explain in a moment.
101 As we have already seen in the context of Problem II (/xiv), for which I am about to
offer a solution, Kant considers the supersensible basis of nature's subjective purposiveness
to be the same supersensible as the supersensible substrate of both objects and subjects
and the supersensible that "the concept of freedom contains practically"; this "same"
supersensible is referred to in all these ways in the context of the solution to the
antinomy of aesthetic judgment. Sometimes, however, still in that same context, Kant
refers to it simply as the supersensible "within us" (see esp. Ak. 341). Now Kant does

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT. . .

xcvii

On the other hand, even though this concept is indeterminate
as a whole (as one concept), some details (specific determinations)
in it must be determinate. For most of the reasoning just used
concerning nature's subjective purposiveness applies to nature's objective purposiveness as well. For we saw that both the antinomy of
teleological judgment and its solution apply not only to subjective
but also to objective purposiveness in nature (the purposiveness
found in natural purposes, organisms). Therefore, if the concept of
nature's objective purposiveness is not to be contradictory, then this
purposiveness also must be thought of as based on an intellectual
intuition, and hence the concept of this purposiveness must likewise
be equated with the concept of an intellectual intuition as basis
of that purposiveness. And since objective purposiveness, despite
presupposing judgment's general and indeterminate concept of nature's
subjective purposiveness, does also involve determinate concepts of
purposes, such concepts of determinate purposes must be included as
details in the otherwise indeterminate concept of that intellectual
intuition.
The solution just offered for Problem I can now be used to solve
Problem II (see above, /xiv): how can the concept of the supersensible
basis of nature's subjective purposiveness make determinable the
concept of the supersensible that is contained practically in the idea
of freedom, and thus help make the supersensible cognizable practically.
even though the concept of the supersensible as basis of nature's
subjective purposiveness is indeterminate, indeed, "intrinsically indeterminable and inadequate for cognition" (Ak. 340), even practical
cognition (Ale. 176)1 How can this supersensible mediate between
the other "two" so that the "three" supersensibles tum out to be one
and the same?
indeed identify this supersensible also with the "others." Does he emphasize "within us"
because this is where "the" supersensible is somehow "closest" to us? Or does he do so
because he considers the indeterminate harmony between imagination and understanding as such to be itself based on, and identical with, parts of that same intellectual
intuition? If the form in a beautiful object of nature must be thought of as identical
both with the form of that harmony and with the form that an intellectual intuition
would be, it would indeed follow (even if our cognitive powers were not based on an
intuitive understanding'S intellectual intuition) that the form of the harmony between
our imagination and understanding as such is (not in origin, but simply as that form)
supersensible as well (despite the fact that these powers themselves are not supersensible any more than the beautiful object is).

xcviii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

The key to this mediation role of the concept of the supersensible
basis of nature's subjective purposiveness lies in the following three
points: (1) by the solution of Problem I, this concept is equivalent to
the concept of nature's subjective purposiveness; (2) the concept of
nature's subjective purposiveness belongs to the power of judgment;
and (3) the power of judgment is a function of understanding. From
these three points it follows that our understanding must be able to
think not only the concept of nature's subjective purposiveness but
also the concept of the supersensible basis of that purposiveness.
Indeed, since even the concept of nature's objective purposiveness
must be thought as equivalent to (at least to certain details in) such a
supersensible basis, our understanding must be able to think the
concept of such a basis whenever it exercises its function of judging
either kind of purposiveness in nature. Yet the concept of the supersensible basis we have been discussing, i.e., the concept of an intuitive understanding with its intellectual intuition, is a concept that
only reason can think. For the very fact that our own understanding is
not intuitive but discursive keeps it from being able to conceive of an
intuitive understanding, i.e., an understanding that could legislate not
merely the universal but the particular as well; in other words, our
discursive understanding is incapable of conceiving of an understanding that legislates a "synthetic" universal, a whole that makes possible
the character and combination of the parts (rather than the other way
round, viz., a whole that is made possible by the character and
combination of the parts, and hence made possible mechanically, as
our understanding must conceive of wholes). (Ak. 407.) The best that
OUT understanding can do in this regard is to conceive of the idea of a
whole as making possible the character and combination of the parts
(and hence the whole itself); in other words, the best our understanding can do is to conceive of this whole as produced, i.e., a purpose
brought about by means of an intention, i.e., by means of an idea of
the purpose (Ak. 407-08). Hence our understanding, because of its
own peculiarity, can indeed think of another understanding as causing
the particular (and its form), i.e., as determining it practically; but it
cannot think of another understanding as legislating the particular,
i.e., as determining it theoretically. Hence our understanding must
think of the (subjectively or objectively) purposive form of the particular
in nature by analogy with our own technically practical ability, Le.,

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT. . .

xcix

our ability to produce objects through art l02 (Ak. 397) by means
of understanding and reason. Thus our understanding too thinks,
in judgment's concept of the (subjective or objective) purposiveness that nature has in its particular, a supersensible understanding; but it thinks this understanding as an intelligent cause of the
world in terms of purposes. This (Le., our understanding's) concept
of the supersensible basis of nature's purposiveness is still indeterminate 103 (and inadequate for cognition); yet, through the analogy
with our technically practical ability, this concept is somewhat more
determinate (has more content) than the concept of the intuitive
understanding.
Because what enables our understanding to give some content
(determination) to the concept of the supersensible basis of nature's
(subjective or ubjective) purpusiveness is the analogy with our own
technically practical ability, our understanding can go on to make
further use of the same analogy. It can use this analogy to make some
sense of the relation between mechanism and causation in terms of
purposes, viz., by subordinating mechanism to that causality (Ak.
379, 422): once our understanding has conceived of the world with
all its purposiveness as caused by some intelligence, it can go on
to conceive of this intelligent cause as using mechanism, just as
we human beings do, as the means to the purposes it pursues
(Ak. 414, 390), "as an instrument, as it were" (Ak. 422). Moreover, our
understanding can do this in different ways: in terms of occasionalism, in terms of the theory of preestablished harmony, and so on
(Ak. 422-24).
It is important to realize, however, that in thus subordinating the
principle of mechanism to the principle of (subjective or objective)
purposiveness, understanding does not itself resolve the antinomy
between mechanistic necessity and the contingency in the purposive
form of the particular. When Kant says that no conflict arises if our
power of judgment (and hence our understanding) uses both the
mechanistic and the teleological principles because these two ways of
explaining do not contradict each other (Ak. 409), he takes as under1021n the broad sense of this term, which includes craft.
103E.g., the concept in no way implies that the "intelligent cause" has the properties,
the moral properties, that would qualify it as a "God."

e~p.

C

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

stood the addition: subject to the solution of the antinomy of teleological judgment by which the "contingency" in the form of the
particular is thought of as merely a seeming contingency; Kant is not
saying that merely subordinating the principle of mechanism to the
principle of purposiveness would itself remove the conflict between
the two, as plainly it would not. Hence this subordination cannot
possibly be, as McFarland takes it to be, Kant's solution to the
antinomy of teleological judgment.l 04 OUf understanding and power
of judgment can without contradiction use the two principles (even in
the very same contexts), not because the two principles can be subordinated to each other, nor because they are regulative (see above,
L'Cxxviii-xc), but because our understanding and power of judgment
are aware that reason has solved the antinomy by means of the idea
of an intuitive understanding with its intellectual intuition. Understanding and judgment themselves are incapable of thinking of the
order in nature's particular, which to them seems purposive, as in fact
involving necessity; hence as far as they are concerned the particular
laws covering that order do not have genuine (i.e., apodeictic) necessity,
but are only "rules" (Ak. 391,360). Such rules, though "lawful" (Ak.
359), are still contingent; the only necessity they can involve would be
a practical necessity (cf. Ak. 172,450).1 05
Now, we saw a moment ago that our understanding's concept of an
intelligent cause of the world is somewhat more determinate than the
concept of an intuitive understanding as legislator of the purposive
form of nature. But it is also somewhat more determinate than the
concept of the supersensible as it was left by the Critique of Pure
Reason, viz., the concept of the supersensible as mere "basis" (substrate)
of nature; for this latter concept says nothing whatsoever as to what
this supersensible substrate includes. Does it include only a nature in
itself, or also an "intelligence" (understanding) as "cause" of that
I04Kant:S- Concept of Teleology, 127-29.
105 And they can involve even a practical "necessity" only after the supersensible
causality has been determined further as a moral cause that acts in terms of the moral
law (which is a necessary law), Such a supersensible moral cause, a God, would have a
"holy" will, a will incapable of acting on maxims that conflict with the moral law
(Critique of Practical Reason. Ak. Y, 32). Perhaps this is the necessity Kant has in mind
when, occasionally (e.g., at Ak. 183), he speaks of particular laws as "necessary"
even as a result of causatlon rather than theoretical legislation.

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT. . .

ci

nature in itself in terms of "purposes"? It is true that even the addition
of these further predicates leaves the concept of the supersensible
indeterminate: How much understanding should we conceive that
cause of nature in itself as having? How great should we conceive its
might to be (to affect that nature in itself)? Should we even conceive
of this understanding as a single being rather than several? (Ak. 480.)
Yet those further predicates do suffice to make that completely
indeterminate concept of the "supersensible" determinable: the concept can now be determined practically. morally, by reason. For while
we could not intelligibly have described a mere (utterly indeterminate)
"supersensible basis of nature" in moral terms, viz., as being a "nature
in itself created, in terms of the final purpose, by a God having all the
divine perfections," we certainly can intelligibly describe in such
terms a nature in itself created, as an intentional purpose, by an
intelligent cause. In other words, we can now think of this cause as
moral author of the world by reference to the final purpose, and
hence we can also think of nature as being forced by this moral
author to cooperate with our attempt to achieve the final purpose.
The moral argument for the existence of God was indeed sufficient to
determine the concept of the supersensible in this way; but it is
judgment's concept, as thought by reason but then adapted by
understanding, of the supersensible basis of nature's purposive order
which made that determination possible and thus prepared us for that
moral argument.
The solution to Problem II is therefore this. The antinomy of
teleological judgment (which applies to aesthetic judgment and its
antinomy as well I gives rise, in its solution, to the concept of the
supersensible basis of nature's (subjective or objective) purposiveness.
The concept of the supersensible basis of nature's purposiveness is
the concept of an intuitive understanding with its intellectual intuition;
but our understanding, unable to think the concept of an intuitive
understanding, instead thinks of the supersensible basis of nature's
purposiveness as an intelligent cause of the world in terms of purposes.
The concept of an intelligent cause of the world in terms of purposes
makes determinable the concept of the supersensible as mere basis of
nature (as this latter concept arises from the antinomies of the Critique
of Pure Reason ), and thus "mediates" between this latter concept and
the concept of the supersensible which is determined practically and

ell

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

contained in the idea of freedom (this concept arises from the antinomy of the Critique of Practical Reason). Through this mediation
jUdgment's concept of the supersensible basis of nature's (subjective
as well as objective) purposiveness (as equivalent to the concept of
that purposiveness itself) unites the "three" supersensibles in one. For
the substrate of nature was merely made determinate enough to be
nature in itself as the "purpose" brought about by an intelligent cause,
and then to be nature in itself as caused by a moral author, a God.
Hence, in this way, the Critique of Judgment mediates between the
other two Critiques and thus unites the three Critiques in the critical
system.
We are now in a position to solve Problem III (see above,lxiv). This
problem was Kant's assertion that what makes the concept of nature's
purposiveness "suitable" for its mediation role is "the spontaneity in
the play of the cognitive powers, whose harmony with each other
contains the basis of Ithe 1 pleasure [that we feel in judging the
beautiful," (Ak. 197). Kant also claims, similarly, that in the Critique
of Judgment the "essential" part is the Critique of Aesthetic Judgment
(Ak. 193). He makes this claim because, whereas teleological judgments go beyond the power of judgment and also bring in reason with
its determinate concepts of purposes, judgments of taste are based
solely on reflection and hence solely on the power of judgment (Ak.
193-94). By the same token, Kant says that only the power of aesthetic judgment is a "special" power (Ak. 194); this is why, when Kant
says that apart from the antinomies of the first and second Critiques
there is, in the Critique of Judgment. "an" (i.e., one) antinomy, he
calls that one antinomy (as I have already indicated) an antinomy of
reason "for the feeling of pleasure and displeasure," an antinomy
"concerning the aesthetic use of judgment" (Ak. 345).
None of these claims imply that teleological judgment plays no role
in the mediation. Not only are teleological judgments reflective and
hence based, as judgments of taste are, on judgment's indeterminate
concept of nature's subjective purposiveness, but-as we have seeneven the determinate concept used in a teleological judgment, viz.,
the concept of objective natural purposiveness (in natural purposes)
must, if it is not to be contradictory, be equated with the concept of
the supersensible basis of this purposiveness; and this latter concept
can then be adapted by our understanding, as discussed above, and
thus play its mediation role. Why, then, does the fact that teleological

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT. . .

ciii

judgments bring in reason with its determinate concepts of purposes
make them less "suitable" for the mediation than judgments of taste
are?
First of all, although this mediation is a mediation among the
"supersensibles," it is just as much-as we saw (lxxxvi-Ixxxvil)-a mediation among our mental powers. including the higher cognitive (and
legislative) powers. The mediation in its entirety is a mediation among
these powers and among the "worlds" of appearance with which these
powers deal along with the supersensible substrates of these "worlds."
Specifically, the power of judgment is to mediate between the realm
of nature and the realm of freedom. But judgment's concept of
nature's subjective purposiveness is especially "suitable" for mediating between these two realms only if no objective purposiveness
(purposiveness with a purpose) has been based on it, i.e., only if the
subjective purposiveness is merely subjective, a purposiveness without
a purpose, and hence a purposiveness as judged aesthetically. For
only such purposiveness without a purpose is "analogous" to or
"symbolic" of the supersensible fonn that the moral law enjoins us to
impose on nature (see Ak. 353,356, and above, xliv). What makes this
purposiveness analogous to supersensible (moral) form is that, since it
involves no determinate concept of a natural purpose with its objective (and material: see !xxvii) purposiveness, it is a purely formal and
free purposiveness. It is formal, as the moral law is formal; it is free,
as our will is free to obey or disobey the moral law (cf. Ak. 354).
Moreover, the "play" in which our cognitive powers are when we
judge subjective purposiveness aesthetically is "spontaneous"; i.e.,
this play is "active" inasmuch as it sustains itself (Ak. 313, 222, and cf.
220), and in this respect it is again similar to our will's freedom, which
is active by being a special causality.
This same special mediation role of aesthetic reflective judgment
manifests itself in our consciousness. In judgments of taste we are
conscious nonconceptually (i.e., without a [determinate I concept) of
the free harmonious play of imagination and understanding; this
nonconceptual consciousness is the feeling of pleasure we have in a
judgment of taste. Because of the link, just described, between this
play and the moral law as well as our freedom, our nonconceptual
consciousness of this play is linked to moral feeling (see xliv), i.e.,
respect for the moral law together with our awareness that we have
the freedom we need in order to carry it out. This is why the

elV

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

spontaneity in the play of the cognitive powers, as accompanied by
our awareness of it, can lead to moral feeling and thus can "promote"
the mind's "receptivity" for moral feeling (Ak. 197.356).
In conclusion, then, it is indeed the power of judgment, but
above all the aesthetic power of judgment, i.e., the power of judgment as unaided by reason, that is responsible for the mediation
between the "world" of the first Critique and the "world" of the
second Critique by which the three Critiques come to form a
system.
In this introduction. on the whole, I have had to limit myself to an
explanation of the Critique of Judgment and to leave aside criticism.
I must now make an exception and raise one problem beyond the
three already discussed. This is a problem for which I can see
no solution that does not create other serious trouble for Kant's
doctrines. I must raise the problem because it concerns the key
concept of the Critique of Judgment. viz., the concept of nature's
(subjective or objective) purposiveness, as we must think this concept in accordance with the solution to the antinomy of teleological
judgment.
There is, I am afraid, a conflict between the antinomy of teleological judgment and the third antinomy of the Critique of Pure
Reason; the two give rise. as it were, to an "antinomy between
antinomies."
In order for the antinomy of teleological judgment to work, i.e .. to
be an antinomy at all, the necessity in nature must be so strict as to
contradict the contingency in the form of nature's particular unless
we remove the contingency by solving the antinomy. For if the
necessity were less strict than that. then we would not need, as
solution of the antinomy, the idea of an intuitive understanding that
legislates the form of the particular and thus makes it. too, strictly
necessary; rather, we could then interpret the form of the particular
(as our mere understanding with its "peculiarity" is forced to do: see
xcviii-xcix) in practical terms, and hence as having only the lawfulness
of a "rule" that is still contingent (c).
Now the conflict that Kant presents in the third antinomy of the
Critique of Pure Reason is a very similar conflict, viz., a conflict
between the necessity in nature and our freedom (which again implies
contingency in terms of natural laws) to affect nature in alternative
ways. Yet Kant does not solve that antinomy as he solves the ant in-

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT. . .

cv

amy of teleological judgment: he does not say that we must think of
our practical freedom as being only a seeming freedom and as in fact
being a theoretical necessity due to the legislation of some higher and
intuitive understanding with its intellectual intuition. Instead, his
solution of that antinomy consists in pointing out that we can attribute
the necessity to nature as mere appearance and still also think of our
freedom as a supersensible (noumenal) causality, although a supersensible causality that can nevertheless affect nature as appearance in
alternative ways. If the necessity in nature is strict enough for the
antinomy of teleological judgment to arise at all, and if our freedom
with its contingency can be reconciled, as just described, with that
strict necessity despite having to manifest itself in that nature as
appearance with its necessity, why should the antinomy of teleological judgment require a solution that is so different? Why could we not
solve it by thinking, not a supersensible understanding that is intuitive
and hence removes the contingency in the particular, but a supersensible understanding that determines things only practically and
hence leaves the contingency intact? We could then go on to claim,
as Kant does in the case of freedom, that such a supersensible
contingency, even as affecting the world as appearance, "does not
conflict" with the mentioned strict necessity. The trouble with such
an alternative "solution" to the antinomy of teleological judgment
is, of course, that it does not seem to work; for if the world as
appearance can be affected in alternative ways, how can it still
involve strict necessity? By the same token, Kant's solution to the
third antinomy of the first Critique is in the same trouble if our
freedom. as something to be manifested in the world as appearance,
must indeed be reconciled with such a strict necessity.l06 It seems,
therefore. that if the third antinomy is to be capable of being solved,
and if our freedom is not to be denied, then the necessity in nature
cannot be allowed to be a strict necessity but must be weakened in
someway.
One way to weaken the necessity in nature is to make regulative,
rather than constitutive. not only the idea of freedom (which from the
theoretical point of view taken by the first Critique is already regulative)
but the categories as well, since it is on them that nature's mechanism
I06S ee, e.g .. Lewis White Beck, A Commentary on Kant's Critique of Practical Reason
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960), 191-92.

CVl

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

with its necessity is based.1 07 One serious problem with such a move is
that it would undermine the first Critique, which could no longer
support any claim to propositions that are synthetic and yet a priori
and necessary (cf. n. 107). But a far worse problem is that such a
I07This is how Beck proposes to remove the difficulty with Kant's solution to the third
antinomy. (Ibid., 192-94.) Beck's suggestion has been developed further by Butts. Butts
argues that Kant himself makes the categories regulative in the first Critique. (Kallt
and the Double Government Methodology, esp. 261-63.) It seems to me, however, that
this view involves at least the following four major difficulties. First, it flies in the face
of Kant's entire immanent metaphysics as developed in the Analytic. (Butts emphasizes
Kant's epistemology, but acknowledges that it entails an immanent or "local" ontology:
ibid., 243,225.) Second, it undermines Kant's epistemology, which tries to show that
there are (theoretical) synthetic judgments tbat are indeed a priori and necessary, and are
not merely considered to be so. Third, the evidence Butts offers for his view can easily
be interpreted in a different way, one that does not involve any of the difficulties I am
mentioning here: as far as I can see, none of the citations given by Butts show that Kant
is making regulative anything but the ideas of reason. That holds even for the passage
that Butts seems to consider (ibid., 261) his most important piece of evidence (viz., A
561-62 = B 589-90): In discussing the fourth antinomy, Kant does indeed include, as
the initial part of the regulative principle of reason, a brief characterization of the
phenomenal world in categorial terms. Yet the principle then continues in nothing but
the familiar regulative terms: it seeks to regulate our investigation of nature, by telling
us (as Kant tells us so often), roughly, that we should try to account for things in
mechanical terms as far as we can and not appeal too hastily to causes beyond nature.
Why, then, should we assume that the initial instruction to regard the phenomenal
world first of all in categorial terms is more than a reminder not to (orget that the
phenomenal world is indeed mechanistic? After all, a methodology ("regulation") can
be based on an ontology, as Butts himself points out (ibid., 226, and cr. 241). The fourth
difficulty with Butts' view strikes me as even more serious than the mentioned three:
making the categories regulative does not in fact solve the third antinomy. For even if
both the idea of freedom and the concept of causal necessity are regulative, I still
cannot without contradiction think them together, i.e., in the same context. And yet I
must think them together; for though I can study nature without thinking of freedom, [
cannot think about freedom without bringing in nature, because it is in nature that my
free will is to make a difference, as Kant points out again and again (e.g., in the Critique
of Judgment, at Ak. 176 and 196). (We can course choose to think of only one half of
the antinomy at a time; but that holds even for all genuine contradictions and does not
begin to remove the contradiction.) I rind it interesting that after Butts construes
Kant's solution of the antinomy of teleological judgment along the same lines as he
does the third antinomy of the first Critique (see above, n. 90), he himself attributes 10
Kant the view that adopting even the maxims of mechanism and teleology would not
be "consistent" (ibid., 279) unless we invoke the supersensible (which, like McFarland
Isee above, xcix-c j, he takes to be an intelligent cause of the world). Yet all that Butts says
about this remaining conflict between the two regulative principles, along with Kant's
alleged solution of it, is that it "does no harm" to Kant's ;'essential position on
teleology" (ibid., 278), as Butts has interpreted that position.

m

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT. . .

cvii

sacrifice would not even help. For just as construing the principle of
mechanism and the teleological principle as regulative does not resolve
the conflict between them and hence cannot solve the antinomy of
teleological judgment (see lxxxviii-xc), so making the categories
regulative would still leave them in conflict with a regulative principle
of freedom. For we cannot even think of (categorial) necessity together
with the contingency implied in the concept of freedom (cf. n. 107),
since the two thoughts still contradict and hence cancel each other.
A less radical way to weaken the necessity in nature's mechanism
would be the following. We might leave the categories constitutive,
determinative, and strictly necessary, including the category on which
mechanism is based above all, viz., the category of cause and effect;
we might then go on to weaken just what the principle of causality, as
based on that category, says with that strict necessity. According to
that principle, every event must have "its" (efficient) cause (Ak. 183),
though the principle does not determine what that cause is. We could
weaken that principle to this: Every event has some (efficient) cause,
and not only does the principle not determine what that cause is, but
the cause need not even be the same in each otherwise similar event.
It is at least possible that Kant has in mind this weak version of the
causal principle (rather than merely the denial that the causal principle determines what causes what) when he says such things as that
understanding does not determine the particular (Ak. 179, 185,407),
or that "nature, considered as mere mechanism, could have structured
itself differently in a thousand ways" (Ak. 360).108
Weakening the principle of causality in this way (or construing
Kant as defending only this weaker principle) has a twofold major
advantage: allowing individual links in (unbroken) chains of efficient
causes to vary leaves some contingency; hence it leaves room for
freedom as well as for nature's purposiveness. It would allow us to
think of nature's purposiveness as produced by an intelligent cause of
the world; and it would allow us to think of our will as a free causality.
Indeed, this free causality could, in obedience to the moral law,
produce purposive order in nature in precisely those contexts where
l08Henry E. Allison has argued, on the basis of more such textual evidence, that Kant
does indeed intend his causal principle to say no more than this: Kant's Transcendental
Idealism (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1983),216-34, esp. 216 and 229.
Cf. also Lewis White Beck's "A Prussian Hume and a Scottish Kant," in his Essays on
Kant and Hume (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1978), 111-29.

cviii

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

nature, including nature within ourselves, does not already have it but
is seriously defective in ways that go against the moral law. Hence we
could think of nature as governed practically in two ways: as governed
by a moral God and as governed by human beings in those respects in
which that God has chosen to leave the world imperfect and improvable by us. Moreover, even apart from such divine and human action
directed toward making the world more "purposive" (orderly), the
described variability that the weakened causal principle would permit
would not make nature chaotic. For the variations among the efficient causes could still be (as, on Kant's view, particular causes
already are) governed by particular laws; the variations would be
regularities involving some contingency (Ak. 404). Hence we can
still, on this view, predict eclipses, or human behavior, with a
"certainty"109 proportionate to this "lawfulness." Where regularities
are already present, we could ascribe them to God; we would do so
especially in the case of organisms, less so in the case of nature as a
whole, and least in the case of "contrapurposive" arrangements in
nature, i.e., whatever manifests least order and is most in conflict with
the idea of nature as a system of purposes subordinated to the final
purpose. Where such regularities are absent but are required morally,
our free will could "initiate" causal series in nature in the sense of
determining what sort of efficient cause is to appear in this or that
position in certain chains of efficient causes.
Unfortunately, weakening the causal principle in this way has at
least three major disadvantages as well. First, it does more than
"solve" Kant's third antinomy: it destroys it. Kant could indeed suggest a seeming contradiction between categorial necessity and freedom and then point out that the causal principle is weak enough to
allow for freedom; but he could no longer use the antinomy to get to
anything supersensible (he then would have to rely on other routes).
Second, weakening the causal principle as described would also
destroy the antinomy of teleological judgment and with it another
route to the supersensible: to the supersensible as an intuitive understanding with its intellectual intuition (the contingency in the particular would remain rather than be considered as merely a "seeming"
one); to the supersensible as an intelligent cause of the world; and to
I09Critique of Practical Reason. Ak. V. 99; and cf. the Critique of Pure Reason. A

549-50

=

B 577-78.

15. HOW THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT. . .

ClX

the supersensible basis of nature's purposiveness as mediator between
other "supersensibles" (if indeed there would be any supersensibles
left between which to mediate) and as "needed" to solve the antinomy
of aesthetic judgment. By the same token, if we say that Kant already
considers his causal principle to be of this weaker sort, we saddle him
with the difficulty of having set up "antinomies" where none can arise
and of having introduced supersensibles without any justification.
Moreover, third, the "antinomy between antinomies," i.e., the conflict
between the antinomy of teleological judgment and the third antinomy of the first Critique, as Kant presents and handles these antinomies,
would also remain a problem.

CRITIQUE
OF JUDGMENT
Immanuel Kant

165

PREFACE
TO THE

FIRST EDITION, 17901

Our abilily Lo cognize from a priori principles may be called pure
reason, and the general inquiry into the possibility and bounds of
such cognition2 may be called critique of pure reason. These terms
are appropriate even if, as I did in my Critique of Pure Reason, we
mean by this power3 [Vermogen] only reason in its theoretical use,
without yet seeking to investigate what ability [Vermogen] and what
special principles it may have as practical reason. A critique of pure
reason, in this narrow sense, is concerned merely with our ability to
IIThis is the full title of the Preface as it appeared in the second edition (1793), on which
the Akademie edition is based.]
2lErkenntnis. In Kant's philosophy, 'cognition' most often refers to the process of
acquiring knowledge or to the product of this process; but there is also a practical (as
opposed to theoretical) cognition, and most practical cognition (e.g., that of the
existence of God), is not (and does not yield) Wissen (knowledge). See Ak. 475. Cf.
also Ak. 174-76. See also the Translator's Introduction, xl-xlii. 1

3[1 am using 'power,' rather than 'faculty,' in order to disassociate Kant's theory
(of cognition, desire, etc.) from the traditional faculty psychology; i.e., I am trying
to avoid reifying the Kantian powers (which are mere abilities), in other words,
avoid turning them into psychological entities such as compartments, sources, or
agencies "in" the mind. Hence, in this translation, expressions like 'the power of
judgment,' 'the power of thought,' 'the power of concepts,' 'the power of desire,'
and so on, always refer to an ability (a "faculty" in that sense). In such expressions, 'power' is never used to mean anything like Jtrength or forcefulness (of concepts.
desire. and so on).1

3

167

4

168

PREFACE

cognize things a priori. Hence it deals only with the [theoretical]
cognitive power, to the exclusion of the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure and of the power of desire; and among the cognitive
powers it deals with the understanding as governed by its a priori
principles, to the exclusion of judgment 4 as well as reason (both of
which are also powers involved in theoretical cognition). The understanding is singled out in this way because, as that critique discovers,
it is the only one among the cognitive powers capable of providing
principles of cognition that are constitutive [rather than merely
regulative] a priori. The critique [discovers this as it I inspects every
one of the cognitive powers to decide what each has [in fact] contributed from its own roots to the cognition we actually possess, [as
distinguished froml whatever it might pretend to have contributed to
it. Nothing, it turns out, [passes this inspection] except what the
understanding [through its a priori concepts I prescribes a priori as a
law to nature, as the sum total of appearances (whose form is also
given a priori). All other pure concepts the critique relegates to the
ideas, which are transcendent for our theoretical cognitive power,
though that certainly does not make them useless or dispensable,
since they serve as regulative principles: they serve, in part, to restrain
the understanding's arrogant claims, namely, that (since it can state a
priori the conditions for the possibility of all things it can cognize) it
has thereby circumscribed the area within which all things in general
are possible; in part, they serve to guide the understanding, in its
contemplation of nature, by a principle of completeness-though the
understanding cannot attain this completeness-and so further the
final aim of all cognition. S
41 Urleilskrafl. literalIy 'power of judgment.' Since this "power" is nothing more than
our ability to judge (cr. Kant's translation of 'Urteilskraft' with Latin 'iudicium':
Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View. Ak. VII, 199), 'power of will be omitted
where it may be regarded as understood and where there is no confusing reference to
an individual judgment in the same context. ('Urteil' by itself, unlike 'judgment: can
refer only to an individual judgment) This is one of several cases where I have revised
the opinions on translation which [ expressed in a paper whose main purpose was to
defend my rendering of one key term: "How to Render ZweckmiijJigkeit in Kant's
Third Critique," in Interpreting Kant, ed. Moltke S. Gram (Iowa City: University of
Iowa Press. 1982).)
5[Concerning the "regulative use of the ideas of pure reason," see the CritIque of Pure
Reason. A 642-68 = B 670-96.)

PREFACE

5

So it was actually the understanding, which has its own domain as
a cognitive power insofar as it contains principles of cognition that
are constitutive a priori, which the critique that we all call the
critique of pure reason was to make the secure and sale possessor [of
that domain] against all other competitors. Similarly reason, which
does not contain any constitutive a priori principles except [those] for
the power of desire. was given possession [of its domain I by the
critique of practical reason.
The present critique, the critique of judgment, will deal with the
following questions: Does judgment, which in the order of our
[specific] cognitive powers is a mediating link between understanding and reason,6 also have a priori principles of its own? Are
these principles constitutive, or are they merely regulative (in which
case they would fail to prove Ithat judgment has I a domain of its
own)? Does judgment give the rule a priori to the feeling of pleasure
and displeasure, the mediating link between the cognitive power
[in general I and the power of desire 7 (just as the understanding
prescribes laws a priori to the cognitive power and reason to the power
of desire)?
A critique of pure reason, i.e., of our ability to judge according
to a priori principles. would be incomplete if it failed to include,
as a special part. a treatment of judgment, which, since it is a
cognitive power, also lays claim to a priori principles; judgment
must be treated, in a special part of the critique, even if, in a system
of pure philosophy, its principles are not such that they can form a
special part between theoretical and practical philosophy, but may
be annexed to one or the other as needed. For if a system of pure
philosophy, under the general title metaphysics, is to be achieved
some day (to accomplish this quite completely is both possible and
of the utmost importance for our use of reason in all contexts), the
critique must already have explored the terrain supporting this edifice, to the depth at which lies the first foundation of our power of
principles independent of experience, so that no part of the edifice
may give way, which would inevitably result in the collapse of the
whole.
6[Cf. Ak. 177.)

7[Cf. Ak. 178.)

6
169

PREFACE

On the other hand, the nature of the power of judgment (whose
correct use is so necessary and universally required that this power is
just what we mean by sound understanding) is such that an attempt to
discover a principle of its own must plainly be accompanied by great
difficulties (and it must contain some principle a priori, since otherwise,
despite being a distinct cognitive power, it would not be subject even
to the most ordinary critique): for this principle must, nevertheless,
not be derived from a priori concepts, since these belong to the
understanding and judgment only applies them. So judgment itself
must provide a concept, a concept through which we do not actually
cognize anything but which only serves as a rule for the power of
judgment itself- but not as an objective rule, to which it could adapt
its judgment, since then we would need another power of judgment
in order to decide whether or not the judgment is a case of that
rule. 8
This perplexity about a principle (whether subjective or objective)
arises mainly in those judgments [Beurteilungenl. 9 called aesthetic,
which concern the beautiful and the sublime in nature or in art. And
yet a critical inquiry [in search I of a principle of judgment in them is
the most important part of a critique of this power. For though these
judgments do not by themselves contribute anything whatever to
our cognition of things, they still belong to the cognitive power
alone and prove a direct relation of this power to the feeling of
pleasure or displeasure according to some a priori principle. without
there being any confusion of this principle with the one that can
be the basis determining the power of desire. since that power has
its a priori principles in concepts of reason. [The fact that this
8[Cf. On the Saying That May Be Correct in Theory but Is Inadequate for Practice
(1793), Ak. VIII, 275, and the Anthropology, Ak. VII, 199.1
9[In one place (Ak. 211 '), Kant makes a distinction between Beurteilung and Urteil
(judgment), using the first term to stand for a reflective judgment. But he does not
repeat this distinction anywhere else, nor does he consistently adhere to it. The reason
for this seems to be that in German grammar adding 'be-' to the intransitive 'urteifel!'
simply turns it into the transitive 'beurteilen.' By the same token. it is misleading to use
'to judge' (which is both transitive and intransitive) for 'urteilen' but a different term for
'beurteilen, ' especially such a term as 'to estimate,' or 'to assess,' or 'to appraise; all of
which tend to imply evaluation rather than just reflection, (The context tells us when
the judging is reflective.) 1

PREFACE

7

aesthetic judging is directly referred to the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure distinguishes it from a certain kind of) logical judging
of nature: when experience manifests in things a lawfulness that
understanding's concept of the sensible is no longer adequate to
[help us) understand or explain, judgment can find within itself
a principle that refers the natural thing to the uncognizable supersensible, though judgment must use this principle for cognizing
nature only in relation to itself. In these cases such an a priori
principle can and must indeed be employed if we are to cognize the
beings in the world, and it also opens up prospects advantageous
to practical reason. Yet here the principle has no direct relation to
the feeling of pleasure and displeasure, while it is precisely this
relation which gives rise to that puzzle regarding judgment's principle,
which necessitates a special division for this power in the critique:
for the [mentioned kind of] logical judging according to concepts
(from which no direct inference can ever be drawn to the feeling
of pleasure and displeasure) could at most have formed an appendix,
including a critical restriction on such judging, to the theoretical part
of philosophy.
Since this inquiry into our power of taste, which is the aesthetic
power of judgment, has a transcendental aim, rather than the aim to
[help I form and cultivate taste (since this will continue to proceed, as
it has in the past, even if no such investigations are made), I would
like to think that it will be judged leniently as regards its deficiency
for the latter purpose. As a transcendental inquiry, however, it must
be prepared to face the strictest examination. Yet even here, given
how difficult it is to solve a problem that nature has made so involved,
I hope to be excused if my solution contains a certain amount of
obscurity, not altogether avoidable, as long as I have established
clearly enough that the principle has been stated correctly. [I say this
because] the way in which I have derived from that principle this
phenomenon, viz., jUdgment, may fall short of the clarity we are
entitled to demand elsewhere, namely, where we deal with cognition
according to concepts, and which I do believe I have achieved in the
second part of this work. to
With this, then, I conclude my entire critical enterprise. I shall
IOlThat is, in the Critique of Teleological JudgmenLJ

170

8

PREFACE

proceed without delay to the doctrinal one, in order to snatch from
my advancing years what time may yet be somewhat favorable to the
task. It goes without saying that judgment will have no special part in
doctrine, since in the case of this power critique takes the place of
theory. Rather, in accordance with the division of philosophy, and of
pure philosophy, into a theoretical and a practical part, the doctrinal
enterprise will consist of the metaphysics of nature and that of morals.ll

II[The Metaphysics of Morals appeared in 1797. The case of the metaphysics of nature
is less clear. In 1786, four years before the publication of the Critique of Judgment,
Kant had already published the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. It is not
clear in what respect he considered that work. as conjoined with the Critique of PUTe
Reason, as falling short of a metaphysics of nature. (Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason,
B xliii.) Perhaps the missing part was the projected Transitionfrom the Metaphysical
Foundations of Natural Science to Physics. on which Kant worked until a year before
his death and which appeared (in unfinisbed form) in what is now called the Opus
Postumum (Ak. XXI and XXII). Cf. James W. Ellington. "The Unity of Kant's
Thought in His Philosophy of Corporeal Nature," 135-219 (esp. 213--219) in Book II
of his translation of the Prolegomena and the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural
Science: Immanuel Kant. Philosophy of Material Nature (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1985).]

INTRODUCTION12

I

On the Division of Philosophy
Insofar as philosophy contains principles for the rational cognition of
things through concepts (and not merely, as logic does, principles of
the form of thought in general without distinction of objects (3 ), it is
usually divided into theoretical and practical. That division is entirely
correct, provided there is also a difference in kind between the
concepts that assign to the principles of this rational cognition their
respective objects: otherwise the concepts would not justify a division,
since a division presupposes that the principles of the rational cogni·
tion pertaining to the different parts of a science are opposed to one
another.
There are, however, only two kinds of concepts, which [thus) allow
for two different principles concerning the possibility of their respective objects. These are the concepts of nature and the concept of
freedom. Concepts of nature make possible a theoretical cognition
governed by a priori principles, whereas the very concept of free121This is the second introduction Kant wrote for the work. Cf. the Translator's
Introduction, XXIX. The (longer) First Introduction appears, as the Translator's Supplement, below, 383-441 (Ale. 193'-251').]

131Cf. the Logic. Ak. IX, 12-13.]

9

171

10

172

INTRODUCTION

dom carries with it, as far as nature is concerned, only a negative
principle (namely, of mere opposition), but gives rise to expansive
principles for the determination of the will, which are therefore called
practical; hence we are right to divide philosophy into two parts
that are quite different in their principles: theoretical or natural
philosophy, and practical or moral philosophy (morality is the term
we use for reason's practical legislation governed by the concept
of freedom). In the past, however, these terms have been badly
misused for dividing the different principles and along with them
philosophy. For no distinction was made between the practical governed by concepts of nature and the practical governed by the
concept of freedom, with the result that the same terms, theoretical
and practical philosophy, were used to make a division that in fact
did not divide anything (since the two parts might have the same kind
of principles).
For the will, as the power of desire, is one of the many natural
causes in the world, namely, the one that acts in accordance with
concepts; and whatever we think of as possible (or necessary) through
a will we call practically possible (or necessary), as distinguished
from the physical possibility or necessity of an effect whose cause
is not determined to [exercise] its causality through concepts (but
through mechanism, as in the case of lifeless matter, or through
instinct, as in the case of animals). It is here, concerning the practical,
that people leave it undetermined whether the concept that gives
the rule to the will's causality is a concept of nature or a concept of
freedom.
Yet this distinction is essential. For if the concept that determines [the exercise of] the causality is a concept of nature, then
the principles will be technically 14 practical; but if it is a concept of freedom, then the principles will be morally practical.
And since the division of a rational science [-wissenschaft I depends entirely on that difference between the respective objects
which requires different principles for [their] cognition, the technically practIcal principles will belong to theoretical philosophy
(natural science 1-lehreD, while the morally practical ones alone
14[In the sense derived from the Greek TEXV1J (techne), i.e., 'art' in the sense that
includes craft.]

J. ON THE DIVISION OF PHIWSOPHY

11

will form the second part, practical philosophy (moral theory
[-lehre 15 ]).

All technically practical rules (i.e., those of art and of skill in
general, or for that matter of prudence, i.e., skill in influencing
people's volition), insofar as their principles rest on concepts, must be
included only in theoretical philosophy, as corollaries. For they concern nothing but the possibility of things according to concepts of
nature; and this includes not only the means we find in nature for producing them, but even the will (as power of desire and hence as a natural
power), as far as it can be determined, in conformity with the mentioned rules, by natural incentives. However, such practical rules are not
called laws (as are, e.g., physical laws), but only precepts. This is because
the will is subject not merely to the concept of nature, but also to the
concept of freedom; and it is in relation to the latter that the will's principles are called laws. Only these latter principles, along with what follows from them, form the second, i.e., the practical, part of philosophy.
The point is this: Solving the problems of pure geometry does not
belong to a special part of geometry, nor does the art of land surveying deserve the name of practical geometry (as distinct from pure), as
a second part of geometry in general. But it would be equally wrong,
even more so, to consider the art of experimentation or observation
in mechanics or chemistry to be a practical part of natural science,
or, finally, to include any of the following in practical philosophy, let
alone regard them as constituting the second part of philosophy in
general: domestic, agricultural, or political economy, the art of social
relations, the precepts of hygiene, or even the general theory [Lehrel
of [how to attain] happiness, indeed not even-with that goal in
mind - the taming of our inclinations and the subjugation of our
affects. For all of these arts contain only rules of skill, which are
therefore only technically practical, for producing an effect that is
possible according to concepts of nature about causes and effects;
and since these concepts belong to theoretical philosophy, they are
subject to those precepts as mere corollaries of theoretical philosophy (i.e., of natural science), and so cannot claim a place in a special
15[For Lehre as Theorie. see Perpetual Peace. Ak. VIII. 370; for the term 'Theorie' as
applied to the practical (not just the theoretical), see ibid., but especially On the
Saying That May Be Correct in Theory. Ak. vm, 275-89. )

173

12

INTRODUCTION

philosophy called practical. Morally practical precepts, on the other
hand, which are based entirely on the concept of freedom, all natural
bases determining the will being excluded, form a very special kind of
precepts. Just as the rules that nature obeys are called laws simply, so
too are these; but, unlike laws of nature, practical laws do not rest on
sensible conditions but rest on a supersensible principle; [hence] they
require just for themselves another part of philosophy, alongside the
theoretical one, to be called practical philosophy.
What the above shows is that a set of practical precepts provided
by philosophy cannot form a special part of philosophy, placed alongside the theoretical part, merely because they are practical; for they
could be practical even if their principles (as technically practical
rules) were taken entirely from our theoretical cognition of nature.
Rather, they form such a special part when and if their principle is in
no way borrowed from the concept of nature, which is always conditioned by the sensible, but rests on the supersensible that the concept
of freedom alone enables us to know [kennbar} through formal laws,
so that these precepts are morally practical, i.e., they are not just
precepts and rules for achieving this or that intention, but are laws
that do not refer to any purposes or intentions we already have.

174

II

On the Domain of
Philosophy in General
The range within which we can use our power of cognition according
to principles, and hence do philosophy, is the range within which a
priori concepts have application.
We refer these concepts to objects, in order to bring about cogni·
tion of these objects where this is possible. Now the sum total of all
these objects can be divided in accordance with how adequate or
inadequate our powers are for this aim.
Insofar as we refer concepts to objects without considering whether

II. ON THE DOMAIN OF PHIWSOPHY . . .

13

or not cognition of these objects is possible, they have their realm;
and this realm is determined merely by the relation that the object of
these concepts has to our cognitive power in general. The part of this
realm in which cognition is possible for us is a territory (territorium)
for these concepts and the cognitive power we need for such cognition.
That part of the territory over which these concepts legislate is the
domain (ditio) of these concepts and the cognitive powers pertaining
to them. Hence empirical concepts do have their territory in nature,
as the sum total of all objects of sense, but they have no domain in it
(but only residence, domicilium); for though they are produced according to law, they do not legislate; rather, the rules that are based on
them are empirical and hence contingent.
Our cognitive power as a whole has two domains. that of the
concepts of nature and that of the concept of freedom, because it
legislates a priori by means of both kinds of concept. Now philosophy
too divides, according to these legislations, into theoretical and
practical. And yet the territory on which its domain is set up and on
which it exercises its legislation is still always confined to the sum
total of the objects of all possible experience, insofar as they are
considered nothing more than mere appearances, since otherwise it
would be inconceivable that the understanding could legislate with
regard to them.
Legislation through concepts of nature is performed by the understanding and is theoretical. Legislation through the concept of freedom is performed by reason and is merely practical. Only in the
practical sphere can reason legislate; with regard to theoretical cognition (of nature), all it can do (given the familiarity with laws that it has
attained by means of the understanding) is to use given laws to infer
consequences from them, which however remain always within nature.
But the reverse does not hold: if rules are practical. that does not yet
make reason legislative, since they might only be technically practical.
Hence understanding and reason have two different legislations on
one and the same territory of experience. Yet neither of these legislations is to interfere with the other. For just as the concept of nature
has no influence on the legislation through the concept of freedom,
so the latter does not interfere with the legislation of nature. That it is
possible at least to think, without contradiction, of these two legislations and the powers pertaining to them as coexisting in the same
subject was proved by the Critique of Pure Reason, for it exposed the

175

14

176

INTRODUCTION

dialectical illusion in the objections against this possibility and thus
destroyed them.16
Now although these two different domains do not restrict each
other in their legislation, they do restrict each other incessantly in
the effects that their legislation has in the world of sense. Why do
these two domains not form one domain? This is because the concept
of nature does indeed allow us to present!7 its objects in intuition,
but as mere appearances rather than as things in themselves, whereas
the concept of freedom does indeed allow us to present its object as a
thing in itself, but not in intuition; and so neither concept can provide
us with theoretical cognition of its object (or even of the thinking
subject) as things in themselves, which would be the supersensible.
We do need the idea of the supersensible in order to base on it the
possibility of all those objects of experience, but the idea itself can
never be raised up and expanded into a cognition.
Hence there is a realm that is unbounded, but that is also inaccessible to our entire cognitive power: the realm of the supersensible. In
this realm we cannot find for ourselves a territory on which to set up a
domain of theoretical cognition, whether for the concepts of the
understanding or for those of reason. It is a realm that we must
indeed occupy with ideas that will assist us in both the theoretical and
the practical use of reason; but the only reality we can provide for
these ideas, by reference to the laws [arisingJ from the concept of
freedom, is practical reality, which consequently does not in the least
expand our theoretical cognition to the supersensible.
Hence an immense gulf is fixed between the domain of the concept
of nature, the sensible, and the domain of the concept of freedom,
the supersensible, so that no transition from the sensible to the
J6(See the Third Antinomy (A 444-51 = B 472-79) and its solution (A 532-58

=

B 560-86).1
17( Vorstellen. The traditional rendering of this term as 'to represent' (similarly for the
nounl suggests that Kant's theory of perception (etc.) is representational, which,
however. it is not (despite the fact that Kant sometimes adds the Latin repraesentatio).
Since 'to present' too is awkward, it will be replaced by a more specific term where
clarity requires and no risk of distortion arises for Kant's point or his other views. The
German term 'darstellen' (similarly for the noun) has traditionally been translated as 'to
present' but will here be rendered as 'to exhibit,' which seems both closer to Kant's
meaning and less misleading. On the meaning of 'presentation,' see below, Ak. 203 br.

n.4.\

II. ON THE DOMAIN OF PHIWSOPHY . . .

15

supersensible (and hence by means of the theoretical use of reason) is
possible, just as if they were two different worlds, the first of which
cannot have any influence on the second; and yet the second is to
have an influence on the first, i.e., the concept of freedom is to
actualize in the world of sense the purpose enjoined by its laws.
Hence it must be possible to think of nature as being such that the
lawfulness in its form will harmonize with at least the possibility of
[achieving] the purposes that we are to achieve in nature according to
laws of freedom. So there must after all be a basis uniting the
supersensible that underlies nature and the supersensible that the
concept of freedom contains practically, even though the concept of
this basis does not reach cognition of it either theoretically or practically and hence does not have a domain of its own, though it does
make possible the transition from our way of thinking in terms of
principles of nature to our way of thinking in terms of principles of
freedom.

III

On the Critique of Judgment
as Mediating the Connection
of the Two Parts of Philosophy
to [Form] a Whole
A critique that assesses what our cognitive powers can accomplish a
priori does not actually have a domain as regards objects. For it is not
a doctrine: its only task is to investigate whether and how our powers
allow us (when given their situation) to produce a doctrine. The
realm of this critique extends to all the claims that these powers
make, in order to place these powers within the boundaries of their
rightful [use]. But if something [for lack of a domain] cannot have a
place in the division of philosophy, it may still enter as a main part
into the critique of our pure cognitive power in general, namely, if it

16

177

INTRODUCTION

contains principles that by themselves are not fit for either theoretical
or practical use.
The concepts of nature, which contain a priori the basis for all theoretical cognition, were found to rest on the legislation of the understanding. The concept of freedom was found to contain a priori the basis
for all practical precepts that are unconditioned by the sensible, and
to rest on the legislation of reason. Therefore, both these powers,
apart from being applicable in terms of logical form to principles of
whatever origin, have in addition a legislation of their own in terms of
content which is not subject to any other (a priori) legislation, and hence
this justifies the division of philosophy into theoretical and practical.
And yet the family of our higher cognitive powers also includes a
mediating link between understanding and reason. This is judgment,
about which we have cause to suppose, by analogy, that it too may contain a priori, if not a legislation of its own, then at least a principle of its
own, perhaps a merely subjective one, by which to search for laws. Even
though such a principle would lack a realm of objects as its own domain,
it might still have some territory; and this territory might be of such a
character that none but this very principle might hold in it.
But there is also Uudging by analogy) another basis, namely, for
linking judgment with a different ordering of our presentational powers,
an ordering that seems even more important than the one involving
judgment's kinship with the family of cognitive powers. For all of the
soul's powers or capacities can be reduced to three that cannot be
derived further from a common basis: the cognitive power, the feeling
of pleasure and displeasure. and the power of desire. 18 The under181f concepts are used as empirical principles and there is cause to suppose that there
is a kinship between them and the pure a priori cognitive power, then it is useful to
attempt, on account of that relation. to give a transcendental definition of them. i.e., a
definition by means of pure categories, insofar as these suffice by themselves to
indicate how the concept at hand differs from others. This procedure follows the
example of the mathematician. who leaves the empirical data in his problem undetermined
and only brings the relation they have in their pure synthesis under the concepts of
pure arithmetic, thereby universalizing his solution of the problem. I have been
reproached for following a similar procedure (Preface to the Kritik der praktischen
Vernunft. p. 1619), namely, for defining the power of desire as the power of being the
cause. through one's presentations. of the actuality of the objects of these presentations.
The criticism was that. after all, mere wishes are desires too, and yet we all know that

19[Of the first edition (1788) of the Critique of Practical Reason. Ak. V.9n.j

III. ON THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT. . .

17

standing alone legislates for the cognitive power when this power is referred to nature, namely, as a power of theoretical cognition, (as indeed
it must be when it is considered by itself, without being confused with
the power of desire); for only with respect to nature (as appearance) is
it possible for us to give laws by means of a priori concepts of nature,
which are actually pure concepts of the understanding. For the power
of desire, considered as a higher power governed by the concept of
freedom, only reason (which alone contains that concept) legislates a
priori. Now between the cognitive power and the power of desire lies
the feeling of pleasure, just as judgment lies between understanding
and reason. Hence we must suppose, at least provisionally, that
they alone do not enable us to produce their object. That, however, proves nothing
more than that some of man's desires involve him in self-contradiction. inasmuch as he
uses the presentation by itself to strive to produce the object, while yet he cannot
expect success from it. Such is the case because he is aware that his mechanical forces
(if I may call the nonpsychological ones that), which would have to be determined by
that presentation in order to bring the object about (hence to be the means for it) are
either insufficient, or perhaps even directed to something impossible, such as to undo
what is done (0 mihi praeteritos, etc.20), or as being able, as one is waiting impatiently
for some wished·for moment, to destroy what time remains. In such fanciful desires we
are indeed aware that our presentations are insufficient (or even unfit) to be the cause
of their objects. Still their causal relation, and hence the thought of their causality. is
contained in every wish and is especially noticeable [sichtbarJ when that wish is an
affect, namely, longing For since these desires [alternatelyl expand the heart and
make it languid, thus exhausting its forces, they prove that these forces are repeatedly
tensed by presentations. but that they allow the mind each time to relapse into
weariness as it considers again the impossibility. Even prayers that ask for the deflection of some great and, as far as we can see, unavoidable evil, and also various
superstitious means aimed at achieving purposes unattainable through nature prove
the causal relation of these presentations to their objects; and this relation is such that
even an awareness of its insufficiency for producing the effect cannot keep it from
striving for the effect. But why our nature was given a propensity toward desires of
whose futility we are aware is an anthropological-teleological question. It seems that if
we had to assure ourselves that we can in fact produce the object. before we could be
determined [by the presentation I to apply our forces, then OUt forces would remain
largely unused. For usually we do not come to know what forces we have in the first
place except by trying them out. Hence the deception contained in vain wishes is only
the result of a beneficent arrangement in our nature. 21
20[Vergil's Aeneid. viii, 560: 0 mihipraeteritos referat si luppiter annos; i.e., If Jupiter
would only restore to me those bygone years. (All translations given in footnotes are my
own, and this fact is not indicated in each such footnote individually.)]
21[On defining the power of desire, ct. also the Metaphysics of Morals. Ak. VI,
356-57.]

178

178

18

179

INTRODUCTION

judgment also contains an a priori principle of its own, and also
suppose that since the power of desire is necessarily connected with
pleasure or displeasure (whether this precedes the principle of this
power, as in the case of the lower power of desire, or, as in the case of
the higher one, only follows from the determination of this power by
the moral law),22 judgment will bring about a transition from the
pure cognitive power, i.e., from the domain of the concepts of nature,
to the domain of the concept of freedom, just as in its logical use it
makes possible the transition from understanding to reason.
Hence, even if philosophy can be divided into only two main parts,
theoretical and practical, and even if everything we might need to say
about judgment's own principles must be included in the theoretical
part of philosophy, i.e., in rational cognition governed by concepts of
nature, yet the critique of pure reason, which must decide all of this
before we attempt to construct the mentioned system so as to inform
us whether this system is possible, still consists of three parts: the
critiques, respectively, of pure understanding, of pure judgment, and
of pure reason, which are called pure because they legislate a priori.

On Judgment as a Power
That Legislates A Priori
Judgment in general is the ability to think the particular as contained
under the universal. If the universal (the rule, principle, law) is
given, then judgment, which subsumes the particular under it, is
determinative (even though [in its role l as transcendental judgment
it states a priori the conditions that must be met for subsumption
under that universal to be possible).24 But if only the particular
221Cf. ibid., Ak. VI, 212-13 and 377-78.J
2310n this and the next section, cf. the Critique of Pure Reason. A 650-68
678-96.)
24[Cf. ibid.• A 131-36

=

B 170-75.\

=

B

IV.

ON JUDGMENT AS A POWER. . .

19

is given and judgment has to find the universal for it, then this power
is merely reflective.
Determinative judgment. [which operates J under universal transcendentallaws given by the understanding, is only subsumptive. The
law is marked out for it a priori. and hence it does not need to devise a
law of its own so that it can subsume the particular in nature under
the universal. On the other hand, since the laws that pure understanding gives a priori concern only the possibility of a nature as such (as
object of sense), there are such diverse forms of nature, so many
modifications as it were of the universal transcendental concepts of
nature, which are left undetermined by these laws, that surely there
must be laws for these forms too. Since these laws are empirical, they
may indeed be contingent as far as our understanding can see; still, if
they are to be called laws (as the concept of a nature does require),
then they must be regarded as necessary by virtue of some principle
of the unity of what is diverse, even though we do not know this
principle. Hence reflective judgment, which is obliged to ascend from
the particular in nature to the universal, requires a principle, which it
cannot borrow from experience, precisely because it is to be the basis
for the unity of all empirical principles under higher though still
empirical principles, and hence is to be the basis that makes it possible
to subordinate empirical principles to one another in a systematic way.
So this transcendental principle must be one that reflective judgment
gives as a law, but only to itself: it cannot take it from somewhere else
(since judgment would then be determinative); nor can it prescribe it
to nature, because our reflection on the laws of nature is governed by
nalure, nol natur~ by the conditions under which we try to obtain a
concept of it that in view of these conditions is quite contingent.
Now this principle can only be the following: since universal naturallaws have their basis in our understanding, which prescribes them
to nature (though only according to the universal concept of it as a
nature), the particular empirical laws must, as regards what the
universal laws have left undetermined in them, be viewed in terms of
such a unity as [they would have J if they too had been given by an
understanding (even though not ours) so as to assist our cognitive
powers by making possible a system of experience in terms of particular natural laws. That does not mean that we must actually assume
such an understanding (for it is only reflective judgment that uses this
idea as a principle, for reflection rather than determination); rather,

180

20

181

INTRODUCTION

in using this principle judgment gives a law only to itself, not to
nature.
Now insofar as the concept of an object also contains the basis for
the object's actuality, the concept is called the thing's purpose, and a
thing's harmony with that character of things which is possible only
through purposes is called the purposiveness of its form. Accordingly,
judgment's principle concerning the form that things of nature have
in terms of empirical laws in general is the purposiveness 0/ nature in
its diversity. In other words, through this concept we present nature
as if an understanding contained the basis of the unity of what is
diverse in nature's empirical laws.
Hence the purposiveness of nature is a special a priori concept that
has its origin solely in reflective judgment. For we cannot attribute to
natural products anything like nature's referring them to purposes,
but can only use this concept in order to reflect on nature as regards
that connection among nature's appearances which is given to us in
terms of empirical laws. This concept is also quite distinct from
practical purposiveness (in human art or in morality), though we do
think it by analogy with practical purposiveness.

v
The Principle of the
Formal Purposiveness
of Nature Is a
Transcendental Principle
of Judgment
A transcendental principle is one by which we think the universal a
priori condition under which alone things can become objects of our
cognition in general; on the other hand, a principle is called metaphysical if it is one [by I which [we I think the a priori condition under
which alone objects whose concept must be given empirically can be

V.

THE FORMAL PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE. . .

21

further determined a priori.2 5 Thus the principle by which we cognize bodies as substances and as changeable substances is transcendental if it says that a change in them must have a cause; but it is
metaphysical if it says that a change in them must have an external
cause. For in order for us to cognize the proposition a priori in the
first case, we must think the body only through ontological predicates
(pure concepts of the understanding), e.g., as a substance; but in the
second case we must base the proposition on the empirical concept
of a body (as a movable thing in space), after which we can, however,
see completely a priori that the latter predicate (of motion that must
have an external cause) applies to the body. Accordingly, as I will
show in a moment, the principle of the purposiveness of nature (in
the diversity of its empirical laws) is a transcendental principle. For
the concept of objects, insofar as they are thought as subject to this
principle, is only the pure concept of objects of possible empirical
cognition in general and contains nothing empirical. On the other
hand, the principle of practical purposiveness, the purposiveness that
must be thought in the idea of the determination of a free will, is a
metaphysical principle, because the concept of a power of desire,
considered as a will, does have to be given empirically (i.e., it does
not belong to the transcendental predicates).26 Still, both principles
are a priori rather than empirical, because in such judgments we need
no further experience in order to connect the predicate with the
empirical concept of the subject, but can see this connection completely
a priori.
That the concept of a purposiveness of nature belongs to the
transcendental principle~ is sufficiently evident from the maxims of
judgment which we use as an a priori basis for our investigation of
nature but which yet concern no more than the possibility of experience and hence of our cognition of nature, though not merely of
nature as such but of nature as determined by a diversity of particular
laws. These maxims occur only sporadically but fairly frequently in
the course of the science of metaphysics, as pronouncements of its
wisdom, when it formulates certain rules whose necessity cannot be
established from concepts: "Nature takes the shortest way (lex
parsimoniae); yet it makes no leap, either in the sequence of its
251Cf. the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, Ak. IV, 469-70.J
261Cf. the Metaphysics of Morals. Ak. VI, 216-17.J

182

22

183

INTRODUCTION

changes or in the juxtaposition of forms that differ in kind (lex
continui in natura); its great diversity in empirical laws is nonetheless
a unity under few principles (principia praeter necessitatem non sunt
multiplicanda ),"27 and so forth.
If we try to indicate the origin of these principles by following the
psychological route, then we go wholly against their meaning. For
they do not say what happens, i.e., by what rule our cognitive powers
actually play their role [ihr Spiel treibenl. and how we judge: they
rather say how we ought to judge; and if these principles are merely
empirical, they cannot yield this logical objective necessity. Hence
the purposiveness of nature for our cognitive powers and their use,
which manifestly shines forth from these principles, is a transcendental principle of judgments; and hence it too requires a transcendental
deduction [Le., justification]. by means of which we must try to find
the basis for such judging in the a priori sources of cognition.
It is true that we do initially find something necessary in the bases
of the possibility of experience, namely, the universal laws without
which nature as such (as object of sense) cannot be thought. These
laws rest on the categories, applied to the formal conditions of all
intuition that is possible for us, as far as it too is given a priori. Under
these laws judgment is determinative, for all it has to do is to subsume
under given laws. For example, the understanding says: All change
has its cause ([this is al universal law of nature), and transcendental
judgment need only state the condition for subsumption under the a
priori concept of the understanding offered to it, and this condition
is successiveness of states [Bestimmungenl of one and the same
thing. Now for nature as such (as object of possible experience) we
cognize that law as absolutely necessary. But apart from that formal
temporal condition, objects of empirical cognition are still determined [bestimmtJ. or-if we confine ourselves to what we can judge a
priori-determinable, in all sorts of additional ways. Therefore, specifically different natures, apart from what they have in common as
belonging to nature as such, can still be causes in an infinite diversity
of additional ways; and each of these ways must (in accordance with
the concept of a cause as such) have its rule, a rule that is a law and
hence carries necessity with it, even though the character and limits
271 Respectively, the principle of parsimony, the principle of continuity in nature. and
(the principle that) principles must not be multiplied beyond necessity. 1

V.

THE FORMAL PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE. . .

23

of our cognitive powers bar us altogether from seeing that necessity.
Hence we must think nature, as regards its merely empirical laws, as
containing the possibility of an endless diversity of empirical laws that
[despite being laws I are nonetheless contingent as far as we can see
(i.e., we cannot cognize them a priori); and it is in view of this
possibility that we judge the unity of nature in terms of empirical
laws, as well as the possibility of the unity of experience (as a system
in terms of empirical laws) to be contingent. And yet we must neces·
sarily presuppose and assume this unity, since otherwise our empiri·
cal cognition could not thoroughly cohere to [form] a whole of
experience;28 for though the universal natural laws do make things
cohere in terms of their genus, as natural things as such, they fail to
provide them with specific coherence in terms of the particular
natural beings they are. Hence judgment must assume, as an a priori
principle for its own use, that what to human insight is contingent in
the particular (empirical) natural laws does nevertheless contain a
law-governed unity, unfathomable but still conceivable by us, in the
combination of what is diverse in them to [form] an experience that is
intrinsically [an siehl possible. Now when we find in such a combination a law-governed unity cognized by us as conforming to a neces·
sary aim that we have (a need of our understanding), but at the same
time as in itself [an siehl contingent, then we present this unity as a
purposiveness of objects (of nature, in this case). Hence judgment,
which with respect to things under possible (yet to be discovered)
empirical laws is merely reflective, must think of nature with regard
to these laws according to a principle of purposiveness for our cognitive power; and that principle is then expressed in the above maxims
of judgment. Now this transcendental concept of a purposiveness of
nature is neither a concept of nature nor a concept of freedom, since
it attributes nothing whatsoever to the object (nature), but [through]
this transcendental concept [we] only think of the one and only way
in which we must proceed when reflecting on the objects of nature
with the aim of having thoroughly coherent experience. Hence it is a
subjective principle (maxim) of judgment. This is also why we rejoice
(actually we are relieved of a need) when, just as if it were a lucky
28j Cf. Kant's response to Johann August Eberhard in On a Discovery According to
Which Any New Critique of Pure Reason Has Been Made Superfluous by an Earlier
One (1790. Just before the Critique of Judgment), Ak. VIII, 250.1

184

24

185

INTRODUCTION

chance favoring our aim, we do find such systematic unity among
merely empirical laws, even though we necessarily had to assume that
there is such unity even though we have no insight into this unity and
cannot prove it.
To convince ourselves of the correctness of this deduction Ii.e.,
justification] of the concept in question and of the necessity of
assuming the concept as a transcendental cognitive principle, we
need only consider the magnitude of the task, which lies a priori in
our understanding, of making coherent experience out of given perceptions of nature even though this nature could contain an infinite
diversity of empirical laws. It is true that the understanding is a priori
in possession of universal laws of nature, without which nature could
not be the object of experience at all. Yet there is required in addition
that nature also have a certain order in its particular rules- rules that
the understanding can come to know only empirically and that, as far
as it is concerned, are contingent. [But since] without these rules
there would be no way for us to proceed from the universal analogy of
a possible experience as such to the particular one, the understanding
must think of these rules as laws (i.e., as necessary)-even though it
does not cognize, nor could ever see, their necessity-for otherwise
such laws would not form an order of nature. Hence, though the
understanding cannot determine anything a priori with regard to
these (objects),29 still it must, in order to investigate these empirical
so-called laws, lay an a priori principle at the basis of all reflection on
nature: the principle that a cognizable order of nature in terms of
these laws is possible. A principle like this is expressed in the following propositions; that there is in nature a subordination graspable by
us of species under genera; that genera in tum approach one another
under some common principle so as to make possible a transition
from one to another and so to a higher genus; that, while initially it
seems to our understanding unavoidable to assume as many different
kinds of causality as there are specific differences among natural
effects, they may nevertheless fall under a small number of principles
whicb it is our task to discover, etc. This harmony of nature with our
cognitive power is presupposed a priori by judgment. as an aid in its
reflection on nature in terms of empirical laws. For understanding
acknowledges at the same time that this harmony is contingent
291Objects

of experience insofar as their form is particular rather than universal.]

V.

THE FORMAL PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE. . .

25

objectively, and only judgment attributes it to nature as a transcendental purposiveness (in relation to the subject's cognitive power), since
without presupposing this harmony we would have no order of nature
in terms of empirical laws, and hence nothing to guide us in using
empirical laws so as to experience and investigate nature in its diversity.
For it is quite conceivable that, regardless of all the uniformity of
natural things in terms of the universal laws, without which the form
of an empirical cognition in general would not occur at all, the
specific differences in the empirical laws of nature, along with their
effects, might still be so great that it would be impossible for our
understanding to discover in nature an order it could grasp [Jassen 1i.e.. impossible for it to divide nature's products into genera and
species, so as to use the principles by which we explain and understand one product in order to explain and grasp [begreifen I another
as well, thereby making coherent experience out of material that to
us is so full of confusion (though actually it is only infinitely diverse
and beyond our ability to grasp [it]).
Hence judgment also possesses an a priori principle for the possibility of nature, but one that holds only for the subject, a principle by
which judgment prescribes, not to nature (which would be autonomy)
but to itself (which is heautonomy), a law for its reflection on nature.
This law could be called the law of the specification of nature in
terms of its empirical laws. It is a law that judgment does not cognize
a priori in nature, but that, in dividing nature's universal laws, it
assumes a priori when it seeks to subordinate to them a diversity of
particular laws, so that the division will have an order that our
understanding can cognize. So if we say that nature makes its universal laws specific in accordance with the principle of purposiveness for
our cognitive power-i.e., in a way commensurate with the human
understanding with its necessary task of finding the universal for the
particular offered by perception, and of finding interconnection,
under the unity of this principle, with regard to what is different
[across species) (though universal within anyone species)-then we
are neither prescribing a law to nature, nor learning one from it
by observation (although observation can confirm the mentioned
principle). For it is a principle not of determinative but merely of
reflective judgment. We insist only that, however nature may be
arranged in terms of its universal laws, any search for its empirical
laws should follow both this principle of purposiveness and the maxims

186

26

INTRODUCTION

based on it, because only to the extent that this principle has application can we make progress in using our understanding in experience
and arrive at cognition.

VI
On the Connection of
the Feeling of Pleasure with
the Concept of the
Purposiveness of Nature

187

In thinking of nature as harmonizing, in the diversity of its particular
laws, with our need to find universal principles [Allgemeinheit der
Prinzipien I for them, we must, as far as our insight goes, judge this
harmony as contingent, yet as also indispensable for the needs of our
understanding- hence as a purposiveness by which nature harmonizes with our aim, though only insofar as this is directed to cognition.
The universal laws of the understanding, which are at the same time
laws of nature, are just as necessary for nature (even though they arise
from spontaneity) as are the laws of motion regarding matter; and the
generation of such natural laws does not presuppose [on nature's part)
any aim concerning our cognitive powers, because only through such
laws do we first get a concept of what a cognition of things (of nature)
is, and because these laws belong necessarily to nature taken as
object of our cognition in general. But it is contingent. as far as we
can see, that the order of nature in terms of its particular laws should
actually be commensurate with our ability to grasp [that order),
despite all the diversity and heterogeneity by which such order at
least might go beyond that ability. Moreover, the discovery of this
order is an occupation of the understanding conducted with regard to
a necessary purpose of its own - the unification of this order under
principles. And hence it is judgment that must then attribute this
purpose to nature, because the understanding cannot prescribe a law
regarding this [unity J to nature.

VI. THE FEELING OF PLEASURE. . .

27

The attainment of an aim [Absichtl is always connected with the
feeling of pleasure; and if the condition of reaching the aim is an a
priori presentation-as, in this case, it is a principle for reflective
judgment as such - then [there is I a basis that determines the feeling
of pleasure a priori and validly for everyone. And the feeling of
pleasure is determined a priori and validly for everyone merely because
we refer the object to the cognitive power; [fori in this case the
concept of purposiveness does not in the least concern the power of
desire and hence is quite distinct from any practical purposiveness of
nature.
The facts bear out this connection. Now it is true that we do not
find that the concurrence of our perceptions with the laws governed
by universal concepts (the categories) has the slightest effect upon
our feeling of pleasure; nor can there ever be any such effect,
because the understanding proceeds with these [lawsl unintentionally
i unabsichtlich I, by the necessity of its own nature. On the other hand,
it is a fact that when we discover that two or more heterogeneous
empirical laws of nature can be unified under one principle that
comprises them both, the discovery does give rise to a quite noticeable pleasure. frequently even admiration. even an admiration that
does not cease when we have become fairly familiar with its object. It
is true that we no longer feel any noticeable pleasure resulting from
our being able to grasp nature and the unity in its division into genera
and species that alone makes possible the empirical concepts by
means of which we cognize nature in terms of its particular laws. But
this pleasure was no doubt there at one time, and it is only because
even the commonest experience would be impossible without it that
we have gradually come to mix it in with mere cognition and no
longer take any special notice of it. So, if we are to feel pleasure in
[response tol the harmony, which we regard as merely contingent, of
nature's heterogeneous laws with our cognitive power, we need something that in our judging of nature makes us pay attention to this
purposiveness of nature for our understanding-namely, an endeavor
to bring, if possible, these heterogeneous laws under higher though
still empirical laws, when this endeavor is met with success. By
contrast, we would certainly dislike it if nature were presented in a
way that told us in advance that if we investigated nature slightly
beyond the commonest experience we would find its laws so heterogeneous that our understanding could not unify nature's particular laws

188

28

INTRODUCTION

under universal empirical laws. For this would conflict with the
principle of nature's subjectively purposive specification in its genera,
and with the principle that our reflective judgment follows in dealing
with nature.
Yet judgment's presupposition [about this unity] is so indeterminate regarding the extent of that ideal purposiveness of nature for our
cognitive power that if we are told that a deeper or broadened
knowledge of nature based on observation must ultimately meet with
a diversity of laws that no human understanding can reduce to a
single principle, then we will be content with that too. But we would
still prefer to hear others offer hope that if we had deeper insight into
nature, or could compare the nature [we know] more broadly with
the parts of it we do not yet know, then we would find nature ever
simpler as our experience progressed and ever more accordant despite
the seeming heterogeneity in its empirical laws. For judgment bids us
proceed in accordance with the principle of nature's being commensurate with our cognitive power, as far as that principle extends, without
deciding whether this principle has any bounds (since that rule is not
given us by a determinative power of judgment). For though we can
determine what the bounds are for the rational use of our cognitive
powers, we cannot do so in the empirical realm.

VII
On the Aesthetic Presentation
of the Purposiveness of Nature

189

What is merely subjective in the presentation of an object. i.e., what
constitutes its reference to the subject and not to the object, is its
aesthetic30 character; but whatever in it serves, or can be used, to
determine the object (for cognition) is its logical validity. In the
cognition of an object of sense these two references [to the subject
and to the object I occur together. When the senses present things
3O[From Greek alUIJia'IJal (aisthesthai). 'to sense. ']

VII. THE AESTHETIC PRESENTATION. . .

29

outside me, the quality of the space in which these things are intuited
is the merely subjective [feature] of my presentation of them (and
because of this [feature] I cannot tell what such things may be as
objects in themselves), and because of this subjective reference the
object is moreover thought as merely appearance. But despite its
merely subjective quality, space is still an element in our cognition of
things as appearances. [Now the term] sensation (in this case, outer
sensation) also stands for what is merely subjective in our presentations of things outside us, though in its proper meaning it stands for
what is material (real) in them (that through which something existent
is given),3! just as [the term] space stands for the mere a priori form
that enables us to intuit things; yet sensation is also required for
cognition of objects outside us.
On the other hand, that subjective [feature I of a presentation
which cannot at all become an element 0/ cognition is the pleasure or
displeasure connected with that presentation. For through this pleasure or displeasure I do not cognize anything in the object of the
presentation, though it may certainly be the effect of some cognition.
Now a thing's purposiveness, insofar as it is presented in the perception of the thing, is also not a characteristic of the object itself (for no
such characteristic can be perceived), even though it can be inferred
from a cognition of things. Therefore, the subjective [feature] of the
presentation which cannot at all become an element of cognition is
the purposiveness that precedes the cognition of an object32 and that
we connect directly with this presentation even if we are not seeking
to use the presentation of the object for cognition. Therefore, in this
case we call the object purposive only because its presentation is
directly connected with the feeling of pleasure, and this presentation
itself is an aesthetic presentation of purposiveness. The only question
is whether there is such a presentation of purposiveness at aU.
When pleasure is connected with mere apprehension (apprehensio)
of the form of an object of intuition, and we do not refer the apprehension to a concept so as to give rise to determinate cognition, then we
refer the presentation not to the object but solely to the subject;
and the pleasure cannot express anything other than the object's
being commensurate with the cognitive powers that are, and insofar
31( Cf.

the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, Ak. IV, 481.[

32[ I.e., the purposiveness that we present in mere intuition. [

30
190

INTRODUCTION

as they are, brought into play when we judge reflectively, and hence

Iexpresses] merely a subjective formal purposiveness of the object.

191

For this apprehension of forms by the imagination could never occur
if reflective judgment did not compare them, even if unintentionally,
at least with its ability [in general] to refer intuitions to concepts. Now
if in this comparison a given presentation unintentionally brings the
imagination (the power of a priori intuitions) into harmony with the
understanding (the power of concepts), and this harmony arouses a
feeling of pleasure, then the object must thereupon be regarded as
purposive for the reflective power of judgment. A judgment of this
sort is an aesthetic judgment about the object's purposiveness; it is
not based on any concept we have of the object, nor does it provide
such a concept. When the form of an object (rather than what is
material in its presentation, viz., in sensation) is judged in mere
reflection on it (without regard to a concept that is to be acquired
from it) to be the basis of a pleasure in such an object's presentation,
then the presentation of this object is also judged to be connected
necessarily with this pleasure, and hence connected with it not merely
for the subject apprehending this form but in general for everyone
who judges [itl. The object is then called beautiful, and our ability to
judge by such a pleasure (and hence also with universal validity) is
called taste. For the basis of the pleasure is posited merely in the form
of the object for reflection in general, and hence not in a sensation of
the object, nor with a reference to any concept that might involve
some intention or other. Therefore, the harmony we are dealing with
is only a harmony in reflection. whose a priori conditions are valid
universally, between the presentation of the object and the lawfulness
[inherent] in the empirical use in general of the subject's power of
judgment (this lawfulness being the unity between imagination and
understanding). And since this harmony of the object with the powers
of the subject is contingent, it brings about the presentation of a
purposiveness of the object with regard to the subject's cognitive
powers.
Here then is a pleasure that, like any pleasure or displeasure that is
not brought about by the concept of freedom (i.e., by the prior
determination of the higher power of desire by pure reason) \ we
cannot possibly gain insight into by means of concepts, as necessarily
connected with the presentation of an object, but is a pleasure that
must always be recognized only through a perception upon which we

VII. THE AESTHETIC PRESENTATION. . .

31

reflect [and] that must be recognized as connected with the perception.
Hence [a judgment of taste, which involves] this pleasure!,) is like any
empirical judgment because it cannot proclaim objective necessity or
lay claim to a priori validity; but, like any other empirical judgment, a
judgment of taste claims only to be valid for everyone, and it is always
possible for such a judgment to be valid for everyone despite its
intrinsic contingency. What is strange and different about a judgment
of taste is only this: that what is to be connected with the presentation
of the object is not an empirical concept but a feeling of pleasure
(hence no concept at all), though, just as if it were a predicate
connected with cognition of the object, this feeling is nevertheless to
be required of everyone.
A singular empirical judgment, e.g., the judgment made by someone who perceives a mobile drop of water in a rock crystal, rightly
demands that anyone else must concur with its finding, because the
judgment was made in accordance with the universal conditions of
the determinative power of judgment under the laws of a possible
experience in general. In the same way, someone who feels pleasure
in the mere reflection on the form of an object, without any concern
about a concept, rightly lays claim to everyone's assent, even though
this judgment is empirical and a singUlar judgment. For the basis of
this pleasure is found in the universal, though subjective, condition of
reflective judgments, namely, the purposive harmony of an object
(whether a product of nature or of art) with the mutual relation of the
cognitive powers (imagination and understanding) that are required
for every empirical cognition. Hence the pleasure in a judgment of
taste is indeed dependent on an empirical presentation and cannot be
connected a priori with any concept (we cannot determine a priori
what object will or will not conform to taste; we must try it out); but
the pleasure is still the basis determining this judgment, solely because
we are aware that it rests merely on reflection and the universal
though only subjective conditions of the harmony of that reflection
with the cognition of objects generally, the harmony for which the
form of the object is purposive.
That is why judgments of taste, since their possibility presupposes
an a priori principle, are also subject to a critique concerning their
possibility, even though that principle is neither a cognitive principle
for the understanding, nor a practical one for the will, and hence is
not at all determinative a priori.

192

32

INTRODUCTION

But our receptivity to a pleasure arising from our reflection on the
forms of things (both of nature and of art) does not always indicate a
purposiveness of objects in relation to the subject's reflective power
of judgment, in accordance with the concept of nature; sometimes,
on the contrary, it indicates a purposiveness of the subject with regard
to objects in terms of their form, or even their lack of (orm, in
conformity with the concept of freedom. And this is why not all
aesthetic judgments are judgments of taste, which as such refer to the
beautiful; but some of them arise from an intellectual feeling and as
such refer to the sublime. so that this Critique of Aesthetic Judgment
must be divided into two main parts corresponding to these.

VIII
On the Logical Presentation
of the Purposiveness of Nature
When an object is given in experience, there are two ways in which
we can present purposiveness in it. We can present it on a merely
subjective basis: as the harmony of the form of the object (the form
that is [manifested) in the apprehension (apprehensio) of the object
prior to any concept)33 with the cognitive powers--Le., the harmony required in general to unite an intuition with concepts so as to
produce a cognition. But we can also present it on an objective basis:
as the harmony of the form of the object with the possibility of the
thing itself according to a prior concept of the thing that contains the
basis of that form. We have seen that the presentation of the first kind
of purposiveness rests on the pleasure we take directly in the form of
the object when we merely reflect on it. Since the presentation of the
second kind of purposiveness does not refer the object's form, in its
apprehension, to the subject's cognitive powers, but instead to a
determinate cognition of the object under a given concept, the presentation of this purposiveness has nothing to do with a feeling of
33[ Outer

parentheses added. J

VIII.

THE LOGICAL PRESENTATION. . .

33

pleasure in things but rather with the understanding in our judging of
them. When the concept of an object is given and we use it for
cognition, the task of judgment is to exhibit (exhibere) the concept,
i.e., to place beside the concept an intuition corresponding to it.34
Exhibition may occur by means of our own imagination, as happens
in art, where a concept which we have already formed of an object
that is a purpose for us is made real. Or it may come about by nature,
through its technic 35 (as in the case of organized bodies), where we
attribute to nature our concept of a purpose in order to judge its
product; in that case we present not just a purposiveness of nature in
the form of the thing, but present the product itself as a natural
purpose. Although our concept of a subjective purposiveness [manifested I in nature's forms in terms of empirical laws is not at all a
concept of the object, but is only a principle of judgment by which it
provides itself with concepts in nature's immense diversity (so that
judgment can orient itself in this diversity), we are still attributing to
nature, on the analogy of a purpose, a concern, as it were, for our
cognitive power. Hence we may regard natural beauty as the exhibition
of the concept of formal (merely subjective) purposiveness, and may
regard natural purposes as the exhibition of the concept of a real
(objective) purposiveness, the first of which we judge by taste
(aesthetically, by means of the feeling of pleasure), and the second by
understanding and reason (logically, according to concepts).
This is the basis for dividing the critique of judgment into that of
aesthetic and that of teleological judgment. By the first I mean the
power to judge formal purposiveness (sometimes also called subjective purposiveness) by the feeling of pleasure or displeasure; by the
second I mean the power to judge the real (objective) purposiveness
of nature by understanding and reason.
In a critique of judgment, the part that deals with aesthetic judgment belongs to it essentially. For this power alone contains a principle that judgment lays completely a priori at the basis of its reflection
on nature: the principle of a formal purposiveness of nature, in terms
of its particular (empirical) laws, for our cognitive power, without
34[Cf. Ak. 232 br. n. 51.1
35[In § 72, Kant characterizes the technic of nature as "nature's power to produce
[things] in tenns of purposes" (Ak. 390-91). The term is derived from the Greek r(XV71
(technej, i.e .. 'art' in the sense that includes craft.J

193

34

194

INTRODUCTION

which principle the understanding could not find its way about in
nature. By contrast, we cannot indicate any a priori basis whatever
[for saying] that there must be objective purposes in nature, i.e.,
things possible only as natural purposes; indeed, the concept of
nature as object of experience, whether in its universal or in its
particular [aspects I, does not tell us that such a basis is even possible.
Rather, judgment, without containing a priori a principle for such
[objective purposiveness], merely contains the rule for using the
concept of purposes for the sake of reason when cases (certain
products) occur, after the former transcendental principle lof the
formal purposiveness of nature Jhas already prepared the understanding
to apply the concept of a purpose (at least in terms of form) to nature.
But as a principle for judging the form of a thing, the transcendental principle of presenting in the form a purposiveness of nature, with
regard to the subject and his cognitive power, leaves it wholly
undetermined where and in what cases when judging a product I am
[to regard the product as having arisen I in accordance with a principle of purposiveness rather than merely in accordance with universal natural laws; the principle leaves it to aesthetic judgment to
ascertain by taste whether the thing (its form) is commensurate with
our cognitive powers (as far as judgment decides by feeling rather
than by a harmony with concepts). On the other hand, when judgment is used teleologically, it indicates determinately the conditions
under which something (e.g., an organized body) is to be judged in
terms of the idea of a purpose of nature; but judgment cannot adduce
a principle Iderived [ from the concept of nature, taken as object of
experience, authorizing it to assert a priori that nature [makes products]
by reference to purposes, or authorizing it even to assume in an
indeterminate way that actual experience will manifest anything of
the sort in such products. The reason for this is that, in order for us
to cognize only empirically that a certain object has objective
purposiveness, we would have to engage in many particular experiences and examine them under the principle that unites them. Hence
aesthetic judgment is a special power of judging things according to a
rule, but not according to concepts. Teleological judgment is not a
special power, but is only reflective judgment as such proceeding
according to concepts (as it always does in theoretical cognition),J6
36[Parentheses added.]

VIII. THE WGICAL PRESENTATION. . .

35

but proceeding, in the case of certain natural objects, according to
special principles, namely, according to principles of a power of
judgment that merely reflects upon but does not determine objects.
Hence, as regards its application, teleological judgment belongs to
the theoretical part of philosophy; because of its special principles,
which are not determinative (as would be required in a doctrine),37 it
must also form a special part of the critique. Aesthetic judgment, on
the other hand. contributes nothing to the cognition of its objects;
hence it belongs only to the critique that is the propaedeutic to all
philosophy-viz., to the critique of the judging subject and his cognitive powers insofar as these are capable of [having) a priori principles,
no matter what their use may be (theoretical or practical).

IX
How Judgment Connects
the Legislations
of the Understanding
and of Reason
The understanding legislates a priori for nature, as object of sense, in
order to give rise to theoretical cognition of nature in a possible
experience. Reason legislates a priori for freedom and for freedom's
own causality, in other words. for the supersensible in the subject, in
order to give rise to unconditioned practical cognition. The great gulf
that separates the supersensible from appearances completely cuts
off the domain of the concept of nature under the one legislation, and
the domain of the concept of freedom under the other legislation,
from any influence that each (according to its own basic laws) might
have had on the other. The concept of freedom determines nothing
with regard to our theoretical cognition of nature, just as the concept
of nature determines nothing with regard to the practical laws of
37, Parentheses added.,

195

36

196

INTRODUCTION

freedom; and to this extent it is not possible to throw a bridge
from one domain to the other. And yet. even though the bases
that determine the causality governed by the concept of freedom
(and by the practical rule contained in this concept) do not lie
in nature. and even though the sensible cannot determine the supersensible in the subject, yet the reverse is possible (not, indeed,
with regard to our cognition of nature, but still with regard to the
consequences that the concept of freedom has in nature); and this
possibility38 is contained in the very concept of a causality through
freedom, whose effect is to be brought about in the world [butl
in conformity with formal laws of freedom. It is true that when
we use the word cause with regard to the supersensible, we mean
only the basis that determines natural things to exercise their causality to produce an effect in conformity with the natural laws proper
to that causality, yet in accordance with the formal principle of
the laws of reason as well. Though we have no insight into how
this is possible, the objection that alleges a contradiction in it can
be refuted adequately.39 The effect [at which we are to aiml according
to the concept of freedom is the final purpose which (or the appearance of which in the world of sense) ought to exist; and we Imustl
presuppose the condition under which it is possible [to achieve I
this final purpose in nature (in the nature of the subject as a
being of sense, namely, as a human being). It is judgment that presupposes this condition a priori, and without regard to the practical,
[so that I this power provides us with the concept that mediates between
the concepts of nature and the concept of freedom: the concept of a
3!![Of the supersensible's (i.e., freedom's) determining the sensible (nature}.l

196

390ne of the various supposed contradictions in this complete distinction of natural
causality from the causality through freedom is given in the following objection to it. It
is held that when [ talk about nature putting obstacles in the way of the causality
governed by laws of freedom (moral laws), or about nature furthering it, 1 do after all
grant that nature influences freedom. But this is a misinterpretation, which is easily
avoided merely by understanding what I have said. The resistance or furtherance is not
between nature and freedom, but between nature as appearance and the effects of
freedom as appearances in the world of sense; and even the causality of freedom (of
pure and practical reason) is the causality of a natural cause (the subject, regarded as a
human being and hence as an appearance) subject to [the laws of\ nature. [t is this
causality'S determination whose basis is contained, in a way not otherwise explicable,
in the intelligible that is thought of when we think freedom (just as in the case of the
intelligible that is the supersensible substrate of nature).

IX.

HOW JUDGMENT CONNECTS. . .

37

purposiveness of nature, which makes possible the transition40 from
pure theoretical to pure practical lawfulness, from lawfulness in terms
of nature to the final purpose set by the concept of freedom. For it is
through this concept that we cognize the possibility of [achievingl the
final purpose, which can be actualized only in nature and in accordance with its laws.
The understanding, inasmuch as it can give laws to nature a priori,
proves that we cognize nature only as appearance, and hence at the
same time points to a supersensible substrate of nature; but it leaves
this substrate wholly undetermined. Judgment, through its a priori
principle of judging nature in terms of possible particular laws of
nature, provides nature's supersensible substrate (within as well as
outside us) with determinability 41 by the intellectual power. But
reason, through its a priori practical law, gives this same substrate
determination. Thus judgment makes possible the transition from the
domain of the concept of nature to that of the concept of freedom.
Regarding the powers of the soul in general, insofar as they are
considered as higher ones, i.e., as powers that have autonomy, [the
following can be said]: for the power of cognition (theoretical cognition of nature), the constitutive a priori principles lie in the understanding; for the feeling of pleasure and displeasure. they lie in
judgment, [as far as it is I independent of concepts and sensations,
which might have to do with determining the power of desire and
hence be directly practical; for the power of desire. they lie in reason,
which is practical without the mediation of any pleasure whatsoever.
regardless of origin, and which determines for this power, insofar as it
is the higher power of desire, the final purpose that also carries with it
pure intellectual liking for its object. Judgment's concept of a purposiveness of nature still belongs to the concepts of nature, but only
as a regulative principle of the cognitive power, even though the
aesthetic judgment about certain objects (of nature or of art) that
prompts this concept of purposiveness is a constitutive principle with
regard to the feeling of pleasure or displeasure. The spontaneity in
the play of the cognitive powers, whose harmony with each other
4010n this "transition" and "mediation," see the Translator's Introduction, /xiv and

xcvii-cii.]
411This point is closely related to the mediation and transition just mentioned. See the
references in n. 4O.J

197

38

INTRODUCTION

contains the basis of this pleasure, makes that concept of purposiveness
suitable42 for mediating the connection of the domain of the concept
of nature with that of the concept of freedom, as regards freedom's
consequences, inasmuch as this harmony also promotes the mind's
receptivity to moral feeling. The following table may facilitate an
overview of all the higher powers in their systematic unity.43

198

All the
Mental Powers

Cognitive Powers

A Priori
Principles

Application
to

cognitive power

understanding

lawfulness

nature

feeling of pleasure and displeasure

judgment

purposiveness

art

power of desire

reason

final purpose

freedom

42(On why this is so, see "Problem III" in the Translator's Introduction, !xiv and

cii-civ. (
43'fhat my divisions in pure philosophy almost always tum out tripartite has aroused
suspicion. Yet that is in the nature of the case. If a division is to be made a priori. then it
will be either analytic or synthetic. If it is analytic, then it is governed by the principle
of contradiction and hence is always bipartite (quodllbet ens est aut A aut non A 44). If
it is synthetic, but is to be made on the basis of a priori concepts (rather than, as in
mathematics, on the basis of the intuition corresponding a priori to the concept), then
we must have what is required for a synthetic unity in general, namely, (1) a condition.
(2) something conditioned, (3) the concept that arises from the union of the conditioned with its condition; hence the division must of necessity be a trichotomy.
44(Any entity is either A or not A.(

DIVISION OF THE ENTIRE WORK

39

Division of the Entire Work
PART I:

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

DIVISION I:

ANALYTIC OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

Book I:
Book II:

Analytic of the Beautiful
Analytic of the Sublime

DIVISION II:

DIALECTIC OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

[Appendix:

On Methodology Concerning Taste ]45

PART II:

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

DIVISION I:

ANALYTIC OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

DIVISION II:

DIALECTIC OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

Appendix:

Methodology of Teleological Judgment

451There can be no methodology concerning taste, and this appendix explains why
that is so: § 60, Ak. 354-56.1

199

PART

I

CRITIQUE OF
AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

201

DIVISION I
ANALYTIC OF
AESTHETIC JUDGMENT
BOOK I
ANALYTIC OF
THE BEAUTIFUL
First Moment
of a Judgment of Taste,!
As to Its Quality
IThe definition of taste on which J am basing this [analysis) is that it is the ability to
judge the beautiful. But we have to analyze judgments of taste in order to discover what
is required for calling an object beautiful. I have used the logical functions of judging2
to help me find the moments that judgmentJ takes into consideration when it reflects
(since even a judgment of taste still has reference to the understanding). I have
examined the moment of quality first, because an aesthetic judgment about the
beautiful is concerned with it first.
2[They fall under four headings: quantity, quality, relation, modality. See the Critique
of Pure Reason, A 70 = B 95.[

3[Urteilskra!t. in this case. Cf. above. Ak. 167 br. n. 4.[

43

203

§1

A Judgment of
Taste Is Aesthetic
If we wish to decide whether something is beautiful or not, we do not

204

use understanding to refer the presentation4 to the object so as to
give rise to cognition;5 rather, we use imagination (perhaps in
connection with understanding) to refer the presentation to the subject and his feeling of pleasure or displeasure_ Hence a judgment of
taste is not a cognitive judgment and so is not a logical judgment
but an aesthetic one, by which we mean a judgment whose determining basis cannot be other than subjective. But any reference of
presentations, even of sensations, can be objective (in which case it
signifies what is real [rather than formal] in an empirical presentation); excepted is a reference to the feeling of pleasure and displeasurethis reference designates nothing whatsoever in the object, but
here the subject feels himself, [namely] how he is affected by the
presentation.
To apprehend a regular, purposive building with one's cognitive
power6 (whether the presentation is distinct or confused) is very
different from being conscious of this presentation with a sensation of
liking. Here the presentation is referred only to the subject, namely, to
his feeling of life, under the name feeling of pleasure or displeasure,
and this forms the basis of a very special power of discriminating and
judging. 7 This power does not contribute anything to cognition, but
merely compares the given presentation in the subject with the entire
presentational power, of which the mind becomes conscious when it
feels its own state. The presentations given in a judgment may be
41 Vorstellung, traditionally rendered as 'representation: (See above, Ak. 175 br. n.
17.j 'Presentation' is a generic term referring to such objects of our direct awareness as
sensations, intuitions, perceptions, concepts, cognitions, ideas, and schemata. cr. the
Critique of Pure Reason, A 320 = B 376-77 and A 140 = B 179.1
5[Erkenntnis.

cr. above, Ak.

167 br. n. 2.]

61For my use of 'power,' rather than 'facuity,' see above, At. 167 br. n. 3.1
71 Beurteilung. On Kant's attempt to make a terminological distinction between
'beurteilen' and 'urteilen, 'see above, Ak. 169 br. n. 9.]

44

§ 1. A JUDGMENT OF TASTE IS AESTHETIC

45

empirical (and hence aesthetic8), but if we refer them to the object,
the judgment we make by means of them is logical. On the other
hand, even if the given presentations were rational, they would still be
aesthetic if, and to the extent that, the subject referred them, in his
judgment, solely to himself (to his feeling).

§2

The Liking That
Determines a Judgment
of Taste Is Devoid
of All Interest
Interest is what we call the Liking we connect with the presentation of
an object's existence. Hence such a liking always refers at once to our
power of desire, either as the basis that determines it, or at any rate as
necessarily connected with that determining basis. But if the question
is whether something is beautiful, what we want to know is not
whether we or anyone cares, or so much as might care, in any way,
about the thing's existence, but rather how we judge it in our mere
contemplation of it (intuition or reflection). Suppose someone asks
me whether I consider the palace I see before me beautiful. I might
reply that I am not fond of things of that sort, made merely to be
gaped at. Or I might reply like that Iroquois sachem who said that he
liked nothing better in Paris than the eating-houses. 9 I might even
81From Greek a/<Ji}iu1Jal (aistMsthai), 'to sense.'1
91Wilhelm Windelband, editor of the Akademie edition of the Critique of Judgment.
notes (Ak. V, 527) that Kant's reference has been traced to (Pierre Fran~ois Xavier de)
Charlevoix (1682-1761, French Jesuit traveler and historian), Histoire et descriptl'on
generate de fa Nouvelle-France (History and General Description of New France lin
eastern CanadaD (Paris, 1744). Windelband quotes a passage (from III, 322) in French,
which translates: "Some Iroquois went to Paris in 1666 and were shown all the royal
mansions and all the beauties of that great city. But they did not adm\re anything in
these, and would have preferred the villages to the capital of the most flourishing
kingdom of Europe if they had not seen tbe rue de /a Huchette where they were
delighted with the rotisseries that they always found furnished with meats of all sorts."
(All translations given in footnotes are my own. and this fact is not indicated in each
such footnote individually.)1

46

205

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

go on, as Rousseau would, to rebuke the vanity of the great who
spend the people's sweat on such superfluous things. I might, finally,
quite easily convince myself that, if I were on some uninhabited
island with no hope of ever again coming among people, and
could conjure up such a splendid edifice by a mere wish, I would not
even take that much trouble for it if I already had a sufficiently
comfortable hut. The questioner may grant all this and approve of it;
but it is not to the point. All he wants to know is whether my mere
presentation of the object is accompanied by a liking, no matter
how indifferent I may be about the existence of the object of this
presentation. We can easily see that, in order for me to say that an
object is beautiful, and to prove that I have taste, what matters is what
I do with this presentation within myself, and not the [respect]
in which I depend on the object's existence. Everyone has to admit
that if a judgment about beauty is mingled with the least interest
then it is very partial and not a pure judgment of taste. In order to
play the judge in matters of taste, we must not be in the least biased
in favor of the thing's existence but must be wholly indifferent
about it.
There is no better way to elucidate this proposition. which is
of prime importance, than by contrasting the pure disinterested lO
liking that occurs in a judgment of taste with a liking connected
with interest, especially if we can also be certain that the kinds of
interest I am about to mention are the only ones there are.

lOA judgment we make about an object of our liking may be wholly disinterested but
still very interesting, i.e., it is not based on any interest but it gives rise to an interest; all
pure moral judgments are of this sort. But judgments of taste, of themselves, do not
even give rise to any interest. Only in society does it become interesting to have taste;
the reason for this will be indicated later. I I
1liSee esp. Ak. 275-76 and 296-98.)

§3
A Liking for the Agreeable
Is Connected with Interest
AGREEABLE is what the senses like in sensation. Here the opportunity
arises at once to censure and call attention to a quite common
confusion of the two meanings that the word sensation can have. All
liking (so it is said or thought) is itself sensation (of a pleasure). Hence
whatever is liked, precisely inasmuch as it is liked, is agreeable (and,
depending on the varying degrees or on the relation to other agreeable sensations, it is graceful, lovely, delightful, gladdening, etc. ). But
if we concede this, then sense impressions that determine inclination,
or principles of reason that determine the will, or mere forms of
intuition that we reflect on [and J that determine the power of judgment,
will all be one and the same insofar as their effect on the feeling of
pleasure is concerned, since pleasure would be the agreeableness
[found] in the sensation of one's state. And since, after all, everything
we do with our powers must in the end aim at the practical and unite
in it as its goal, we could not require them to estimate things and their
value in any other way than by the gratification they promise; how
they provided it would not matter at all in the end. And since all that
could make a difference in that promised gratification would be what
means we select, people could no longer blame one another for
baseness and malice, but only for foolishness and ignorance, since all
of them, each according to his own way of viewing things, would be
pursuing one and the same goal: gratification.
When [something determines the feeling of pleasure or displeasure
and this] determination of that feeling is called sensation, this term
means something quite different from what it means when I apply it
to the presentation of a thing (through the senses, a receptivity that
belongs to the cognitive power). For in the second case the presentation is referred to the object, but in the first it is referred solely to the
subject and is not used for cognition at all, not even for that by which
the subject cognizes himself.
As [ have just explicated it [i.e., for the second easel. the word
sensation means an objective presentation of sense; and. to avoid

47

206

48

207

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

constantly running the risk of being misinterpreted, let us call what
must always remain merely subjective, and cannot possibly be the
presentation of an object, by its other customary name: feeling.1 2 The
green color of meadows belongs to objective sensation, i.e., to the
perception of an object of sense; but the color's agreeableness belongs
to subjective sensation, to feeling, through which no object is presented,
but through which the object is regarded as an object of our liking
(which is not a cognition of it).
Now, that a judgment by which I declare an object to be agreeable
expresses an interest in that object is already obvious from the fact
that, by means of sensation, the judgment arouses a desire for objects
of that kind, so that the liking presupposes something other than my
mere judgment about the object: it presupposes that I have referred
the existence of the object to my state insofar as that state is affected
by such an object. This is why we say of the agreeable not merely that
we like it but that it gratifies us. When I speak of the agreeable, I am
not granting mere approval: the agreeable produces an inclination.
Indeed, what is agreeable in the liveliest way requires no judgment at
all about the character of the object, as we can see in people who aim
at nothing but enjoyment (this is the word we use to mark the
intensity of the gratification): they like to dispense with all judging.

§4

A Liking for the Good
Is Connected with Interest 13
Good is what, by means of reason, we like through its mere concept. We
call something (viz., if it is something useful) good for [this or that]
if we like it only as a means. But we call something intrinsically good if
we like it for its own sake. In both senses of the term, the good always
121Kant does not, however, consistently adhere to this stipulation, and the inconsistency has been left intact in the translation. I
131ef., in this section, the Critique of Practical Reason, Ak. V, 22-26. I

§ 4. A LIKING FOR THE GOOD. . .

49

contains the concept of a purpose, consequently a relation of reason to a
volition (that is at least possible), and hence a liking for the existence
of an object or action. In other words, it contains some interest or
other.
In order to consider something good, I must always know what sort
of thing the object is [meant] to be, i.e., I must have a [determinate)
concept of it. But I do not need this in order to find beauty in
something. Flowers. free designs, lines aimlessly intertwined and
called foliage: these have no significance. depend on no determinate
concept, and yet we like [gefallen] them. A liking I Wohlgefallen 14 ]
for the beautiful must depend on the reflection, regarding an object,
that leads to some concept or other (but it is indeterminate which
concept this is). This dependence on reflection also distinguishes the
liking for the beautiful from (that for) the agreeable, which rests
entirely on sensation.
It is true that in many cases it seems as if the agreeable and the
good are one and the same. Thus people commonly say that all
gratification (especially if it lasts) is intrinsically good, which means
roughly the same as to be (lastingly) agreeable and to be good are one
and the same. Yet it is easy to see that in talking this way they are
merely substituting one word for another by mistake, since the concepts that belong to these terms are in no way interchangeable.
Insofar as we present an object as agreeable, we present it solely in
relation to sense; but if we are to can the object good [as well], and
hence an object of the will, we must first bring it under principles of
reason, using the concept of a purpose. [Sol if something that gratifies
us is also called good, it has a very different relation to our liking. This
is [also] evident from the fact that in the case of the good there is always
the question whether it is good merely indirectly or good directly15
(i.e., useful, or intrinsically good), whereas in the case of the agreeable
14[The only noun Kant had for the verb 'gefallen' (,to be liked') was 'Wohlgefa/len,'
and 'wohl' does not add anything. Grammar aside, Kant uses the two interchangeably.
Moreover, hc uses them just as much concerning the good and the agreeable as
concerning the beautiful. and what is special about the liking for the beautiful lies in
what else Kant says about it. not in the word 'Wohlgefallen' itself.[
15[ 'Mitte/bar. . 'unmlltelbar ' The more literal rendering of these as 'mediately' and
'immediately' has been avoided in this translation because 'immediately' has also its
temporal sense, which would frequently be misleading.,

208

SO

209

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

this question cannot even arise, since this word always signifies something that we like directly. (What we call beautiful is also liked directly.)
Even in our most ordinary speech we distinguish the agreeable
from the good. If a dish stimulates [erheben lour tasting by its spices
and other condiments, we will not hesitate to call it agreeable while
granting at the same time that it is not good; for while the dish is
directly appealing to our senses, we dislike it indirectly, i.e., as
considered by reason, which looks ahead to the consequences. Even
when we judge health, this difference is still noticeable. To anyone
who has it, health is directly agreeable (at least negatively, as the
absence of all bodily pain). But in order to say that health is good, we
must also use reason and direct this health toward purposes: we must
say that health is a state that disposes us to [attend toJ all our tasks.
[Perhaps in the case of happiness, at least, the agreeable and the good
are the same?J Surely everyone believes that happiness, the greatest
sum (in number as well as duration) of what is agreeable in life, may
be called a true good, indeed the highest good[?) And yet reason
balks at this too. Agreeableness is enjoyment. But if our sale aim were
enjoyment, it would be foolish to be scrupulous about the means for
getting it, [i.e., I about whether we got it passively, from nature's
bounty, or through our own activity and our own doing. But reason
can never be persuaded that there is any intrinsic value in the existence of a human being who lives merely for enjoyment (no matter how
industrious he may be in pursuing that aim), even if he served others,
all likewise aiming only at enjoyment, as a most efficient means to it
because he participated in their gratification by enjoying it through
sympathy. Only by what he does without concern for enjoyment, in
complete freedom and independently of whatever he could also receive
passively from nature, does he give his existence [Dasein I an absolute
value, as the existence IExistenz 16 1of a person. Happiness, with all its
abundance of agreeableness, is far from being an unconditioned good,17
16[In the Critique of Judgment Kant uses 'Dasein' and 'Existenz' synonymously, and
they will both be rendered as 'existence: Moreover, rendering 'Dasein' as 'being' or
'Being'leads to serious trouble in tile contexts where Kant also refers to the original
being (Wesen); see esp. Ak. 475.1
17An obligation to enjoy oneself is a manifest absurdity. So, consequently, must be an
alleged obligation to any acts that aim merely at enjoyment, no matter how intellectu·
ally subtle (or veiled) that enjoyment may be, indeed, even if it were a mystical,
so-called heavenly, enjoyment,

§ 4. A LIKING FOR THE GOOD. . .

51

But despite all this difference between the agreeable and the good,
they do agree in this: they are always connected with an interest in
their object. This holds not only for the agreeable-see § 3-and for
what is good indirectly (useful), which we like as the means to
something or other that is agreeable, but also for what is good
absolutely and in every respect, i.e., the moral good, which carries
with it the highest interest. For the good is the object of the will (a
power of desire that is determined by reason). But to will something
and to have a liking for its existence, i.e., to take an interest in it, are
identical.

§5
Comparison of the Three Sorts
of Liking, Which Differ in Kind
Both the agreeable and the good refer to our power of desire and
hence carry a liking with them, the agreeable a liking that is conditioned pathologically by stimuli (stimuli), the good a pure practical
liking that is determined not just by the presentation of the object
but also by the presentation of the subject's connection with the
existence of the object; i.e., what we like is not just the object but its
existence as well. A judgment of taste, on the other hand. is merely
contemplative, i.e., it is a judgment that is indifferent to the existence
of the object: 18 it [considers) the character of the object only by
holding it up to l9 our feeling of pleasure and displeasure. Nor is
this contemplation, as such, directed to concepts. for a judgment of
taste is not a cognitive judgment (whether theoretical or practical)
and hence is neither based on concepts. nor directed to them as
purposes.
ISlef. the Metaphysics of Morals. Ak. VI. 212.J
191For comparison: i.e., the feeling, as we shall see shortly (Ak. 222), is a nonconceptua]
awareness of a harmony (with a certain indeterminate form) between imagination and
understanding; in an aesthetic judgment of reflection we hold, for comparison, a given
form up to the form of that harmony. I

52

210

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

Hence the agreeable, the beautiful, and the good designate three
different relations that presentations have to the feeling of pleasure
and displeasure, the feeling by reference to which we distinguish
between objects or between ways of presenting them. The terms of
approbation which are appropriate to each of these three are also
different. We call agreeable what GRATIFIES us, beautiful what we
just LIKE. good what we ESTEEM, or endorse [billigen I. i.e., that to
which we attribute [setzen] an objective value. Agreeableness holds
for nonrational animals too; beauty only for human beings, i.e.,
beings who are animal and yet rational. though it is not enough that
they be rational (e.g., spirits) but they must be animal as well; the
good, however, holds for every rational being as such. though I
cannot fully justify and explain this proposition until later. We may
say that, of all these three kinds of liking, only the liking involved in
taste for the beautiful is disinterested and free. since we are not
compelled to give our approval by any interest, whether of sense or of
reason. So we might say that [the term I liking, in the three cases
mentioned, refers to inclination. or to favor. or to respect. For FAVOR
is the only free liking. Neither an object of inclination, nor one that a
law of reason enjoins on us as an object of desire. leaves us the
freedom to make an object of pleasure for ourselves out of something
or other. All interest either presupposes a need or gives rise to one;
and, because interest is the basis that determines approval, it makes
the judgment about the object unfree.
Consider, first, the interest of inclination, [which occurs] with the
agreeable. Here everyone says: Hunger is the best sauce; and to
people with a healthy appetite anything is tasty provided it is edible.
Hence if people have a liking of this sort, that does not prove that
they are selecting [Wahl] by taste. Only when their need has been
satisfied can we tell who in a multitude of people has taste and who
does not. In the same way, second, one can find manners (conduite)
without virtue, politeness without benevolence, propriety without
integrity, and so on.20 For where the moral law speaks we are
objectively no longer free to select what we must do; and to show
taste in our conduct (or in judging other people's conduct) is very
20[I.e., taste, which is free, can mallifest itself in manners, politeness, and propriety
only where virtue, benevolence. and integrity. with the moral interest they involve, are
absent. I

§ 5. THE THREE SORTS OF LIKING. . .

S3

different from expressing our moral way of thinking. For this contains
a command and gives rise to a need, whereas moral taste 21 only plays
with the objects of liking without committing itself to any of them.

Explication of the Beautiful
Inferred from
the First Moment
Taste is the ability to judge an object, or a way of presenting it, by
means of a liking or disliking devoid of all interest. The object of such
a liking is called beautiful.

Second Moment
of a Judgment of Taste,
As to Its Quantity
§6

The Beautiful Is
What Is Presented
without Concepts as the Object
of a Universal Liking
This explication of the beautiful can be inferred from the preceding
explication of it as object of a liking devoid of all interest. For if
211As displayed in one's conduct: in manners, politeness, or propriety.]

211

54

212

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

someone likes something and is conscious that he himself does so
without any interest, then he cannot help judging that it must contain
a basis for being liked [that holds I for everyone. He must believe that
he is justified in requiring a similar liking from everyone because he
cannot discover, underlying this liking, any private conditions, on
which only he might be dependent, so that he must regard it as based
on what he can presuppose in everyone else as well. He cannot
discover such private conditions because his liking is not based on
any inclination he has (nor on any other considered interest whatever):
rather, the judging person feels completely free as regards the liking
he accords the object. Hence he will talk about the beautiful as if
beauty were a characteristic of the object and the judgment were
logical (namely, a cognition of the object through concepts of it),
even though in fact the judgment is only aesthetic and refers the
object's presentation merely to the subject. He will talk in this way
because the judgment does resemble a logical judgment inasmuch as
we may presuppose it to be valid for everyone. On the other hand,
this universality cannot arise from concepts. For from concepts there
is no transition to the feeling of pleasure or displeasure (except
in pure practical laws; but these carry an interest with them, while
none is connected with pure judgments of taste). It follows that,
since a judgment of taste involves the consciousness that all interest
is kept out of it, it must also involve a claim to being valid for
everyone, but without having a universality based on concepts. In
other words, a judgment of taste must involve a claim to subjective
universality.

§7

Comparison of the Beautiful
with the Agreeable
and the Good
in Terms of the
Above Characteristic
As regards the agreeable everyone acknowledges that his judgment,
which he bases on a private feeling and by which he says that he likes
some object, is by the same token confined to his own person. Hence,
if he says that canary wine is agreeable he is quite content if someone
else corrects his terms and reminds him to say instead: It is agreeable
to me. This holds moreover not only for the taste of the tongue,
palate, and throat, but also for what may be agreeable to anyone's
eyes and ears. To one person the color violet is gentle and lovely, to
another lifeless and faded. One person loves the sound of wind
instruments, another that of string instruments. 22 It would be foolish
if we disputed about such differences with the intention of censuring
another's judgment as incorrect if it differs from ours, as if the two
were opposed logically. Hence about the agreeable the following
principle holds: Everyone has his own taste (of sense23).
It is quite different (exactly the other way round) with the beautiful.
It would be ridiculous if someone who prided himself on his taste
tried to justify [itl by saying: This object (the building we are looking
at, the garment that man is wearing, the concert we are listening to,
the poem put up to be judged) is beautiful for me. For he must not
call it beautiful if [he means I only [that I he24 likes it. Many things
may be charming and agreeable to him; no one cares about that. But
if he proclaims something to be beautiful, then he requires the same
liking from others; he then judges not just for himself but for everyone,
22[For an elaborate discussion of OUf different senses, see the Anthropology, § § 15-27.
Ak. VII, 153-67.J
23[As distinguished from taste of reflection I
24[Emphasis added.]

55

56

213

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

and speaks of beauty as if it were a property of things. That is why he
says: The thing is beautiful, and does not count on other people to
agree with his judgment of liking on the ground that he has repeatedly
found them agreeing with him; rather, he demands that they agree.
He reproaches them if they judge differently, and denies that they
have taste, which he nevertheless demands of them, as something
they ought to have. In view of this [so/ern}, we cannot say that
everyone has his own particular taste. That would amount to saying
that there is no such thing as taste at all, no aesthetic judgment that
could rightfully lay claim to everyone's assent.
And yet, even about the agreeable we can find people standing in
agreement, and because of this we do, after all, deny that some
people have taste while granting it to others; in speaking of taste here
we do not mean the sense of taste, which involves an organ, but an
ability to judge the agreeable in general. Thus we will say that
someone has taste if he knows how to entertain his guests [at a party I
with agreeable things (that they can enjoy by all the senses) in such a
way that everyone likes [the partyl. But here it is understood that the
universality is only comparative, so that the rules are only general (as
all empirical rules are), not universal, as are the rules that a judgment
about the beautiful presupposes [sich unternehmen} or lays claim to.
Such a judgment of taste about the agreeable refers to sociability as
far as that rests on empirical rules. It is true that judgments about the
good also rightfully claim to be valid for everyone, but in presenting
the good as the object of a universal liking we do so by means of a
concept, whereas this is the case neither with the beautiful nor with
the agreeable.

§8

In a Judgment of Taste
the Universality of the Liking
Is Presented Only as Subjective
This special characteristic of an aesthetic judgment [of reflection),
the universality to be found in judgments of taste, is a remarkable
feature, not indeed for the logician but certainly for the transcendental philosopher. 25 This universality requires a major effort on his part
if he is to discover its origin, but it compensates him for this by
revealing to him a property of our cognitive power which without this
analysis would have remained unknown.
We must begin by fully convincing ourselves that in making a
judgment of taste (about the beautiful) we require [ansinnenJ everyone to like the object, yet without this liking's being based on a
concept (since then it would be the good), and that this claim to
universal validity belongs so essentially to a judgment by which we
declare something to be beautiful that it would not occur to anyone
to use this term without thinking of universal validity; instead, everything we like without a concept would then be included with the
agreeable. For as to the agreeable we allow everyone to be of a mind
of his own, no one requiring [zumuten 26 Jothers to agree with his
judgment of taste. But in a judgment of taste about beauty we always
require others to agree. Insofar as judgments about the agreeable are
merely private, whereas judgments about the beautiful are put forward as having general validity (as being public), taste regarding the
agreeable can be called taste of sense, and taste regarding the beauti251The transcendental philosopher tries to discover what enables us to make a priori
judgments, especially synthetic ones: judgments in which the predicate is not already
contained in the subject, as it is in analytic judgments, but which are nonetheless
(wholly or partly) a priori rather than empirical. (See also above, Ak. 181-82, and cf.
the Critique of Pure Reason. A 298-302 = B 355-59.) I

26I'Ans;nnen' and 'zumUlen' are used interchangeably by Kant. Both mean 'to expect'
as in '1 expect you to do this,' but not in the sense of anticipation. Because of this
ambiguity (found also in 'erv.arlen, . 'to el(pect'), 'require' is to be preferred. (It also has
just about the right force.) I

57

214

58

215

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

ful can be called taste of reflection, though the judgments of both are
aesthetic (rather than practical) judgments about an object, [Le.,]
judgments merely about the relation that the presentation of the
object has to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure. But surely there
is something strange here. In the case of the taste of sense, not only
does experience show that its judgment (of a pleasure or displeasure
we take in something or other) does not hold universally, but people,
of their own accord, are modest enough not even to require others to
agree (even though there actually is, at times, very widespread agreement in these judgments too). Now, experience teaches us that the
taste of reflection, with its claim that its judgment (about the beautiful)
is universally valid for everyone, is also rejected often enough. What
is strange is that the taste of reflection should nonetheless find itself
able (as it actually does) to conceive of judgments that can demand
such agreement, and that it does in fact require this agreement from
everyone for each of its judgments. What the people who make these
judgments dispute about is not whether such a claim is possible; they
are merely unable to agree, in particular cases, on the correct way to
apply this ability.
Here we must note, first of all, that a universality that does not rest
on concepts of the object (not even on empirical ones) is not a logical
universality at all, but an aesthetic one; i.e., the [universal] quantity
of the judgment is not objective but only subjective. For this quantity
I use the expression general validity, by which I mean the validity that
a presentation's reference to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure
[may] have for every subject, rather than the validity of a presentation's
reference to the cognitive power. (We may, alternatively, use just one
expression, universal validity, for both the aesthetic and the logical
quantity of a judgment, provided we add objective for the logical
universal validity, to distinguish it from the merely subjective one,
which is always aesthetic.)
Now a judgment that is universally valid objectively is always
subjectively so too, i.e., if the judgment is valid for everything contained under a given concept, then it is also valid for everyone who
presents an object by means of this concept. But if a judgment has
subjective -i.e., aesthetic-universal validity, which does not rest on
a concept, we cannot infer that it also has logical universal validity,
because such judgments do not deal with the object [itself] at all.
That is precisely why the aesthetic universality we attribute to a

§ 8.

IN A JUDGMENT OF TASTE. . .

59

judgment must be of a special kind; for although it does not connect
the predicate of beauty with the concept of the object, considered in
its entire logical sphere, yet it extends that predicate over the entire
sphere of judging persons.
In their logical quantity all judgments of taste are singular judgmentsP For since I must hold the object directly up t0 28 my feeling
of pleasure and displeasure, but without using concepts, these judgments cannot have the quantity that judgments with objective general29
validity have. On the other hand, once we have made a judgment of
taste about an object, under the conditions characteristic for such
judgments, we may then convert the singular presentation of the
object into a concept by comparing it [with other presentations) and
so arrive at a logically universal judgment. For example, I may look at
a rose and make a judgment of taste declaring it to be beautiful. But if
I compare many singular roses and so arrive at the judgment, Roses in
general are beautiful, then my judgment is no longer merely aesthetic,
but is a logical judgment based on an aesthetic one. Now the judgment,
The rose is agreeable (in its smell), is also aesthetic and singular, but
it is a judgment of sense, not of taste. For a judgment of taste carries
with it an aesthetic quantity of universality, i.e., of validity for everyone,
which a judgment about the agreeable does not have. Only judgments
about the good, though they too determine our liking for an object,
have logical rather than merely aesthetic universality; for they hold
for the object, as cognitions of it, and hence for everyone.
If we judge objects merely in terms of concepts, then we lose all
presentation of beauty. This is why there can be no rule by which
someone could be compelled to acknowledge that something is
beautiful. No one can use reasons or principles to talk us into a
judgment on whether some garment, house, or flower is beautiful. We
want to submit the object to our own eyes, just as if our liking of it
depended on that sensation. And yet, if we then call the object
beautiful, we believe we have a universal voice, and lay claim to the
27[ln the Logic, Kant spells out the (familiar) distinctions between universal, panicular,
and singular judgments in terms of inclusion and exclusion, total or panial, of the
spheres of subject and predicate concepts. and also distinguishes universal from
general propositions: Ak. IX, 102-03.1
28[See above, Ak. 209 br. n. 19.J
29[Kant meant to say 'universal.']

216

60

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

agreement of everyone, whereas any private sensation would decide
solely for the observer himself and his liking.
We can see, at this point, that nothing is postulated in a judgment
of taste except such a universal voice about a liking unmediated by
concepts. Hence all that is postulated is the possibility of a judgment
that is aesthetic and yet can be considered valid for everyone. The
judgment of taste itself does not postulate everyone's agreement
(since only a logically universal judgment can do that, because it can
adduce reasons); it merely requires this agreement from everyone, as
an instance of the rule, an instance regarding which it expects confirmation not from concepts but from the agreement of others. Hence
the universal voice is only an idea. (At this point we are not yet
inquiring on what this idea rests.) Whether someone who believes he
is making a judgment of taste is in fact judging in conformity with that
idea may be uncertain; but by using the term beauty he indicates that
he is at least referring his judging to that idea, and hence that he
intends it to be a judgment of taste. For himself, however, he can
attain certainty on this point,30 by merely being conscious that he is
separating whatever belongs to the agreeable and the good from the
liking that remains to him after that. It is only for this that he counts
on everyone's assent, and he would under these conditions [always I
be justified in this claim, if only he did not on occasion fail to observe
these conditions and so make an erroneous judgment of taste.

30IPresumably the point that in a given case "may be uncertain" (at the outset):
whether he is in fact judging in conformity with the idea of the universal voice. For the
sources of error about to be mentioned (in this sentence), cf. Ak. 290-91 incl. n. 15 at
Ak. 290, as well as § 39. Ak. 293. and § 40. Ak. 293-94. See also Ted Cohen. "Why
Beauty Is a Symbol of Morality," in Essays in Kant's Aesthetics. eds. Ted Cohen and
Paul Guyer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982),221-36.,

§9

Investigation of
the Question Whether
in a Judgment of
Taste the Feeling of Pleasure
Precedes the Judging
of the Object
or the Judging
Precedes the Pleasure
The solution of this problem is the key to the critique of taste and
hence deserves full attention.
If the pleasure in the given object came first, and our judgment of
taste were to attribute only the pleasure's universal communicability
to the presentation of the object, then this procedure would be
self-contradictory. For that kind of pleasure would be none other than
mere agreeableness in the sensation, so that by its very nature it could
have only private validity, because it would depend directly on the
presentation by which the object is given.
Hence it must be the universal communicability of the mental
state, in the given presentation, which underlies the judgment of taste
as its subjective condition, and the pleasure in the object must be its
consequence. Nothing. however. can be communicated universally
except cognition, as well as presentation insofar as it pertains to
cognition; for presentation is objective only insofar as it pertains to
cognition, and only through this does it have a universal reference
point with which everyone's presentational power is compelled to
harmonize. If, then, we are to think that the judgment about this
universal communicability of the presentation has a merely subjective determining basis, i.e., one that does not involve a concept of the
object, then this basis can be nothing other than the mental state that
we find in the relation between the presentational powers [imagination

61

217

62

218

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

and understanding] insofar as they refer a given presentation to
cognition in general.
When this happens, the cognitive powers brought into play by this
presentation are in free play, because no determinate concept restricts
them to a particular rule of cognition. Hence the mental state in this
presentation must be a feeling, accompanying the given presentation,
of a free play of the presentational powers directed to cognition in
general. Now if a presentation by which an object is given is, in
general, to become cognition, we need imagination to combine the
manifold of intuition, and understanding to provide the unity of the
concept uniting the [component] presentations. This state of free
play of the cognitive powers, accompanying a presentation by which
an object is given, must be universally communicable; for cognition,
the determination of the object with which given presentations are to
harmonize (in any subject whatever) is the only way of presenting that
holds for everyone.
But the way of presenting [which occurs I in a judgment of taste is
to have subjective universal communicability without presupposing a
determinate concept; hence this subjective universal communicability can be nothing but Ithat ofl the mental state in which we are when
imagination and understanding are in free play (insofar as they harmonize with each other as required for cognition in general). For we are
conscious that this subjective relation suitable for cognition in general must hold just as much for everyone, and hence be just as
universally communicable, as any determinate cognition, since cognition always rests on that relation as its subjective condition.
Now this merely subjective (aesthetic) judging of the object, or of
the presentation by which it is given, precedes the pleasure in the
object and is the basis of this pleasure, [a pleasure] in the harmony of
the cognitive powers. But the universal subjective validity of this
liking, the liking we connect with the presentation of the object we
call beautiful, is based solely on the mentioned universality of the
subjective conditions for judging objects.
That the ability to communicate one's mental state, even if this is
only the state of one's cognitive powers, carries a pleasure with it,
could easily be established (empirically and psychologically) from
man's natural propensity to sociability. But that would not suffice for
our aim here. When we make a judgment of taste, the pleasure we
feel is something we require from everyone else as necessary, just as

§ 9.

INVESTIGATION OF THE QUESTION. . .

63

if, when we call something beautiful, we had to regard beauty as a
characteristic of the object, determined in it according to concepts,
even though in fact, apart from a reference to the subject's feeling,
beauty is nothing by itself. We must, however, postpone discussion of
this question until we have answered another one, namely, whether
and how aesthetic judgments are possible a priori.
At present we still have to deal with a lesser question, namely, how
we become conscious, in a judgment of taste, of a reciprocal subjective harmony between the cognitive powers: is it aesthetically, through
mere inner sense and sensation? or is it intellectually, through consciousness of the intentional activity by which we bring these powers
into play?
If the given presentation that prompts the judgment of taste were a
concept which, in our judgment of the object, united understanding
and imagination so as to give rise to cognition of the object, then the
consciousness of this relation would be intellectual (as it is in the
objective schematism of judgment, with which the Critique [of Pure
Reason] deals 3 !). But in that case the judgment would not have been
made in reference to pleasure and displeasure and hence would not
be a judgment of taste. But in fact a judgment of taste determines the
object, independently of concepts, with regard to liking and the
predicate of beauty. Hence that unity in the relation [between the
cognitive powers 1in the subject can reveal itself only through sensation.
This sensation, whose universal communicability a judgment of taste
postulates, is the quickening of the two powers (imagination and
understanding) to an activity that is indeterminate but, as a result of
the prompting of the given presentation, nonetheless accordant: the
activity required for cognition in general. An objective relation can
only be thought. Still, insofar as it has subjective conditions, it can
nevertheless be sensed in the effect it has on the mind; and if the
relation is not based on a concept (e.g., the relation that the presentational powers must have in order to give rise to a power of cognition
in general), then the only way we can become conscious of it is
through a sensation of this relation's effect: the facilitated play of the
two mental powers (imagination and understanding) quickened by
their reciprocal harmony. A presentation that, though singular and
not compared with others, yet harmonizes with the conditions of the
31[See A 137-47

~

B 176-87. and d. below. Ak. 253 br. n. 17.j

219

64

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

universality that is the business of the understanding in general,
brings the cognitive powers into that proportioned attunement which
we require for all cognition and which, therefore, we also consider
valid for everyone who is so constituted as to judge by means of
understanding and the senses in combination (in other words, for all
human beings).

Explication of the Beautiful
Inferred from the
Second Moment
Beautiful is what, without a concept, is liked universally.

Third Moment
of Judgments of Taste,
As to the Relation of
Purposes That Is Taken
into Consideration in Them
§ 10

On Purposiveness in General
220

What is a purpose? If we try to explicate it in terms of its transcendental attributes (without presupposing anything empirical, such as the
feeling of pleasure), then a purpose is the object of a concept insofar
as we regard this concept as the object's cause (the real basis of its

§ 10. ON PURPOSIVENESS IN GENERAL

65

possibility); and the causality that a concept has with regard to its
object is purposiveness (forma finalis 32 ). Hence we think of a purpose if we think not merely, say, of our cognition of the object, but
instead of the object itself (its form. or its existence), as an effect that
is possible only through a concept of that effect. In that case the
presentation of the effect is the basis that determines the effect's
cause and precedes it. Consciousness of a presentation's causality
directed at the subject's state so as to keep him in that state, may here
designate generally what we caB pleasure; whereas displeasure is that
presentation which contains the basis that determines [the subject to
change I the state [consisting I of Icertain I presentations into their own
opposite (Le., to keep them away or remove them),
The power of desire, insofar as it can be determined to act only by
concepts, i.e., in conformity with the presentation of a purpose,
would be the will,33 On the other hand, we do call objects, states of
mind, or acts purposive even if their possibility does not necessarily
presuppose the presentation of a purpose; we do this merely because
we can explain and grasp them only if we assume that they are based
on a causality Ithat operates I according to purposes, i.e., on a will
that would have so arranged them in accordance with the presentation of a certain rule. Hence there can be purposiveness without a
purpose, insofar as we do not posit the causes of this form in a will,
and yet can grasp the explanation of its possibility only by deriving it
from a will. Now what we observe we do not always need to have
insight into by reason (as to how it is possible). Hence we can at least
observe a purposiveness as to form and take note of it in objectseven if only by reflection-without basing it on a purpose (as the
matter of the nexus /inaLis 34 ).

32lPurposive form. Concerning the use of 'purposiveness' for 'ZweckmiifJigklit•• see
above. Ak. 167 hr. n. 4.J
3J[Cf. the Critique of Practical Reason. Ak. V. 58-59, and the Metaphysics of Morals.
Ak. VI, 384-85.J
34IPurposive connection.J

§ 11
221

A Judgment of Taste
Is Based on Nothing
but the Form of Purposiveness
of an Object
(or of the Way of Presenting It)
Whenever a purpose is regarded as the basis of a liking, it always
carries with it an interest, as the basis that determines the judgment
about the object of the pleasure. Hence a judgment of taste cannot be
based on a subjective purpose. But a judgment of taste also cannot be
determined by a presentation of an objective purpose, Le., a presentation of the object itself as possible according to principles of connection in terms of purposes, and hence it cannot be determined by a
concept of the good. For it is an aesthetic and not a cognitive
judgment, and hence does not involve a concept of the character and
internal or external possibility of the object through this or that
cause; rather, it involves merely the relation of the presentational
powers to each other, insofar as they are determined by a presentation.
Now this relation, [present) when [judgment) determines an object
as beautiful, is connected with the feeling of a pleasure, a pleasure
that the judgment of taste at the same time declares to be valid for
everyone. Hence neither an agreeableness accompanying the presentation, nor a presentation of the object's perfection and the concept
of the good, can contain the basis that determines [such a judgment).
Therefore the liking that, without a concept, we judge to be universally communicable and hence to be the basis that determines a
judgment of taste, can be nothing but the subjective purposiveness in
the presentation of an object, without any purpose (whether objective
or subjective), and hence the mere form of purposiveness, insofar as
we are conscious of it, in the presentation by which an object is given
us.

66

§ 12

A Judgment of Taste
Rests on A Priori Bases
We cannot possibly tell a priori that some presentation or other
(sensation or concept) is connected, as cause, with the feeling of a
pleasure or displeasure, as its effect. For that would be a causal
relation, and a causal relation (among objects of experience) can
never be cognized otherwise than a posteriori and by means of
experience itself.35 It is true that in the Critique of Practical Reason
we did actually derive a priori from universal moral concepts the
feeling of respect (a special and peculiar modification of the feeling
of pleasure and displeasure which does seem to differ somehow from
both the pleasure and the displeasure we get from empirical objects).36
But there we were also able to go beyond the bounds of experience
and appeal to a causality that rests on a supersensible characteristic
of the subject, namely, freedom. And yet, even there, what we derived
from the idea of the moral, as the cause, was actually not this feeling,
but merely the determination of the will, except that the state of mind
of a will determined by something or other is in itself already a feeling
of pleasure and is identical with it. Hence the determination of the
will [by the moral law I does not [in turn I come about as an effect from
the feeling of pleasure, [with that feeling being produced by the
concept of the moral]; this we would have to assume only if the
concept of the moral, as a good [and so as giving rise to respect, the
pleasure I. preceded the will's determination by the law;37 but in that
case the concept of the moral would be a mere cognition, and so it
would be futile to [try to I derive from it the pleasure connected with
it.
35[We cognize a priori only that every event must have some cause; what causes
produce what effects, we discover by observation.]
36(For this derivation. and for a comparison with [his entire paragraph, see the
Critique of Practical Reason. Ak. V, 71-89. Cf. also the Metaphysics of Morals. Ak. VI,
211-13.]

37[The feeling of pleasure would then mediate this determination.]

67

222

68

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

Now the situation is similar with the pleasure in an aesthetic
judgment, except that here the pleasure is merely contemplative, and
does not bring about an interest in the object, whereas in a moral
judgment it is practical,38 The very consciousness of a merely formal
purposiveness in the play of the subject's cognitive powers, accompanying a presentation by which an object is given, is that pleasure. For
this consciousness in an aesthetic judgment contains a basis for
determining the subject's activity regarding the quickening of his
cognitive powers, and hence an inner causality (which is purposive)
concerning cognition in general, which however is not restricted to a
determinate cognition. Hence it contains a mere form of the subjective purposiveness of a presentation. This pleasure is also not practical in any way, neither like the one arising from the pathological
basis, agreeableness, nor like the one arising from the intellectual
basis, the conceived good. Yet it does have a causality in it, namely, to
keep Ius in) the state of [having] the presentation itself, and [to keep]
the cognitive powers engaged [in their occupation] without any further aim. We linger in our contemplation of the beautiful, because
this contemplation reinforces and reproduces itself. This is analogous
to (though not the same as) the way in which we linger over something charming that, as we present an object. repeatedly arouses our
attention, [though here] the mind is passive.

223

§ 13

A Pure Judgment of Taste
Is Independent
of Charm and Emotion
All interest ruins a judgment of taste and deprives it of its impartiality,
especially if, instead of making the purposiveness precede the feeling
of pleasure as the interest of reason does, that interest bases the
purposiveness on the feeling of pleasure; but this is what always
38jCf. the Metaphysics of Morals. Alt. VI, 212.1

§ 13. A PURE JUDGMENT OF TASTE. . .

69

happens in an aesthetic judgment that we make about something
insofar as it gratifies or pains us. Hence judgments affected in this way
can make either no claim at all to a universally valid liking, or a claim
that is diminished to the extent that sensations of that kind are
included among the bases determining the taste. Any taste remains
barbaric if its liking requires that charms and emotions be mingled in,
Jet alone if it makes these the standard of its approval.
And yet, (though beauty should actually concern only fonn) , charms
are frequently not only included with beauty, as a contribution toward
a universal aesthetic liking, but are even themselves passed off as
beauties, so that the matter of the liking is passed off as the form. This
is a misunderstanding that, like many others having yet some basis in
truth, can be eliminated by carefully defining these concepts.
A pure judgment of taste is one that is not influenced by charm or
emotion (though these may be connected with a liking for the beautiful),
and whose determining basis is therefore merely the purposiveness of
the form.

§ 14

Elucidation by Examples
Aesthetic judgments, just like theoretical (i.e., logical) ones, can be
divided into empirical and pure. Aesthetic judgments are empirical if
they assert that an object or a way of presenting it is agreeable or
disagreeable; they are pure if they assert that it is beautiful. Empirical
aesthetic judgments are judgments of sense (material aesthetic judgments); only pure aesthetic judgments (since they are formal) are
properly judgments of taste.
Hence a judgment of taste is pure only insofar as no merely
empirical liking is mingled in with the basis that determines it. But
this is just what happens whenever charm or emotion have a share in
a judgment by which something is to be declared beautiful.
Here again some will raise objections, trying to make out, not
merely that charm is a necessary ingredient in beauty, but indeed that

224

70

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

it is sufficient all by itself to [deserve 1 being called beautiful. Most
people will declare a mere color, such as the green color of a lawn, or
a mere tone (as distinct from sound and noise), as for example that of
a violin, to be beautiful in themselves, even though both seem to be
based merely on the matter of presentations, i.e., solely on sensation,
and hence deserve only to be called agreeable. And yet it will surely
be noticed at the same time that sensations of color as well as of tone
claim to deserve being considered beautiful only insofar as they are
pure. And that is an attribute that already concerns form, and it is
moreover all that can be universally communicated with certainty
about these presentations; for we cannot assume that in all subjects
the sensations themselves agree in quality,let alone that everyone will
judge one color more agreeable than another, or judge the tone of
one musical instrument more agreeable than that of another.
If, following Euler, 39 we assume that colors are vibrations (pulsus)
of the aether in uniform temporal sequence, as, in the case of sound,
tones are such vibrations of the air, and if we assume-what is
most important (and which, after all, I do not doubt at all40)-that
the mind perceives not only, by sense, the effect that these vibrations
have on the excitement of the organ, but also, by reflection, the
391Leonhard Euler (1707-83), Swiss mathematician, physicist, and physiologist. He is
the author of many works and became a member of the Academies of Science,
respectively, of St. Petersburg, Berlin, and Paris.]
401'Woran

ich doch gar nicht zweiJle. . incorporated into the AJw.demie text from the
third edition. Both the first and the second edition had 'woran ich doch gar sehr
zweijle. . i.e., 'which, however. I doubt very much.' Wilhelm Windelband, in his notes to
the Akademie edition of the Critique of Judgment. points out (Alt. V. 527-29) that
Kant's treatment of color and sound in this Critique (as allowing reflection on their
form) presupposes Euler's view. and that Kant also speaks very favorably of it in these
other places: Meditationum quarundam de igne succincta delineatio (Brief Outline of
Some Reflections Concerning Fire [1755]), Ak. 1,378; and Metaphysical FoundatiOIlS
of Natural Science (1786), Ak. IV, the n. on 519-20. On the other hand. in the
Anthropology (At. VII, 156) Kant writes: "Sight too is a sense linvolving] indirect lor
mediate: 'mittelbar') sensation by means of Idurch] a matter in motion, light, which
only a certain organ (the eyes) can sense. Unlike sound, light is not merely a wavelike
motion of a fluid element, which spreads in all directions in the surrounding space;
rather, it is an emanation by which a point in space is determined for the object ......
But the 'not merely' at least can be read in a way that makes this passage compatible
with Windelband's evidence and hence with the third edition reading adopted here.
cr.. on this whole issue, Theodore E. Uehling, Jr., The Notion of Form in Kam's
Critique of Aesthetic Judgment (The Hague: Mouton, 1971). 22-26.]

§ 14. ELUCIDATION BY EXAMPLES

71

regular play of the impressions (and hence tbe form in the connection
of different presentations), then color and tone would not be mere
sensations but would already be the formal determination of the
manifold in these, in which case they could even by themselves be
considered beauties.
But what we call pure in a simple kind of sensation is its uniformity,
undisturbed and uninterrupted by any alien sensation. It pertains only
to form, because there we can abstract from the quality of the kind of
sensation in question (as to which color or tone, if any, is presented).
That is why all simple colors. insofar as they are pure, are considered
beautiful; mixed colors do not enjoy this privilege, precisely because,
since they are not simple, we lack a standard for judging whether we
should call them pure or impure.
But the view that the beauty we attribute to an object on account
of its form is actually capable of being heightened by charm is a
vulgar error that is very prejudicial to genuine, uncorrupted, solid
[grundlich] taste. It is true that charms may be added to beauty as a
supplement: they may offer the mind more than that dry liking, by
also making the presentation of the object interesting to it, and hence
they may commend to us taste and its cultivation, above all if our
taste is still crude and unpracticed. But charms do actually impair the
judgment of taste if they draw attention to themselves as (if they
were] bases for judging beauty. For the view that they contribute to
beauty is so far off the mark that it is in fact only as aliens that they
must, indulgently, be granted admittance when taste is still weak and
unpracticed, and only insofar as they do not interfere with the beautiful form.
In painting, in sculpture, indeed in all the visual arts, including
architecture and horticulture insofar as they are fine arts, design is
what is essential; in design the basis for any involvement of taste is
not what gratifies us in sensation, but merely what we like because of
its form. The colors that illuminate the outline belong to charm.
Though they can indeed make the object itself vivid to sense, they
cannot make it beautiful and worthy of being beheld. Rather, usually
the requirement of beautiful form severely restricts [what) colors
[may be usedl. and even where the charm [of colors) is admitted it is
still only the form that refines the colors.
All form of objects of the senses (the outer senses or, indirectly, the
inner sense as well) is either shape or play; if the latter, it is either

225

72

226

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

play of shapes (in space, namely, mimetic art and dance), or mere play
of sensations (in time). The charm of colors or of the agreeable tone
of an instrument may be added, but it is the design in the first case
and the composition in the second that constitute the proper object
of a pure judgment of taste; that the purity of the colors and of the
tones, or for that matter their variety and contrast, seem to contribute
to the beauty, does not mean that, because they themselves are
agreeable, they furnish us, as it were, with a supplement to, and one
of the same kind as, our liking for the form. For all they do is to make
the form intuitable more precisely, determinately, and completely,
while they also enliven the presentation by means of their charm, by
arousing and sustaining the attention we direct toward the object
itself.
Even what we call ornaments (parerga), i.e., what does not belong
to the whole presentation of the object as an intrinsic constituent, but
[is) only an extrinsic addition, does indeed increase our taste's liking,
and yet it too does so only by its form. as in the case of picture frames,
or drapery on statues. or colonnades around magnificent buildings.
On the other hand, if the ornament itself does not consist in beautiful
form but is merely attached, as a gold frame is to a painting so that its
charm may commend the painting for our approval, then it impairs
genuine beauty and is called finery.
Emotion, a sensation where agreeableness is brought about only
by means of a momentary inhibition of the vital force followed by a
stronger outpouring of it. does not belong to beauty at all. But
sublimity (with which the feeling of emotion is connected) requires a
different standard of judging from the one that taste uses as a basis.
Hence a pure judgment of taste has as its determining basis neither
charm nor emotion, in other words, no sensation, which is [merely)
the matter of an aesthetic judgment.

§ 15

A Judgment of Taste
Is Wholly Independent
of the Concept of Perfection
Objective purposiveness can be cognized only by referring the manifold to a determinate purpose, and hence through a concept. Even
from this it is already evident that the beautiful, which we judge on
the basis of a merely formal purposiveness, i.e., a purposiveness
without a purpose, is quite independent of the concept of the good.
For the good presupposes an objective purposiveness, i.e., it presupposes that we refer the object to a determinate purpose.
Objective purposiveness may be extrinsic, in which case it is an
object's utility, or intrinsic, in which case it is an object's perfection.
If our liking for an object is one on account of which we call the
object beautiful, then it cannot rest on a concept of the object's
utility, as is sufficiently clear from the two preceding chapters;41 for
then it would not be a direct liking for the object, while that is the
essential condition of ajudgment about beauty. But perfection, which
is an objective intrinsic purposiveness, is somewhat closer to the
predicate beauty, and that is why some philosophers of repute have
identified perfection with beauty, adding, however, that it is perfection
thought confusedly. 42 It is of the utmost importance, in a critique of
taste, to decide if indeed beauty can actually be analyzed into the
concept of perfection.
In order to judge objective purposiveness, we always need the
concept of a purpose, and (if the purposiveness is not to be extrinsicutility- but intrinsic) it must be the concept of an intrinsic (inner]
purpose that contains the basis for the object's inner43 [inner] possi41(The chapters on the first two moments of a judgment of taste, Ak. 203-19.]
42[Kant is responding to aestheticians of the Leibnizian schoo), especiaUy Alexander
Guttlieb Baumgarten and Geurg Friedrich Meier. See the Translator's Introduction,
xlviii-Ii.]
43[The German 'inner' is rendered as 'inner' when it modifies 'possibility,' because
'intrinsic possibility' means 'possibility in principle. ']

73

227

74

228

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

bility. Now insofar as a purpose as such is something whose concept
can be regarded as the basis of the possibility of the object itself,
presenting objective purposiveness in a thing presupposes the concept of the thing, i.e., what sort of thing it is [meant] to be .. and the
harmony of the thing's manifold with this concept (which provides
the rule for connecting this manifold) is the thing's qualitative perfection.
Qualitative perfection is quite distinct from quantitative perfection.44
The latter is the completeness that any thing {may J have as a thing of
its kind. It is a mere concept of magnitude (of totality); in its case
what the thing is [meant] to be is already thought in advance as
detennined, and the only question is whether the thing has everything
that is required for being a thing of that kind. What is fonnal in the
presentation of a thing, the harmony of its manifold to [form] a unity
(where it is indeterminate what this unity is [meant] to be) does not by
itself reveal any objective purposiveness whatsoever. For here we
abstract from what this unity is as a purpose (what the thing is
[meant] to be), so that nothing remains but the subjective purposiveness
of the presentations in the mind of the beholder. Subjective purposiveness [is] merely a certain purposiveness of the subject's presentational state and, within that state, [anI appealingness [involved) in
apprehending a given form by the imagination. Such purposiveness
does not indicate any perfection of any object whatever, Isince I no
object is being thought through any concept of a purpose. Suppose,
for example, that in a forest I come upon a lawn encircled by trees but
that I do not connect with it the thought of any purpose, e.g., that it is
[meant] (say) for a country dance. In that case no concept whatsoever
of perfection is given me through the mere form. But the thought of a
fonnal objective purposiveness that nevertheless lacks a purpose, i.e.,
the mere form of a perfection (without any matter and concept of
what the harmony is directed to, not even the mere idea of a lawfulness
as such) is a veritable contradiction.
Now a judgment of taste is an aesthetic judgment, i.e., a judgment
that rests on subjective bases, and whose determining basis cannot be
a concept and hence also cannot be the concept of a determinate
purpose. Hence in thinking of beauty, a formal subjective pUIpOsiveness,
we are not at all thinking of a perfection in the object, an allegedly
formal and yet also objective pUIpOsiveness; and the distinction between
44lef. the Metaphysics of Morals. Ak. VI, 386.1

§ 15. JUDGMENT OF TASTE IS WHOLLY INDEPENDENT. . .

75

the concepts of the beautiful and of the good which alleges that the
two differ only in their logical form, with the first merely being a
confused and the second a distinct concept of perfection, while the
two are otherwise the same in content and origin, is in error. For in
that case there would be no difference in kind between them. but a
judgment of taste would be just as much a cognitive judgment as is a
judgment by which we declare something to be good. So, for example,
the common man bases his judgment that deceit is wrong on con~
fused rational principles, and the philosopher bases his on distinct
ones, but both at bottom base their judgments on one and the same
rational principles. In fact, however, as I have already pointed out, an
aesthetic judgment is unique in kind and provides absolutely no
cognition (not even a confused one) of the object; only a logical
judgment does that. An aesthetic judgment instead refers the presentation, by which an object is given, solely to the subject; it brings to
our notice no characteristic of the object, but only the purposive
form in the [way J the presentational powers are determined in their
engagement with the object. Indeed, the judgment is called aesthetic4S
precisely because the basis determining it is not a concept but the
feeling (of the inner sense) of that accordance in the play of the
mental powers insofar as it can only be sensed. If, on the other hand,
we wished to call confused concepts and the objective judgment
based on them aesthetic, then we would have an understanding that
judges by sense [sinnlichJ, or a sense that presents its objects by
means of concepts, both of which are contradictory. Our power of
concepts, whether they are confused or distinct, is the understanding;
and although understanding too is required (as it is for aU judgments)
for a judgment of taste, as an aesthetic judgment, yet it is required
here not as an ability to cognize an object, but as an ability to determine
(without a concept) the judgment and its presentation in accordance
with the relation that this presentation has to the subject and his inner
feeling, namely, so far as this judgment is possible in accordance with
a universal rule.

4S[From Greek aiG11{G11al (aisthesthai), 'to sense'. in the broad meaning of this term,
which includes feeling. The Greek term thus shares the ambiguity of 'to sense' and of
'emp/inden.' Cf. Ak. 20S-{)6.j

229

§ 16

A Judgment of Taste
by WhIch We Declare
an Object Beautiful
under the Condition
of a Determinate Concept
Is Not Pure
There are two kinds of beauty, free beauty (pulchritudo vaga) and
merely accessory beauty (pulchritudo adhaerens). Free beauty does
not presuppose a concept of what the object is [meant) to be. Accessory beauty does presuppose such a concept. as well as the object's
perfection in terms of that concept. The free kinds of beauty are
called (self-subsistent) beauties of this or that thing. The other kind of
beauty is accessory to a concept (i.e., it is conditioned beauty) and as
such is attributed to objects that fall under the concept of a particular
purpose.
Flowers are free natural beauties. Hardly anyone apart from the
botanist knows what sort of thing a flower is [meant] to be; and even
he, while recognizing it as the reproductive organ of a plant, pays no
attention to this natural purpose when he judges the flower by taste.
Hence the judgment is based on no perfection of any kind, no
intrinsic purposiveness to which the combination of the manifold
might refer. Many birds (the parrot, the humming-bird. the bird of
paradise) and a lot of crustaceans in the sea are [free I beauties
themselves [and I belong to no object determined by concepts as to its
purpose, but we like them freely and on their own account. Thus
designs a La grecque,46 the foliage on borders or on wallpaper, etc.,
461Walter Cerf notes: "The phrase ala grecque was apparently used in the eighteenth
century-and is still used by some present-day French art historians-to characterize
the classicism in what is now called the Louis XVI style. Stimulated by the excavations
at Pompeii. which began around 1748. the style a la grecque put an end to the style
rocaiUe or rococo (rocaille. rock or grotto work) of Louis XV and flourished from
about 1760 to 1792...... From Walter Cerfs translation of part of the Critique of
Judgment. entitled Analytic of the Beautiful (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1963).111.1

76

§ 16. A JUDGMENT OF TASTE. . .

77

mean nothing on their own: they represent [vorstellen] nothing, no
object under a determinate concept, and are free beauties. What we
call fantasias in music (namely, music without a topic [Thema]),
indeed all music not set to words, may also be included in the same
class.
When we judge free beauty (according to mere form) then our
judgment of taste is pure. Here we presuppose no concept of any
purpose for which the manifold is to serve the given object, and
hence no concept [as to] what the object is (meant] to represent; our
imagination is playing, as it were, while it contemplates the shape,
and such a concept would only restrict its freedom.
But the beauty of a human being (and, as kinds subordinate to a
human being, the beauty of a man or woman or child), or the beauty
of a horse or of a building (such as a church, palace, armory, or
summer-house) does presuppose the concept of the purpose that
determines what the thing is [meant] to be, and hence a concept of its
perfection, and so it is merely adherent beauty. Now just as a connection of beauty, which properly concerns only form, with the agreeable
(the sensation) prevented the judgment of taste from being pure, so
does a connection of beauty with the good (i.e., as to how, in terms of
the thing's purpose, the manifold is good for the thing itself) impair
the purity of a judgment of taste.
Much that would be liked directly in intuition could be added to a
building, if only the building were not [meant] to be a church. A
figure could be embellished with all sorts of curlicues and light but
regular lines, as the New Zealanders do with their tattoos, if only it
were not the figure of a human being. And this human being might
have had much more delicate features and a facial structure with a
softer and more likable outline, if only he were not (meant] to
represent a man, let alone a warlike one.
Now if a liking for the manifold in a thing refers to the intrinsic
purpose that determines [how I the thing is possible, then it is a liking
based on a concept, whereas a liking for beauty is one that presupposes no concept but is directly connected with the presentation by
which the object is given (not by which it is thought). Now if a
judgment of taste regarding the second liking is made to depend on,
and hence is restricted by. the purpose involved in the first liking, it is
a rational judgment, and so it is no longer a free and pure judgment of
taste.

230

78

231

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

It is true that taste gains by such a connection of aesthetic with
intellectual liking, for it becomes fixed and, though it is not universal,
rules can be prescribed for it with regard to certain objects that are
purposively determined. By the same token, however, these rules will
not be rules of taste but will merely be rules for uniting taste with
reason, i.e., the beautiful with the good, a union that enables us to use
the beautiful as an instrument for our aim regarding the good, so that
the mental attunement that sustains itself and has subjective universal
validity may serve as a basis for that other way of thinking that can be
sustained only by laborious resolve but that is universally valid
objectively.47 Actually, however, neither does perfection gain by
beauty, nor beauty by perfection. Rather, because in using a concept
in order to compare the presentation by which an object is given us
with that object itself (with regard to what it is [meantl to be), we
inevitably hold the presentation up to the sensation in the subject, it is
the complete power of presentation that gains when the two states of
mind harmonize.
A judgment of taste about an object that has a determinate intrinsic purpose would be pure only if the judging person either had no
concept of this purpose, or if he abstracted from it in making his
judgment. But although he would in that case have made a correct
judgment of taste, by judging the object as a free beauty, another
person who (looking only to the object's purpose) regarded the beauty
in it as only an accessory characteristic, would still censure him and
accuse him of having wrong taste, even though each is judging correctly
in his own way, the one by what he has before his senses, the other by
what he has in his thoughts. If we make this distinction we can settle
many quarrels that judges of taste have about beauty, by showing
them that the one is concerned with free and the other with accessory
beauty, the one making a pure and the other an applied judgment of
taste.

47[On the link between the beautiful and the good. cf. § 42 (Ak. 298-303) and § 59
(Ak. 351-54), as well as the Anthropaiogy, § § 69-70, Ak. VII, 244-45.]

§ 17

On the Ideal of Beauty
There can be no objective rule of taste, no rule of taste that dete....
mines by concepts what is beautiful. For any judgment from this
source [i.e., taste] is aesthetic, i.e., the basis determining it is the
subject's feeling and not the concept of an object. If we search for a
principle of taste that states the universal criterion of the beautiful by
means of determinate concepts, then we engage in a fruitless endeavor,
because we search for something that is impossible and intrinsically
contradictory. The universal communicability48 of the sensation (of
liking or disliking) - a universal communicability that is indeed not
based on a concept-II say that) the broadest possible agreement
among all ages and peoples regarding this feeling that accompanies
the presentation of certain objects is the empirical criterion Ifor what
is beautiful). This criterion, although weak and barely sufficient for a
conjecture, Idoes suggest] that a taste so much confirmed by examples stems from Ia) deeply hidden basis, common to all human beings,
underlying their agreement in judging the forms under which objects
are given them.
That is why we regard some products of taste as exemplary. This
does not mean that taste can be acquired by imitating someone else's.
For taste must be an ability one has oneself; and although someone
who imitates a model may manifest skill insofar as he succeeds in this,
he manifests taste only insofar as he can judge that model himself.49
From this, however, it follows that the highest model, the archetype
of taste, is a mere idea. an idea which everyone must generate within
himself and by which he must judge any object of taste, any example
of someone's judging by taste, and even the taste of everyone [else).
48[Cf. § § 20--21 (Ak. 237-39) and § § 39-40 (Ak. 291-96).1
49Models of taste in the arts of speech must be composed in a language both dead and
scholarly; dead, so that it will not have to undergo the changes that inevitably affect
living ones. whereby noble expressions become fiat, familiar ones archaic, and newly
created ones enter into circulation for only a short while; scholarly, so that it will have
a grammar that is not subject to the whims of fashion but has its own unalterable
rule.

79

232

80

233

PART l. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

Idea properly means a rational concept, and ideal the presentation of
an individual being as adequate to an idea. 5O Hence that archetype
of taste. which does indeed rest on reason's indeterminate idea of a
maximum. but which still can be presented not through concepts but
only in an individual exhibition,51 may more appropriately be called
the ideal of the beautiful. Though we do not have such an ideal in our
possession, we do strive to produce it within us. But it will be merely
an ideal of the imagination, precisely because it does not rest on
concepts but rests on an exhibition, and the power of exhibition is the
imagination. How, then, do we arrive at such an ideal of beauty? Do
we do so a priori or empirically? Also, which type of the beautiful
admits of an ideal?
We must be careful to note, first of all, that if we are to seek an
ideal of beauty then the beauty must be fixed rather than vague,
fixed by a concept of objective purposiveness. Hence this beauty
must belong not to the object of an entirely pure judgment of taste,
but to the object of a partly intellectual one. In other words, if an
ideal is to be located in any kind of bases for judging, then there must
be some underlying idea of reason, governed by determinate concepts,
that determines a priori the purpose on which the object's inner
possibility rests. An ideal of beautiful flowers, of beautiful furnishings,
or of a beautiful view is unthinkable. But an ideal of a beauty that is
accessory to determinate purposes is also inconceivable, e.g., an ideal
SOICf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 567-71

~

B 595-99.1

StICf. Ak. 192, where 'to exhibit' {'darstellen'} is defined as 'to place beside lal
concept an intuition corresponding to it.' In the Critique of Pure Rer.uon, 'to construct
a concept' is defined as 'to exhibit a priori the intuition corresponding to it' (A 713 .. B
741). Apart from that context (A 713-21 ~ B 741-49), the term 'darstellen' rarely
occurs in the first Critique. even where construction of concepts is discussed. By the
time of the Critique of Judgment, Kant uses it frequently, and broadens it to include
not only schematic exhibition (as, e.g., in construction) but also symbolic exhibition.
See esp. § 59, (Ak. 351-54) as well as br. n. 31 at Ak. 351. See also the Logic, Ak. IX,
23, and the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, Ak, IV, 486, and cf. the
Anthropology, Ak. VII. 167-97. See also Kant's response to Johann August Eberhard in
On a Discovery According to Which Any New Critique of Pure Reason Has Been Made
Superfluous by an Earlier One, Ak. VIll, 185-251. The traditional rendering of
'darstellen' as 'to present' has been abandoned in this translation because 'to exhibit'
seems both closer to Kant's meaning and less misleading. (Similarly for the noun.) 'To
present' has been used instead to replace the traditional rendering of 'vorJtellen' as 'to
represent,' which wrongly suggests that Kant'S theory of perception (etc.) is representational. Cf. above, Ak. 175 br. n. 17.1

§ 17. ON THE IDEAL OF BEAUTY

81

of a beautiful mansion, a beautiful tree, a beautiful garden, etc.,
presumably because the purposes are not sufficiently determined and
fixed by their concept, so that the purposiveness is nearly as free as in
the case of vague beauty. IThis leaves] only that which has the
purpose of its existence within itself-man. Man can himself determine his purposes by reason; or, where he has to take them from
outer perception, he can still compare them with essential and
universal purposes and then judge the former purposes' harmony
with the latter ones aesthetically as well. It is man, alone among
all objects in the world, who admits of an ideal of beauty, just as
the humanity in his person, [Le., in man considered] as an intelIigence,52 is the only [thing] in the world that admits of the ideal of
perfection.
But this [ideal of beauty) has two components. The first is the
aesthetic standard idea, which is an individual intuition (of the
imagination) [by] which Iwe) present the standard for judging man as
a thing belonging to a particular animal species. The second is the
rational idea. which makes the purposes of humanity, insofar as they
cannot be presented in sensibility, the principle for judging his figure,
which reveals these purposes, as their effect in appearance. 53 The
standard idea of the [figure or] shape of an animal of a particular kind
has to take its elements from experience. But the greatest purposiveness
in the structure of that shape resides merely in the judging person's
idea; and it is this greatest purposiveness-the image on which nature's
technic 54 was, as it were, intentionally based, and to which only the
kind as a whole but no individual by itself is adequate-which would
be suitable as the universal standard for judging each individual of
that species aesthetically. And yet this idea and its proportions can be
exhibited as an aesthetic idea fully in concreto in a model image. In
order that we may grasp this [process J to some extent (for who
can elicit nature's secret entirely?), let us attempt a psychological
explanation.
52[I.e., as a free rational (and noumenal) being, rather than as a being ofsense. Cf. the
Critique of Practical Reason. Ak. V. 114. and the Metaphysics oj Morals. Ak. VI, 418.1

53[Cf. the Prolegomena to Ally Future MetlZphysics, Ak. IV, 343-47; the Critique of
Practical Reason. Ak. V, 114-15; and the Foundations of the MetlZphysics of Morals.
Ak. IV. 446-63.1
54[See above. Ak. 193 br. n. 35.1

82

234

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

Notice how in a manner wholly beyond our grasp our imagination
is able on occasion not only to recall, even from the distant past, the
signs that stand for concepts, but also to reproduce [anI object's
image and shape from a vast number of objects of different kinds or
even of one and the same kind. Moreover, all indications suggest that
this power, when the mind wants to make comparisons, can actually
proceed as follows, though this process does not reach consciousness:
the imagination projects, as it were, one image onto another, and
from the congruence of most images of the same kind it arrives at an
average that serves as the common standard for all of them. For
instance: Someone has seen a thousand adult men. If now he wishes
to make a judgment about their standard size, to be estimated by way
of a comparison, then (in my opinion) the imagination projects a large
number of the images (perhaps the entire thousand) onto one another.
If I may be permitted to illustrate this by an analogy from optics: in
the space where most of the images are united. and within the outline
where the area is illuminated by the color applied most heavily, there
the average size emerges, equally distant in both height and breadth
from the outermost bounds of the tallest and shortest stature; and
that is the stature for a beautiful man. (The same result could be
obtained mechanically, by measuring the entire thousand, adding up
separately aU their heights and their breadths (and thicknesses) by
themselves and then dividing each sum by a thousand. And yet the
imagination does just that b}' means of a dynamic effect arising from
its multiple apprehension of such shapes on the organ of the inner
sense. 55 ) Now if in a similar way we try to find for this average man
the average head, for it the average nose, etc., then it is this shape
which underlies the standard idea of a beautiful man in the country
where this comparison is made. That is why, given these empirical
conditions. a Negro's standard idea of the beauty of the [humanl
figure necessarily differs from that of a white man, that of a Chinese
from that of a European. The same would apply to the model of a
beautiful horse or dog (of a certain breed). This standard idea is not
derived from proportions that are taken from experience as determi551ln the Anthropology (Ak. VII, 161), Kant suggests that one "might say" that the
soul is the organ of the inner sense. But in the Critique of Pure Reason no such organ is
mentioned, and the soul is repeatedly called the object of the inner sense. (E.g., at A
342 = B 400 and A 846 = B 874.) I

§ 17. ON THE IDEAL OF BEAUTY

83

nate rules. Rather, it is in accordance with this idea that rules for
judging become possible in the first place. It is the image for the
entire kind, hovering between all the singular and multiply varied
intuitions of the individuals, the image that nature used as the archetype on which it based its productions within anyone species, but
which it does not seem to have attained completely in any individual.
The standard idea is by no means the entire archetype of beauty
within this kind. but is only the form that constitutes the indispensable condition of all beauty, and hence merely the correctness in the
exhibition of the kind. It is the rule, just as the famous Doryphorus of
Polyclitus was called the rule (Myron~ Cow, within its kind, also
allowed this use, as such a rule).56 It is precisely because of this, too,
that the standard idea cannot contain any specific characteristics,
since then it would not be the standard idea for that kind. Nor is it
because of its beauty that we like its exhibition, but merely because it
does not contradict any of the conditions under which alone a thing
of this kind can be beautiful. The exhibition is merely academically
correct. 57
But from this standard idea of the beautiful we must still distinguish the ideal of the beautiful, which for reasons already stated must
be expected solely in the human figure. Now the ideal in this figure
consists in the expression of the moral; apart from the moral the
object would not be liked universally and moreover positively (rather
than merely negatively, when it is exhibited in a way that is (merelyl
56[Polyclitus (the Elder) and Myron are both Greek sculptors of the fifth century B.C.;
the Doryphorus (Spearbearer) and the Cow are works of theirs.)
57It will be found that a perfectly regular face, such as a painter would like to have as a

model, usually conveys nothing. This is because it contains nothing characteristic and
hence expresses more the idea of the [human] kind than what is specific in one person;
if what is characteristic in this way is exaggerated. i.e., if it offends against the standard
idea (of the purposiveness of the kind) itself, then it is called a caricature. Experience
shows, moreover, that such wholly regular faces usually indicate that inwardly too the
person is only mediocre.58 I suppose (if we may assume that nature expresses in [ourl
outward (appearance] the proportions of what is inward) this is because, if none of the
mental predispositions stands out beyond the proportion that is required for someone
to constitute merely a person free from defects, then we must not expect in him any
degree of what we call genius; in the case of genius 59 nature seems to depart from the
proportions it usually imparts to our mental powers, instead favoring just one.
58[Cf. the Anthropology, Ak. VII, 298.1

59[Cf. §§46-SO, Ak. 307-20.]

235

84

236

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

academically correct). Now it is true that this visible expression of
moral ideas that govern man inwardly can be taken only from
experience. Yet these moral ideas must be connected, in the idea of
the highest purposiveness, with everything that our reason links with
the morally good: goodness of soul, or purity, or fortitude, or serenity,
etc.; and in order for this connection to be made visible, as it were, in
bodily expression (as an effect of what is inward), pure ideas of reason
must be united with a very strong imagination in someone who seeks
so much as to judge, let alone exhibit, it. The correctness of such an
ideal of beauty is proved by its not permitting any charm of sense to
be mingled with the liking for its object, while yet making us take a
great interest in it. This in turn proves that a judging by such a
standard can never be purely aesthetic, and that a jUdging by an ideal
of beauty is not a mere judgment of taste.

Explication of the Beautiful
Inferred from
the Third Moment
Beauty is an object's form of purposiveness insofar as it is perceived
in the object without the presentation of a purpose. 60

60It might be adduced as a counteriDStance to this explication that there are things in
which we see a purposive form without recognizing a purpose in them [but which we
nevertheless do not consider beautiful]. Examples are the stone utensils sometimes
excavated from ancient burial mounds, which are provided with a hole as if for a
handle. Although these clearly betray in their shape a purposiveness whose purpose is
unknown, we do not declare them beautiful on that account. And yet, the very fact that
we regard them as work[s[ of art already forces us to admit that we are referring their
shape to some intention or other and to some determinate purpose. That is also why we
have no direct liking whatever for their intuition. A flower, on the other hand, e.g., a
tulip, is considered beautiful, because in our perception of it we encounter a certain
purposiveness that, given how we are judging the flower, we do not refer to any purpose
whatever.

Fourth Moment
of a Judgment of Taste,
As to the Modality of
the Liking for the Object
§ 18

What the Modality of a
Judgment of Taste Is
About any presentation I can say at least that there is a possibility for
it (as a cognition) to be connected with a pleasure. About that which I
call agreeable I say that it actually gives rise to pleasure in me. But
we think of the beautiful as having a necessary61 reference to liking.
This necessity is of a special kind. It is not a theoretical objective
necessity, allowing us to cognize a priori that everyone will feel this
liking for the object I call beautiful. Nor is it a practical objective
necessity, where, through concepts of a pure rational will that serves
freely acting beings as a rule, this liking is the necessary consequence
of an objective law and means nothing other than that one absolutely
(without any further aim) ought to act in a certain way. Rather,
as a necessity that is thought in an aesthetic judgment, it can only be
called exemplary, i.e., a necessity of the assent of everyone to a
judgment that is regarded as an example of a universal rule that we
are unable to state. Since an aesthetic judgment is not an objective
and cognitive one, this necessity cannot be derived from determinate
concepts and hence is not apodeictic. Still less can it be inferred from
the universality of experience (from a thorough agreement among
judgments about the beauty of a certain object). For not only would
experience hardly furnish a sufficient amount of evidence for this, but
6JIEmphasis added. Cf., on modality, the Critique of Pure Reason. A 80

85

=

B 100.J

237

86

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

a concept of the necessity of these judgments cannot be based on
empirical judgments.

§ 19

The Subi~~tive Necessity
That We Attribute
to a Judgment of Taste
Is Conditioned
A judgment of taste requires everyone to assent; and whoever declares
something to be beautiful holds that everyone ought to give his
approval to the object at hand and that he too should declare it
beautiful. Hence the ought in an aesthetic judgment, even once we
have [nach] all the data needed for judging, is still uttered only
conditionally. We solicit everyone else's assent because we have a
basis for it that is common to all. Indeed, we could count on that
assent, if only we could always be sure that the instance had been
subsumed correctly under that basis,62 which is the rule for the
approval.

621Cf. Ak. 216 inel. br. n. 30.,

§20
The Condition for the
Necessity Alleged by a
Judgment of Taste Is the
Idea of a Common Sense
If judgments of taste had (as cognitive judgments do) a determinate
objective principle, then anyone making them in accordance with
that principle would claim that his judgment is unconditionally necessary. If they had no principle at all, like judgments of the mere taste of
sense, then the thought that they have a necessity would not occur to
us at all. So they must have a subjective principle, which determines
only by feeling rather than by concepts, though nonetheless with
universal validity, what is liked or disliked. Such a principle, however,
could only be regarded as a common sense. This common sense is
essentially distinct from the common understanding that is sometimes also called common sense (sensus communis); for the latter
judges not by feeling but always by concepts, even though these
concepts are usually only principles conceived obscurely.
Only under the presupposition, therefore, that there is a common
sense (by which, however, we [alsol do not mean an outer sense, but
mean the effect arising from the free play of our cognitive powers)only under the presupposition of such a common sense, I maintain,
can judgments of taste be made.

§ 21

Whether We Have a Basis for
Presupposing a Common Sense
Cognitions and judgments, along with the conviction that accompanies
them, must be universally communicable. For otherwise we could not

87

238

88

239

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

attribute to them a harmony with the object, but they would one and
all be a merely subjective play of the presentational powers, just as
skepticism would have it. But if cognitions are to be communicated,
then the mental state, i.e., the attunement of the cognitive powers
that is required for cognition in general-namely, that proportion
[between them which is] suitable for turning a presentation (by which
an object is given us) into cognition-must also be universally
communicable. For this attunement is the subjective condition of [the
process of) cognition, and without it cognition [in the sense of] the
effect [of this process]63 could not arise. And this [attunement] does
actually take place whenever a given object, by means of the senses,
induces the imagination to its activity of combining the manifold, the
imagination in tum inducing the understanding to its activity of
providing unity for this manifold in concepts. But this attunement of
the cognitive powers varies in its proportion, depending on what
difference there is among the objects that are given. And yet there
must be one attunement in which this inner relation is most conducive to the (mutual) quickening of the two mental powers with a view
to cognition (of given objects) in general; and the only way this
attunement can be determined is by feeling (rather than by concepts).
Moreover, this attunement itself, and hence also the feeling of it
(when a presentation is given), must be universally communicable,
while the universal communicability of a feeling presupposes a common sense. Hence it would seem that we do have a basis for assuming
such a sense, and for assuming it without relying on psychological
observations, but as the necessary condition of the universal communicability of our cognition, which must be presupposed in any logic
and any principle of cognitions that is not skeptical.

63[Cf. Ak. 167 br. n. 2.[

§ 22

The Necessity of the
Universal Assent
That We Think in a
Judgment of Taste
Is a Subjective Necessity
That We Present as Objective
by Presupposing a
Common Sense
Whenever we make a judgment declaring something to be beautiful,
we permit no one to hold a different opinion. even though we base
our judgment only on our feeling rather than on concepts; hence we
regard this underlying feeling as a common rather than as a private
feeling. But if we are to use this common sense in such a way, we
cannot base it on experience; for it seeks to justify us in making
judgments that contain an ought: it does not say that everyone will
agree with my judgment, but that he ought to. Hence the common
sense, of whose judgment I am at that point offering my judgment of
taste as an example, attributing to it exemplary validity on that
account. is a mere ideal standard. With this standard presupposed, we
could rightly turn a judgment that agreed with it, as well as the liking
that is expressed in it for some object, into a rule for everyone. For
although the principle is only subjective, it would still be assumed
as subjectively universal (an idea necessary for everyone); and
so it could, like an objective principle, demand universal assent
insofar as agreement among different judging persons is concerned,
provided only we were certain that we had subsumed under it
correctly.
That we do actually presuppose this indeterminate standard of a
common sense is proved by the fact that we presume to make judgments of taste. But is there in fact such a common sense, as a

89

240

90

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

constitutive principle of the possibility of experience, or is there a still
higher principle of reason that makes it only a regulative principle for
us, [in orderl to bring forth in us, for higher purposes. a common
sense in the first place? In other words, is taste an original and natural
ability, or is taste only the idea of an ability yet to be acquired and
Itherefore I artificial, so that a judgment of taste with its requirement
for universal assent is in fact only a demand of reason to produce such
agreement in the way we sense? In the latter case the ought,64 i.e.,
the objective necessity that everyone's feeling flow along with the
particular feeling of each person, would signify only that there is a
possibility of reaching such agreement; and the judgment of taste
would only offer an example of the application of this principle.
These questions we neither wish to nor can investigate at this point.
For the present our task is only to analyze the power of taste into its
elements, and to unite these ultimately in the idea of a common
sense.

Explication of the Beautiful
Inferred from the
Fourth Moment
Beautiful is what without a concept is cognized as the object of a
necessary liking.

64[Ernphasis added. I

General Comment on the
First Division65
of the Analytic
If we take stock of the above analyses, we find that everything comes
down to the concept of taste, namely, that taste is an ability to judge
an object in reference to the free lawfulness of the imagination.
Therefore, in a judgment of taste the imagination must be considered in its freedom. This implies, first of all, that this power
is here not taken as reproductive, where it is subject to the laws
of association, but as productive and spontaneous (as the originator of chosen forms of possible intuitions).66 Moreover, [second,)
although in apprehending a given object of sense the imagination
is tied to a determinate form of this object and to that extent does
not have free play (as it does [e.g.) in poetry), it is still conceivable
that the object may offer it just the sort of form in the combination
of its manifold as the imagination, if it were left to itself [and)
free, would design in harmony with the understanding's lawfulness
in general. And yet, to say that the imagination is free and yet
lawful of itself, i.e., that it carries autonomy with it, is a contradiction. The understanding alone gives the law. But when the
imagination is compelled to proceed according to a determinate law,
then its product is determined by concepts (as far as its form is
concerned);67 but in that case the lik.ing, as was shown above,68
is a liking not for the beautiful but for the good (of perfection.
at any rate, formal perfection), and the judgment is not a judgment
65[The first Book, actually. [
66\Cf. the Anthropology, Ak. VII, 167: "The imagination (jacultas imaginandi), as a
power to intuit even when the object is not present, is either productive or reproductive.
As productive, it is a power of original exhibition of the object (exhibitio originllria),
and hence of an exhibition that precedes experience. As reproductive, it is a power of
derivative exhibition (exhibilio derivativa), an exhibition that brings back to the mind
an empirical intuition we have had before." See also the Critique 0/ Pure Reason, B

151-52.J
67\Parentheses added.J
68[See esp. § § 15 and 16, Ak. 226-31.J

91

241

92

242

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

made by taste. It seems, therefore, that only a lawfulness without
a law. and a subjective harmony of the imagination with the understanding without an objective harmony-where the presentation is
referred to a determinate concept of an object-is compatible with
the free lawfulness of the understanding (which has also been called
purposiveness without a purpose69 ) and with the peculiarity of a
judgment of taste.
It is true that critics of taste commonly adduce geometrically
regular figures, such as a circle, square, or cube, etc., as the simplest
and most indubitable examples of beauty. And yet these are called
regular precisely because the only way we can present them is by
regarding them as mere exhibitions of a determinate concept that
prescribes the rule for that figure (the rule under which alone the
figure is possible). Hence one of these two must be erroneous: either
that judgment by the critics which attributes beauty to such figures,
or our judgment that beauty requires a purposiveness without a
concept.
Probably no one would hold that a man of taste is required in order
to like a circular figure better than a scrawled outline, an equilateral
and equiangular quadrangle better than one that is scalene and
lopsided, as it were, misshapen; for no taste at all is required for this,
but only common understanding. When we pursue an aim, such as to
judge the size of an area or, in a diviSion, to enable ourselves to grasp
the relation of the parts to one another and to the whole, we require
regular figures, and those of the simplest kind; and here our liking does
not rest directly on how the figure looks, but rests on its usefulness for
all sorts of possible aims. A room whose walls form oblique angles, a
garden plot of that kind, even any violation of symmetry in the figure
of animals (such as being one-eyed) or of buildings or flower beds: all
of these we dislike because they are contrapurposive, not only practically with regard to some definite use of them, but contrapurposive
also for our [very] judging of them with all sorts of possible aims [in
mind]. This is not the case in a judgment of taste; when such a
judgment is pure, it connects liking or disliking directly with the mere
contemplation of the object,70 irrespective of its use or any purpose.
It is true that the regularity leading to the concept of an object is
6915ee Ak. 226 and 236.1
701 cr. Ak. 209 and 222.1

GENERAL COMMENT ON THE FIRST DIVISION

93

the indispensable condition (conditio si"e qua non) for apprehending
lfassen I the object in a single presentation and determining the
manifold in the object's form; [and) this determination is a purpose
[we pursue I with regard to cognition, and as so related to cognition it
is indeed always connected with a liking (since achieving any aim
[Absicht), even a problematic one, is accompanied by a liking). But
here the liking is merely our approval of the solution satisfying a
problem, and not a free and indeterminately purposive entertainment
[Unterhaltung J of the mental powers regarding what we call beautiful,
where the understanding serves the imagination rather than vice
versa.
In a thing that is possible only through an intention [Absicht),
such as a building or even an animal, that regularity which consists in the thing's symmetry must express the unity of the intuition that accompanies the concept of the [thing's) purpose, and
is part of the cognition. But where only a free play of our presentational powers is to be sustained [unterhalten) (though under the
condition that the understanding suffers no offense), as in the case of
pleasure gardens, room decoration, all sorts of tasteful utensils, and
so on, any regularity that has an air of constraint71 is [to be) avoided
as much as possible. That is why the English taste in gardens, or the
baroque taste in furniture, carries the imagination's freedom very
far, even to the verge of the grotesque, because it is precisely in
this divorce from any constraint of a rule that the case is posited
where taste can show its greatest perfection in designs made by the
imagination.
Everything that [shows) stiff regularity (close to mathematical
regularity) runs counter to taste because it does not allow us to be
entertained for long by our contemplation of it; instead it bores us,
unless it is expressly intended either for cognition or for a determinate practical purpose. On the other hand, whatever lends itself to
unstudied and purposive play by the imagination is always new to us
and we never tire of looking at it. Marsden,72 in his description of
711Cf. Ak. 306.1
72IWiIliam Marsden (1754-1836), English philologist and ethnologist. He spent a
number of years in Sumatra and is the author of a History of Sumatra (1783) as well as a
Grammar and Dictionary of the Malay Language (1812). He also translated the Travels
of Marco Polo (1818).1

243

94

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

Sumatra. comments that the free beauties of nature there surround
the beholder everywhere, so that there is little left in them to attract
him; whereas, when in the midst of a forest he came upon a pepper
garden, with the stakes that supported the climbing plants forming
paths between them along parallel lines, it charmed him greatly. He
concludes from this that we like wild and apparently ruleless beauty
only as a change, when we have been satiated with the sight of
regular beauty. And yet he need only have made the experiment
of spending one day with his pepper garden to realize that. once
regularity has [prompted] the understanding to put itself into attunement with order which it requires everywhere, the object ceases
to entertain him and instead inflicts on his imagination an irksome constraint; whereas nature in those regions. extravagant in
all its diversity to the point of opulence, subject to no constraint
from artificial rules, can nourish his taste permanently. Even bird
song, which we cannot bring under any rule of music. seems to
contain more freedom and hence to offer more to taste than human
song, even when this human song is performed according to all the
rules of the art of music, because we tire much sooner of a human
song if it is repeated often and for long periods. And yet in this
case we probably confuse our participation in the cheerfulness
of a favorite little animal with the beauty of its song, for when
bird song is imitated very precisely by a human being (as is sometimes done with the nightingale's warble) it strikes our ear as quite
tasteless.
Again, we must distinguish beautiful objects from beautiful views
of objects (where their distance prevents us from recognizing them
distinctly). In beautiful views of objects, taste seems to fasten not so
much on what the imagination apprehends in that area, as on the
occasion they provide for it to engage in fiction [dichten I. i.e., on the
actual fantasies with which the mind entertains itself as it is continually being aroused by the diversity that strikes the eye.73 This is
731Cf. the Anthropology. Ak. VB, 167-68: "The imagination, insofar as it produces
imaginings involuntarily as well, is called fantasy. ... [Sol (in other words) the imagina'
tion either engages infiction (i.e., it is productive), or in recall (i.e., it is reproductive).
But this does not mean that the productive imagination is creative. i.e., capable of
producing a presentation of sense that was never before given to our power of sense;
rather. we can always show Ifrom where the imagination took I its materia!." Cf. also, in
the same work, § § 31-33, Ak. VII, 174-82.1

GENERAL COMMENT ON THE FIRST DIVISION

95

similar to what happens when we watch, say, the changing shapes of
the flames in a fireplace or of a rippling brook: neither of these are
beauties, but they still charm the imagination because they sustain its
free play.

244

BOOK II
ANALYTIC OF
THE SUBLIME
§23

Transition from the
Power of Judgingl the
Beautiful to That of
Judging the Sublime2
The beautiful and the sublime are similar in some respects. We like
both for their own sake, and both presuppose that we make a judgment of reflection rather than either a judgment of sense or a logically determinative one. Hence in neither of them does our liking
depend on a sensation, such as that of the agreeable, nor on a
determinate concept, as does our liking for the good; yet we do refer
the liking to concepts, though it is indeterminate which concepts
these are. Hence the liking is connected with the mere exhibition or
power of exhibition, i.e., the imagination, with the result that we
regard this power, when an intuition is given us, as harmonizing with
the power of concepts, i.e., the understanding or reason, this harmony furthering Ithe aims of] these. That is also why both kinds of
judgment are singular ones that nonetheless proclaim themselves
universally valid for all subjects, though what they lay claim to
I[For my use of 'power: rather than 'faculty: see above, Ak. 167 br. n. 3.1

21Cf. the Anthropology, § § 67-68. Ak. VII, 239-43.1

97

98

245

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

is merely the feeling of pleasure, and not any cognition of the
object.
But some significant differences between the beautiful and the
sublime are also readily apparent. The beautiful in nature concerns
the form of the object, which consists in [the object's) being bounded.
But the sublime can also be found in a formless object, insofar as we
present unboundedness, either [as I in the object or because the
object prompts us to present it, while yet we add to this unboundedness
the thought of its totality. So it seems that we regard the beautiful as
the exhibition of an indeterminate concept of the understanding, and
the sublime as the exhibition of an indeterminate concept of reason.
Hence in the case of the beautiful our liking is connected with the
presentation of quality, but in the case of the sublime with the
presentation of quantity. The two likings are also very different in
kind. For the one liking ({ that for I the beautiful) carries with it
directly a feeling of life's being furthered, and hence is compatible
with charms and with an imagination at play. But the other liking (the
feeling of the sublime) is a pleasure that arises only indirectly: it is
produced by the feeling of a momentary inhibition of the vital forces
followed immediately by an outpouring of them that is all the stronger.
Hence3 it is an emotion,4 and so it seems to be seriousness, rather
than play, in the imagination's activity. Hence, too, this liking is
incompatible with charms, and, since the mind is not just attracted by
the object but is alternately always repelled as well, the liking for the
sublime contains not so much a positive pleasure as rather admiration
and respect, and so should be called a negative pleasure. s
But the intrinsic and most important distinction between the sublime and the beautiful is presumably the following. If, as is permiSSible,
we start here by considering only the sublime in natural objects (since
the sublime in art is always confined to the conditions that [art) must
meet to be in harmony with nature), then the distinction in question
comes to this: (Independent) natural beauty carries with it a purposiveness in its form, by which the object seems as it were prel[Cf. Ak. 226.1
"[Cf. the Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime (1764), Ak. II,

209: "The sublime

MOVES

us, the beautiful CHARMS us."1

5[On admiration, respect, and positive and negative pleasure, cf. the Critique of
Practical Reason, At. V,71-89.1

§ 23.

TRANSITION FROM THE POWER OF JUDGING. . .

99

determined for our power of judgment, so that this beauty constitutes
in itself an object of our liking. On the other hand, if something
arouses in us, merely in apprehension and without any reasoning on
our part, a feeling of the sublime, then it may indeed appear, in its
form, contrapurposive for our power of judgment, incommensurate
with our power of exhibition, and as it were violent to our imagination,
and yet we judge it all the more sublime for that.
We see from this at once that we express ourselves entirely incorrectly
when we call this or that object of nature sublime, even though we
may quite correctly call a great many natural objects beautiful; for
how can we call something by a term of approval if we apprehend it as
in itself contrapurposive? Instead, all we are entitled to say is that the
object is suitable for exhibiting a sublimity that can be found in the
mind. For what is sublime, in the proper meaning of the term, cannot be
contained in any sensible form but concerns only ideas of reason, which,
though they cannot be exhibited adequately, are aroused and called
to mind by this very inadequacy, which can be exhibited in sensibility.
Thus the vast ocean heaved up by storms cannot be called sublime. The
sight of it is horrible; and one must already have filled one's mind
with all sorts of ideas if such an intuition is to attune it to a feeling
that is itself sublime, inasmuch as the mind is induced to abandon sensibility and occupy itself with ideas containing a higher purposiveness.
Independent natural beauty reveals to us a technic 6 of nature
that allows us to present nature as a system in terms of laws whose
principle we do not find anywhere in our understanding: the principle
of a purposiveness directed to our use of judgment as regards
appearances. Under this principle, appearances must be judged as
belonging not merely to nature as governed by its purposeless
mechanism, but also to [nature considered by] analogy with art.
Hence even though this beauty does not actually expand our cognition of natural objects, it does expand our concept of nature, namely,
from nature as mere mechanism to the concept of that same nature as
art, and that invites us to profound investigations about [howl such a
form is possible. However, in what we usually call sublime in nature
there is such an utter lack of anything leading to particular objective
principles and to forms of nature conforming to them, that it is rather
in its chaos that nature most arouses our ideas of the sublime, or in its
61 See Ak. 193 br. n. 35.1

246

100

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

wildest and most ruleless disarray and devastation, provided it displays magnitude and might. This shows that the concept of the
sublime in nature is not nearly as important and rich in implications
as that of the beautiful in nature, and that this concept indicates
nothing purposive whatever in nature itself but only in what use we
can make of OUf intuitions of nature so that we can feel a purposiveness
within ourselves entirely independent of nature. For the beautiful in
nature we must seek a basis outside ourselves, but for the sublime a
basis merely within ourselves and in the way of thinking that introduces sublimity into our presentation of nature. This is a crucial
preliminary remark, which separates our ideas of the sublime completely from the idea of a purposiveness of nature, and turns the
theory of the sublime into a mere appendix to our aesthetic judging of
the purposiveness of nature. For through these ideas we do not
present a particular form in nature, but only develop [the I purposive
use that the imagination makes of the presentation of nature.

247

§24

On Dividing an Investigation of
the Feeling of the Sublime
In dividing the moments that are involved when we judge objects
aesthetically in relation to the feeling of the sublime, the analytic can
go on under the same principle that it followed in analyzing judgments of taste. For, since judgments about the sublime are made by
the aesthetic reflective power of judgment, [the analytic I must allow
us to present the liking for the sublime, just as that for the beautiful,
as follows: in terms of quantity, as universally valid; in terms of
quality, as devoid of interest; in terms of relation, [as a] subjective
purposiveness; and in terms of modality. as a necessary subjective
purposiveness. So our method here will not deviate from the one used
in the preceding [book], except for a (detail that is] of no account:
since aesthetic judgments about the beautiful concerned the form of
the object, we there started by investigating their quality, whereas

§ 24. ON DIVIDING AN INVESTIGATION. . .

101

here, since what we call sublime may be fonnless, we shall begin with
the quantity as the first moment of an aesthetic judgment about the
sublime. The reason for this is evident from the preceding section.
But we do have to make one division in analyzing the sublime that
the analysis of the beautiful did not require: we must divide the
sublime into the mathematically and the dynamically sublime.
For while taste for the beautiful presupposes and sustains the mind
in restful contemplation, the feeling of the sublime carries with it, as
its character, a mental agitation connected with our judging of the
object. But (since we like the sublime) this agitation is to be judged
subjectively purposive, and so the imagination will refer this agitation
either to the cognitive power or to the power of desire, but in both
cases the purposiveness of the given presentation will be judged. only
with regard to these powers (without any purpose or interest). The
first kind of agitation is a mathematical, the second a dynamical,
attunement of the mind. And so we attribute both these kinds of
agitation to the object, and hence present the object as sublime in
these two ways.

A
ON THE
MATHEMATICALLY
SUBLIME
§25

Explication of
the Term Sublime
We call sublime what is absolutely [schlechthin) large. To be large
[groft) and to be a magnitude [Grafte I are quite different concepts
(magnitudo and quantitas). Also, saying simply [schlechtweg) (simpliciter) that something is large is quite different from saying that it is
absolutely large (absolute, non comparative magnum7 ). The latter
is what is large beyond all comparison. But what does it mean to say
that something is large, or small, or medium-sized? Such a term does
not stand for a pure concept of the understanding, let alone an
intuition of sense. Nor does it stand for a rational concept, for it
involves no cognitive principle whatsoever. Hence it must stand for a
concept that belongs to the power of judgment or is derived from
such a concept, and it must presuppose a subjective purposiveness of
the presentation in relation to the power of judgment. That something is a magnitude (quantum) can be cognized from the thing itself
without any comparison of it with others, namely, if a multiplicity of
the homogeneous together constitutes a unity. On the other hand, [to
7jLarge absolutely rather than by comparison.j

103

248

104

249

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

judge] how large something is we always need something else, which
is also a magnitude, as its measure. But since what matters in judging
magnitude is not just multiplicity (number) but also the magnitude of
the unity8 [used as the unit] (the measure), and since [to judge) the
magnitude of this unity we always need something else in turn as a
measure with which we can compare it, it is plain that no determination of the magnitude of appearances can possibly yield an absolute
concept of a magnitude, but at most can yield only a comparative
one.
Now if I say simply that something is large, it seems that I have no
comparison in mind at all, at least no comparison with an objective
measure, because in saying this I do not determine at all how large
[grajJ] the object is. But though my standard of comparison is merely
subjective, my judgment still lays claim to universal assent. Such
judgments as, This man is beautiful, and, He is large, do not confine
themselves to the judging subject, but demand everyone's assent, just
as theoretical judgments do.
But in a judgment by which we describe something as absolutely
large, we do not just mean that the object has some magnitude, but
we also imply that this magnitude is superior to that of many other
objects of the same kind, yet without indicating this superiority
determinately. Hence we do base our judgment on a standard, which
we assume we can presuppose to be the same for everyone; but it is a
standard that will serve not for a logical (mathematically determinate)
judging of magnitude, but only for an aesthetic one, because it is only
a subjective standard underlying our reflective judgment about magnitude [GrofleJ. Furthermore, the standard may be either empirical or
one that is given a priori. An empirical one might be the average size
[GrofJe 1 of the people we know, of animals of a certain kind, of trees,
houses, mountains, and so on. One that is given a priori would be
confined, because of the deficiencies of the judging subject, to subjective conditions of an exhibition in concreto; an example from the
practical sphere is the magnitude [or degree 1of a certain virtue, or of
the civil liberty and justice in a country; from the theoretical sphere.
8!'Einheif can mean 'unity' or 'unit' Here it means both. but the concern is with the
imagination's effort to perform its usual function of providing an intuition (including
that of a unit, even a basic unit) with unity. by comprehending it in accordance with a
concept. See § 26 (Ale.. 251-57) as well as Ale.. 259. Cf. also the Critique of Pure Reason,
A 98-100.J

§ 25.

EXPLICATION OF THE TERM SUBLIME

105

the magnitude lor degree I of the correctness or incorrectness of some
observation or measurement that has been made, and so on.
lt is noteworthy here that even if we have no interest whatsoever in
the object, i.e., we are indifferent to its existence, still its mere
magnitude, even if the object is regarded as formless, can yet carry
with it a liking that is universally communicable and hence involves
consciousness of a subjective purposiveness in the use of our cognitive powers. But - and in this it differs from [the liking for I the
beautiful, where reflective judgment finds itself purposively attuned
in relation to cognition in general- this liking is by no means a liking
for the object (since that may be formless), but rather a liking for the
expansion of the imagination itself.
If (under the above restriction 9 ) we say simply of an object that it
is large, then our judgment is not mathematically determinative; it is
a mere judgment of reflection about our presentation of the object, a
presentation that is subjectively purposive for a certain use we can
make of our cognitive powers in estimating magnitude; and we then
always connect with the presentation a kind of respect. as we connect
a [kind of] contempt with what we simply call small. Furthermore,
our judging of things as large or small [graft oder klein] applies to
anything, even to any characteristics of things. That is why we call
even beauty great or little [groft oder klein], because no matter what
we exhibit in intuition (and hence present aesthetically) in accordance with the precept of judgment, it is always appearance, and
hence also a quantum. lO
But suppose we call something not only large, but large absolutely
[schlechthin, absolut], in every respect (beyond all comparison), i.e.,
sublime. Clearly, in that case, we do not permit a standard adequate
to it to be sought outside it, but only within it. It is a magnitude that is
equal only to itself. It follows that the sublime must not be sought in
things of nature, but must be sought solely in our ideas; but in which
of these it resides [is a question that] must wait for the deduction.lI
The above explication can also be put as follows: That is sublime
in comparison with which everything else is small. We can easily see
910n the kind of standard we are presupposing. I

!Oler. the Cmique

of Pure Reason, Axioms of Intuition, A 162-66

(tlSee below, § 30, Ak. 279-80. J

=

B 202-{)7.1

250

106

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

here that nothing in nature can be given, however large we may judge
it, that could not, when considered in a different relation, be degraded
all the way to the infinitely small, nor conversely anything so small
that it could not, when compared with still smaller standards, be
expanded for our imagination all the way to the magnitude of a
world; telescopes have provided us with a wealth of material in
support of the first point,12 microscopes in support of the second.
Hence, considered on this basis, nothing that can be an object of the
senses is to be called sublime. [What happens is that) our imagination
strives to progress toward infinity, while our reason demands absolute
totality as a real idea, and so [the imagination,) our power of estimating the magnitude of things in the world of sense, is inadequate to
that idea. Yet this inadequacy itself is the arousal in us of the feeling
that we have within us a supersensible power; and what is absolutely
large is not an object of sense, but is the use that judgment makes
naturally of certain objects so as to [arouse] this (feeling), and in
contrast with that use any other use is small. Hence what is to be
called sublime is not the object, but the attunement that the intellect
[gets] through a certain presentation that occupies reflective judgment.
Hence we may supplement the formulas already given to explicate
the sublime by another one: Sublime is what even to be able to think
proves that the mind has a power surpassing any standard of sense.

J2[Cf. the Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens (1755), At. I,
215-368·1

§26

On Estimating the
Magnitude of Natural Things,
as We Must for the
Idea of the Sublime
Estimation of magnitude by means of numerical concepts (or their
signs in algebra) is mathematical; estimation of magnitudes in mere
intuition (by the eye) is aesthetic. It is true that to get determinate
concepts of how large something is we must use numbers (or, at any
rate, approximations [expressed I by numerical series progressing to
infinity). whose unity is [the unit we use as l3 ) the measure; and to
that extent all logical estimation of magnitude is mathematical. Yet
the magnitude of the measure must be assumed to be known. Therefore,
if we had to estimate this magnitude also mathematically, i.e., only by
numbers, whose unity would have to be a different measure, then we
could never have a first or basic measure, and hence also could have
no determinate concept of a given magnitude. Hence our estimation
of the magnitude of the basic measure must consist merely in our
being able to take it in lJassen] directly in one intuition and to use it,
by means of the imagination, for exhibiting numerical concepts. In
other words, all estimation of the magnitude of objects of nature
is ultimately aesthetic (i.e., determined subjectively rather than
objectively).
Now even though there is no maximum [Groptes] for the mathematical estimation of magnitude (inasmuch as the power of numbers
progresses to infinity), yet for the aesthetic estimation of magnitude
there is indeed a maximum. And regarding this latter maximum I say
that when it is judged as [thel absolute measure beyond which no
larger is subjectively possible (Le., possible for the judging subject),
then it carries with it the idea of the sublime and gives rise to that
emotion which no mathematical estimation of magnitude by means
of numbers can produce (except to the extent that the basic aesthetic
131Cf. Ak. 248 inel. br. n. 8.1

107

251

108

252

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

measure is at the same time kept alive in the imagination). For a
mathematical estimation of magnitude never exhibits more than rela·
tive magnitude, by a comparison with others of the same kind,
whereas an aesthetic one exhibits absolute magnitude to the extent
that the mind can take it in in one intuition.
In order for the imagination to take in a quantum intuitively, so
that we can then use it as a measure or unity in estimating magnitude
by numbers, the imagination must perform two acts: apprehension
(apprehensio), and comprehension 14 (comprehensio aesthetica). Apprehension involves no problem, for it may progress to infinity. But
comprehension becomes more and more difficult the farther appre·
hension progresses, and it soon reaches its maximum, namely. the
aesthetically largest basic measure for an estimation of magnitude.
For when apprehension has reached the point where the partial
presentations of sensible intuition that were first apprehended are
already beginning to be extinguished in the imagination. as it proceeds to apprehend further ones. the imagination then loses as much
on the one side as it gains on the other; and so there is a maximum in
comprehension that it cannot exceed.
This serves to explain a comment made by Savary in his report on
Egypt: 1S that in order to get the full emotional effect from the
magnitude of the pyramids one must neither get too close to them nor
stay too far away. For if one stays too far away, then the apprehended
parts (the stones on top of one another) are presented only obscurely,
and hence their presentation has no effect on the subject's aesthetic
judgment; and if one gets too close, then the eye needs some time to
complete the apprehension from the base to the peak, but during that
time some of the earlier parts are invariably extinguished in the
imagination before it has apprehended the later ones, and hence the
comprehension is never complete. Perhaps the same observation can
explain the bewilderment or kind of perplexity that is said to seize the
spectator who for the first time enters St. Peter's Basilica in Rome.
14[ZUSQmmenfassung. 'Comprehension' and 'comprehend' are used in thIS translation
only in this sense of 'collecting together and holding together' (cf. ·comprehensive').
never in the sense of 'understanding: I
lSILettres sur rEgvple (Lellers on Egypt), 1787, by Anne Jean Marie Rene Savary,
Duke of Rovigo, (1774-1833), French general, diplomat, and later minister of police
(notorious for his severity) under Napoleon Bonaparte, but active even after the latter's
banishment to St. Helena in 1815. Savary took part in Bonaparte's expedition to Egypt.[

§ 26.

ON ESTIMATING THE MAGNITUDE. . .

109

For he has the feeling that his imagination is inadequate for exhibiting
the idea of a whole, [a feeling] in which imagination reaches its
maximum, and as it strives to expand that maximum, it sinks back
into itself, but consequently comes to feel a liking [that amounts to
an 16 1emotion [riihrendes Wohlgefallenl.
I shall say nothing for now regarding the basis of this liking, a liking
connected with a presentation from which one would least expect it,
namely, a presentation that makes us aware of its own inadequacy and
hence also of its subjective unpurposiveness for the power of judgment in its estimation of magnitude. Here I shall only point out that if
the aesthetic judgment in question is to be pure (unmixed with any
teleological and hence rational judgment), and if we are to give an
example of it that is fully appropriate for the critique of aesthetic
judgment, then we must point to the sublime not in products of art
(e.g., buildings, columns, etc.), where both the form and the magnitude are determined by a human purpose, nor in natural things whose
very concept carries with it a determinate purpose (e.g., animals with
a known determination in nature), but rather in crude nature (and
even in it only insofar as it carries with it no charm, nor any emotion
aroused by actual danger), that is, merely insofar as crude nature
contains magnitude. For in such a presentation nature contains nothing monstrous (nor anything magnificent or horrid); it does not
matter how far the apprehended magnitude has increased, just as
long as our imagination can comprehend it within one whole. An
object is monstrous if by its magnitude it nullifies the purpose that
constitutes its concept. And colossal is what we call the mere exhibition of a concept if that concept is almost too large for any exhibition
(i.e., if it borders on the relatively monstrous); for the purpose of
exhibiting a concept is hampered if the intuition of the object is
almost too large for our power of apprehension. A pure judgment
about the sublime, on the other hand. must have no purpose whatsoever of the object as the basis determining it, if it is to be aesthetic
and not mingled with some judgment of understanding or of reason.
Since the presentation of anything that our merely reflective power
of judgment is to like without an interest must carry with it a
161Cf. Ak. 245 and 226.1

253

110

254

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

purposiveness that is subjective and yet universally valid, but since
in the sublime (unlike the beautiful) our judging is not based on
a purposiveness of the form of the object, the following questions arise: What is this subjective purposiveness. and how does
it come to be prescribed as a standard, thereby providing a basis
for a universally valid liking accompanying the mere estimation of
magnitude- an estimation that has been pushed to the point where
the ability of our imagination is inadequate to exhibit the concept of
magnitude?
When the imagination performs the combination [Zusammensetzung] that is required to present a magnitude, it encounters no
obstacles and on its own progresses to infinity, while the understanding guides it by means of numerical concepts. for which the imagination must provide the schema;l? and in this procedure, which is
involved in the logical estimation of magnitude, there is indeed
something objectively purposive under the concept of a purpose
(since any measuring is a purpose). And yet there is nothing in it that
is purposive for, and liked by. the aesthetic power of judgment. Nor is
there anything in this intentional purposiveness that necessitates our
pushing the magnitude of the measure, and hence of the comprehension of the many [elements I in one intuition, to the limit of the
imagination's ability. and as far as it may extend in exhibiting. For in
estimating magnitudes by the understanding (arithmetic) we get equally
far whether we pursue the comprehension of the unities to the number 10 (as in the decadic system) or only to 4 (as in the tetradic
system): the further generation of magnitudes-in the [process ofl
combination or. if the quantum is given in intuition, in apprehension-is
done merely progressively (rather than comprehensively), under an
assumed principle of progression. This mathematical estimation of
magnitude serves and satisfies the understanding equally well, whether
the imagination selects as the unity a magnitude that we can take in in
one glance, such as a foot or a rod, or whether it selects a German

17[A schema is what mediates. and so makes possible. the 5ubsumption of intuitions
under concepts of the understanding (and so the application of these concepts to
intuitions). It does so by sharing features of both a concept and an intuition. See tbe
Critique of Pure Reason, A 137-47 = B 176-87, and cf. Ak. 351-52 and the Translator's
Introduction, xxxvi. [

§ 26.

ON ESTIMATING THE MAGNITUDE. . .

111

mile,I8 or even an earth diameter, which the imagination can apprehend but cannot comprehend in one intuition (by a comprehensio
aesthetica, though it can comprehend it in a numerical concept by a
comprehensio logica). In either case the logical estimation of magnitude progresses without hindrance to infinity.l9
But the mind listens to the voice of reason within itself, which
demands totality for all given magnitudes, even for those that we can
never apprehend in their entirety but do (in presentation of sense)
judge as given in their entirety. Hence reason demands comprehension in one intuition, and exhibition of all the members of a progressively increasing numerical series, and it exempts from this demand
not even the infinite (space and past time). Rather, reason makes us
unavoidably think of the infinite (in common reason's judgment) as
given in its entirety (in its totality).
The infinite, however, is absolutely large (not merely large by
comparison). Compared with it everything else (of the same kind of
magnitudes20 ) is small. But-and this is most important-to be able
even to think the infinite as a whole indicates a mental power that
surpasses any standard of sense. For [thinking the infinite as a whole
while using a standard of sense I would require a comprehension
yielding as a unity a standard that would have a determinate relation
to the infinite, one that could be stated in numbers; and this is
impossible. If the human mind is nonetheless to be able even to think
the given infinite without contradiction, it must have within itself a
power that is supersensible, whose idea of a noumenon cannot be
intuited but can yet be regarded as the substrate underlying what is
mere appearance, namely, our intuition of the world. For only by
means of this power and its idea do we, in a pure intellectual estima181The Prussian rod equaled 3.7662 m (meters), the Saxon 4.2951 m, whereas the
English rod equals 5.5 yds. or 5.029 m. The German mile was quite long: 7500 m; the
English statute mile equals only 1609.35 m. There was also a "geographic" or "Bavarian"
as well as a "Badische" mile.j
19['Das Unendliche.' What this expression says litsrally IS 'the infinite.' Yet here (and
similarly in mathematics, where the same expression is used), the expression does not
mean something infinite (to which the estimation of magnitude progresses), even
though it does mean this in other contexts (e.g., in the next paragraph). 'Unendlichludt.'
on the other hand, usually means 'infinity' only in the most abstract sense: 'infiniteness,'
'being infinite.' J

20[In this case, magnitudes that are given (in intuition).}

255

112

256

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

tion of magnitude, comprehend the infinite in the world of sense
entirely under a concept, even though in a mathematical estimation
of magnitude by means of numerical concepts we can never think it
in its entirety. Even a power that enables us to think the infinite of
supersensible intuition as given (in our intelligible substrate) surpasses
any standard of sensibility. It is large beyond any comparison even
with the power of mathematical estimation-not, it is true, for [the
pursuit ofl a theoretical aim on behalf of our cognitive power, but still
as an expansion of the mind that feels able to cross the barriers of
sensibility with a different (a practical) aim.
Hence nature is sublime in those of its appearances whose intuition carries with it the idea of their infinity. But the only way for this
to occur is through the inadequacy of even the greatest effort of our
imagination to estimate an object's magnitude. In the mathematical
estimation of magnitude, however, the imagination is equal to the
task of providing, for any object, a measure that will suffice for this
estimation, because the understanding'S numerical concepts can be
used in a progression and so can make any measure adequate to any
given magnitude. Hence it must be the aesthetic estimation of magnitude where we feel that effort, our imagination's effort to perform a
comprehension that surpasses its ability to encompass [begreifen I the
progressive apprehension in a whole of intuition, and where at the
same time we perceive the inadequacy of the imagination-unbounded
though it is as far as progressing is concerned-for taking in and
using, for the estimation of magnitude, a basic measure that is suitable for this with minimal expenditure on the part of the understanding.
Now the proper unchangeable basic measure of nature is the absolute
whole of nature, which, in the case of nature as appearance, is infinity
comprehended. This basic measure, however, is a self-contradictory
concept (because an absolute totality of an endless progression is
impossible). Hence that magnitude of a natural object to which the
imagination fruitlessly applies its entire ability to comprehend must
lead the concept of nature to a supersensible substrate (which underlies both nature and our ability to think), a substrate that is large
beyond any standard of sense and hence makes us judge as sublime
not so much the object as the mental attunement in which we find
ourselves when we estimate the object.
Therefore, just as the aesthetic power of judgment in judging the
beautiful refers the imagination in its free play to the understanding

§ 26.

ON ESTIMATING THE MAGNITUDE. . .

113

so that it will harmonize with the understanding's concepts in general
(which concepts they are is left indeterminate), so in judging a thing
sublime it refers the imagination to reason so that it will harmonize
subjectively with reason's ideas (which ideas they are is indeterminate),
i.e., so that it will produce a mental attunement that conforms to and
is compatible with the one that an influence by determinate (practical)
ideas would produce on feeling.
This also shows that true sublimity must be sought only in the mind
of the judging person, not in the natural object the judging of which
prompts this mental attunement. Indeed, who would want to call
sublime such things as shapeless mountain masses piled on one another
in wild disarray, with their pyramids of ice, or the gloomy raging sea?
But the mind feels elevated in its own judgment of itself when it
contemplates these without concern for their form and abandons
itself to the imagination and to a reason that has come to be connected with it - though quite without a determinate purpose, and
merely expanding it-and finds all the might of the imagination still
inadequate to reason's ideas.
Nature offers examples of the mathematically sublime, in mere
intuition, whenever our imagination is given. not so much a larger
numerical concept, as a large unity for a measure (to shorten the
numerical series). A tree that we estimate by a man's height will do as
a standard for [estimating the height of) a mountain. If the mountain
were to be about a mile high, it can serve as the unity for the number
that expresses the earth's diameter, and so make that diameter
intuitable. The earth's diameter can serve similarly for estimating the
planetary system familiar to us, and that iin turn] for estimating the
Milky Way system. And the immense multitude of such Milky Way
systems, called nebulous stars, which presumably form another such
system among themselves, do not lead us to expect any boundaries
here. 21 Now when we judge such an immense whole aesthetically,
the sublime lies not so much in the magnitude of the number as in the
fact that, the farther we progress, the larger are the unities we reach.
This is partly due to the systematic division in the structure of the
world edifice; for this division always presents to us whatever is large in
nature as being small in turn, though what it actually presents to us is
211Cf. the Umversal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens (1755), Ak. 1.247-58,
but esp. At. 1,306-22.1

257

114

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

our imagination, in all its boundlessness, and along with it nature, as
vanishing[ly small] in contrast to the ideas of reason, if the imagination is to provide an exhibition adequate to them.

§27

On the Quality of the Liking
in OUf Judging of the Sublime
The feeling that it is beyond our ability to attain to an idea that is a
law for us is RESPECT. Now the idea of comprehending every appearance that may be given us in the intuition of a whole is an idea
enjoined on us by a law of reason, which knows no other determinate
measure that is valid for everyone and unchanging than the absolute
whole. But our imagination, even in its greatest effort to do what is
demanded of it and comprehend a given object in a whole of intuition
(and hence to exhibit the idea of reason), proves its own limits and
inadequacy, and yet at the same time proves its vocation to [obey I a
law, namely, to make itself adequate to that idea. Hence the feeling of
the sublime in nature is respect for our own vocation. But by a certain
subreption22 (in which respect for the object is substituted for respect
for the idea of humanity within our[selves, as] subject[s)) this respect
is accorded an object of nature that, as it were, makes intuitable for
us the superiority of the rational vocation of our cognitive powers
over the greatest power of sensibility.23
Hence the feeling of the sublime is a feeling of displeasure that
arises from the imagination's inadequacy, in an aesthetic estimation
22[Cf. the Inaugural Dissertation (1770), De mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilis forma
et principiis (On the Form and Principles of the Sen.sible and Intelligible World), § 24,
Ak. 11,412: ..... prae.stigia intellectus. per subornationem conceptus sen.sitivi. tamquam
nolae intellectualis. did potest (secundum analogiam significatus recepti) vi/ium
subreptionis." i.e., "We may call fallacy of subreption (by analogy with the accepted
meaning) the intellect's trick of slipping in a concept of sense as if it were the concept
of an intellectual characteristic."]
23[ I.e .•

the imagination "in its greatest expansion": cf. Ak. 269.1

§ 27.

ON THE QUALITY OF THE LIKING. . .

115

of magnitude, for an estimation by reason, but is at the same time also
a pleasure, aroused by the fact that this very judgment, namely, that
even the greatest power of sensibility is inadequate, is [itself) in
harmony with rational ideas, insofar as striving toward them is still a
law for us. For it is a law (of reason) for us, and part of our vocation,
to estimate any sense object in nature that is large for us as being
small when compared with ideas of reason; and whatever arouses in
us the feeling of this supersensible vocation is in harmony with that
law. Now the greatest effort of the imagination in exhibiting the unity
[it needs) to estimate magnitude is [itself) a reference to something
large absolutely, and hence also a reference to reason's law to adopt
only this something as the supreme measure of magnitude. Hence our
inner perception that every standard of sensibility is inadequate for
an estimation of magnitude by reason is [itself) a harmony with laws
of reason, as well as a displeasure that arouses in us the feeling of our
supersensible vocation, according to which finding that every standard of sensibility is inadequate to the ideas of reason is purposive
and hence pleasurable.
In presenting the sublime in nature the mind feels agitated,24
while in an aesthetic judgment about the beautiful in nature it is in
restful contemplation. This agitation (above all at its inception) can
be compared with a vibration, i.e., with a rapid alternation of repulsion from, and attraction to, one and the same object. If a [thing) is
excessive for the imagination (and the imagination is driven to [such
excess) as it apprehends [the thing] in intuition), then [the thing) is. as
it were, an abyss in which the imagination is afraid to lose itself. Yet,
at the same time, for reason's idea of the supersensible [this same
thing) is not excessive but conforms to reason's law to give rise to such
striving by the imagination. Hence [the thing] is now attractive to the
same degree to which [formerly) it was repulsive to mere sensibility.
The judgment itself, however, always remains only aesthetic here. For
it is not based on a determinate concept of the object, and presents
merely the subjective play of the mental powers themselves (imagination
and reason) as harmonious by virtue of their contrast. For just as,
when we judge the beautiful, imagination and understanding give rise
to a subjective purposiveness of the mental powers by their accordance,
so do imagination and reason here give rise to such a purposiveness
24[ Cf.

Ak. 245 and 226. J

258

116

259

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

by their conflict, namely, to a feeling that we have a pure and
independent reason, or a power for estimating magnitude, whose
superiority cannot be made intuitable by anything other than the
inadequacy of that power which in exhibiting magnitudes (of sensible
objects) is itself unbounded.
Measuring (as [a way ofl apprehending) a space is at the same time
describing it, and hence it is an objective movement in the imagination and a progression. On the other hand, comprehending a multi·
plicity in a unity (of intuition rather than of thought),25 and hence
comprehending in one instant what is apprehended successively, is a
regression that in tum cancels the condition of time in the imagination's
progression and makes simultaneity intuitable.26 Hence, (since temporal succession is a condition of the inner sense and of an intuition)
it is a subjective movement of the imagination by which it does
violence to the inner sense, and this violence must be the more
significant the larger the quantum is that the imagination compre·
hends in one intuition. Hence the effort to take up into a single
intuition a measure for magnitude requiring a significant time for
apprehension is a way of presenting which subjectively considered is
contrapurposive. but which objectively is needed to estimate magnitude and hence is purposive. And yet this same violence that the
imagination inflicts on the subject is still judged purposive for the
whole vocation of the mind.
The quality of the feeling of the sublime consists in its being a
feeling, accompanying an object, of displeasure about our aesthetic
power of judging, yet of a displeasure that we present at the same
time as purposive. What makes this possible is that the subject's own
inability uncovers in him the consciousness of an unlimited ability
which is also his. and that the mind can judge this ability aesthetically
only by that inability.
In the logical estimation of magnitude, the impossibility of ever
arriving at absolute totality by measuring the things in the world of
sense progressively, in time and space, was cognized as objective, as
an impossibility of thinking the infinite as given, and not as merely
subjective, as an inability to take it in. For there we are not at all
251Parentheses added.1

26ICf., for this portion of the paragraph. the Critique of Pure Reason. A 411-13

438-40.1

=

B

§ 27.

ON THE QUALITY OF THE LIKING. . .

117

concerned with the degree of the comprehension in one intuition, [to
be used] as a measure, but everything hinges on a numerical concept.
In an aesthetic estimation of magnitude, on the other hand, the
numerical concept must drop out or be changed, and nothing is
purposive for this estimation except the imagination's comprehension
to [formJ a unity [to be used as) a measure (so that the concepts of a
law of the successive generation of concepts of magnitude are avoided).
Now if a magnitude almost reaches the limit of our ability to comprehend [itJ in one intuition, but the imagination is still called upon to
perform, by means of numerical magnitudes (regarding which we are
conscious of having an unbounded ability), an aesthetic comprehension in a larger unity; then we feel in our mind that we are aesthetically confined within bounds. Yet, in view of the necessary expansion
of the imagination toward adequacy regarding what is unbounded in
our power of reason, namely, the idea of the absolute whole, the
displeasure is still presented as purposive for the rational ideas and
their arousal, and hence so is the unpurposiveness of our imagination's
ability. This is precisely what makes the aesthetic judgment itself
subjectively purposive for reason, as the source of ideas, i.e., as the
source of an intellectual comprehension [compared J to which all
aesthetic comprehension is small, and the object is apprehended as
sublime with a pleasure that is possible only by means of a displeasure.

260

B
ON THE
DYNAMICALLY
SUBLIME IN NATURE
§28

On Nature as a Might
Might is an ability that is superior to great obstacles. It is called
dominance [Gewalt I if it is superior even to the resistance of some-

thing that itself possesses might. When in an aesthetic judgment we
consider nature as a might that has no dominance over us, then it is
dynamically27 sublime.

If we are to judge nature as sublime dynamically, we must present
it as arousing fear. (But the reverse does not hold: not every object
that arouses fear is found sublime when we judge it aesthetically.) For
when we judge [something I aesthetically (without a concept), the
only way we can judge a superiority over obstacles is by the magnitude of the resistance. But whatever we strive to resist is an evil, and it
is an object of fear if we find that our ability [to resist it I is no match
for it. Hence nature can count as a might. and so as dynamically
sublime, for aesthetic judgment only insofar as we consider it as an
object of fear.
We can, however, consider an object fearful without being afraid
of it, namely, if we judge it in such a way that we merely think of the
2i!From Greek {j(;vaJ1l~ (dynamis), i.e. 'might: 'power: etc.1

119

120

261

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

case where we might possibly want to put up resistance against it, and
that any resistance would in that case be utterly futile. Thus a virtuous person fears God without being afraid of him. For he does not
think of wanting to resist God and his commandments as a possibility
that should worry him. But for every such case, which he thinks of as
not impossible intrinsically, he recognizes God as fearful.
Just as we cannot pass judgment on the beautiful if we are seized
by inclination and appetite, so we cannot pass judgment at all on the
sublime in nature if we are afraid. For we flee from the sight of an
object that scares us, and it is impossible to like terror that we take
seriously. That is why the agreeableness that arises from the cessation
of a hardship is gladness. But since this gladness involves our liberation from a danger, it is accompanied by our resolve never to expose
ourselves to that danger again. Indeed, we do not even like to think
back on that sensation, let alone actively seek out an opportunity for
it.
On the other hand, consider bold, overhanging and, as it were,
threatening rocks, thunderclouds piling up in the sky and moving
about accompanied by lightning and thunderclaps, volcanoes with aU
their destructive power, hurricanes with all the devastation they leave
behind, the boundless ocean heaved up, the high waterfall of a mighty
river, and so on. Compared to the might of any of these, our ability to
resist becomes an insignificant trifle. Yet the sight of them becomes
all the more attractive the more fearful it is, provided we are in a safe
place. And we like to call these objects sublime because they raise the
soul's fortitude above its usual middle range and allow us to discover
in ourselves an ability to resist which is of a quite different kind, and
which gives us the courage [to believe 1 that we could be a match for
nature's seeming omnipotence.
For although we found our own limitation when we considered the
immensity of nature and the inadequacy of our ability to adopt a
standard proportionate to estimating aesthetically the magnitude of
nature's domain. yet we also found, in our power of reason, a different and nonsensible standard that has this infinity itself under it as a
unit; and since in contrast to this standard everything in nature is
small, we found in our mind a superiority over nature itself in its
immensity. In the same way, though the irresistibility of nature's might
makes us, considered as natural beings, recognize our physical
impotence, it reveals in us at the same time an ability to judge

§ 28.

ON NATURE AS A MIGHT

121

ourselves independent of nature, and reveals in us a superiority over
nature that is the basis of a self-preservation quite different in kind
from the one that can be assailed and endangered by nature outside
us. This keeps the humanity in our person from being degraded, even
though a human being would have to succumb to that dominance lof
nature I. Hence if in judging nature aesthetically we call it sublime, we
do so not because nature arouses fear, but because it calls forth our
strength (which does not belong to nature Iwithin us]), to regard as
small the Iobjects 1 of our Inatural I concerns: property. health, and
life. and because of this we regard nature's might (to which we are
indeed subjected in these Inaturall concerns) as yet not having such
dominance over us, as persons, that we should have to bow to it if our
highest principles were at stake and we had to choose between
upholding or abandoning them. Hence nature is here called sublime
lerhabenl merely because it elevates [erhebtl our imagination, [making]
it exhibit those cases where the mind can come to feel its own
sublimity, which lies in its vocation and elevates it even above nature.
This self-estimation loses nothing from the fact that we must find
ourselves safe in order to feel this exciting liking, so that (as it might
seem), since the danger is not genuine, the sublimity of our intellectual ability might also not be genuine. For here the liking concerns
only our ability's vocation. revealed in such cases, insofar as the
predisposition to this ability is part of our nature, whereas it remains
up to us, as our obligation, to develop and exercise this ability. And
there is truth in this, no matter how conscious of his actual present
impotence man may be when he extends his reflection thus far.
I admit that this principle seems farfetched and the result pf some
subtle reasoning, and hence high-flown [uberschwenglichl for an
aesthetic judgment. And yet our observation of man proves the
opposite, and proves that even the commonest judging can be based
on this principle, even though we are not always conscious of it. For
what is it that is an object of the highest admiration even to the
savage? It is a person who is not terrified, not afraid, and hence does
not yield to danger but promptly sets to work with vigor and full
deliberation. Even in a fully civilized society there remains this superior esteem for the warrior, except that we demand more of him: that
he also demonstrate all the virtues of peace-gentleness, sympathy,
and even appropriate care for his own person-precisely because
they reveal to us that his mind cannot be subdued by danger. Hence,

262

122

26.3

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

no matter how much people may dispute, when they compare the
statesman with the general, as to which one deserves the superior
respect, an aesthetic judgment decides in favor of the general. Even
war has something sublime about it if it is carried on in an orderly
way and with respect for the sanctity of the citizens' rights. At the
same time it makes the way of thinking of a people that carries it on in
this way all the more sublime in proportion to the number of dangers
in the face of which it courageously stood its ground. A prolonged
peace, on the other hand, tends to make prevalent a mere[ly J commercial spirit,28 and along with it base selfishness, cowardice, and softness, and to debase the way of thinking of that people.29
This analysis of the concept of the sublime, insofar as [sublimity is I
attributed to might, may seem to conflict with the fact that in certain
situations- in tempests, storms, earthquakes, and so on-we usually
present God as showing himself in his wrath but also in his sublimity,
while yet it would be both foolish and sacrilegious to imagine that our
mind is superior to the effects produced by such a might, and is
superior apparently even to its intentions. It seems that here the
mental attunement that befits the manifestation of such an object is
not a feeling of the sublimity of our own nature, but rather submission,
prostration, and a feeling of our utter impotence; and this mental
attunement is in fact usually connected with the idea of this object
when natural events of this sort occur. It seems that in religion in
general the only fitting behavior in the presence of the deity is
prostration, worship with bowed head and accompanied by contrite
and timorous gestures and voice; and that is why most peoples have in
fact adopted this behavior and still engage in it. But, by the same
token, this mental attunement is far from being intrinsically and
necessarily connected with the idea of the sublimity of a religion and
its object. A person who is actually afraid and finds cause for this in
himself because he is conscious that with his reprehensible attitude
he offends against a might whose will is at once irresistible and just is
not at all in the frame of mind Ineeded) to admire divine greatness,
which requires that we be attuned to quiet contemplation and that
our judgment be completely free. Only if he is conscious that his
attitude is sincere and pleasing to God, will these effects of might
281Cf. Perpetual Peace, Ak. VIII. 368.1
291Cf.

§ 83, Ak. 429-34.,

§ 28.

ON NATURE AS A MIGHT

123

serve to arouse in him the idea of God's sublimity, insofar as he
recognizes in his own attitude a sublimity that conforms to God's will,
and is thereby elevated above any fear of such natural effects, which
he does not regard as outbursts of God's wrathJEven humility, as a
strict judging of our own defects which, when we are conscious that
our own attitudes are good, could otherwise easily be cloaked with
the frailty of human nature [as an excuse], is a sublime mental
attunement, namely. voluntary subjection of ourselves to the pain of
self-reprimand so as gradually to eradicClte the cause of these defects.
This alone is what intrinsically distinguishes religion from superstition.
The latter establishes in the mind not a reverence for the sublime. but
fear and dread of that being of superior might to whose will the
terrified person finds himself subjected but without holding him in
esteem; and this can obviously give rise to nothing but ingratiation
and fawning, never to a religion based on good conduct. 30
Hence sublimity is contained not in any thing of nature, but only in
our mind, insofar as we can become conscious of our superiority to
nature within us, and thereby also to nature outside us (as far as it
influences us). Whatever arouses this feeling in us, and tbis includes
the might of nature that challenges our forces, is then (althougb
improperly) called sublime. And it is only by presupposing tbis idea
within us, and by referring to it, that we can arrive at the idea of the
sublimity of that being who arouses deep respect in us, not just by his
might as demonstrated in nature, but even more by the ability, with
which we have been endowed, to judge nature without fear and to
think of our vocation as being sublimely above nature.

JOICf. Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone. Ak. VI, 51: ..... (AJII religions
can be divided into two kinds: religion of ingratiation (mere worship), and moral
religion. Le., religion based on good conduct. "J

264

§29

On the Modality of a Judgment
about the Sublime in Nature

265

Beautiful nature contains innumerable things about which we do not
hesitate to require everyone's judgment to agree with our own, and
can in fact expect such agreement without being wrong very often.
But we cannot with the same readiness count on others to accept our
judgment about the sublime in nature. For it seems that, if we are to
pass judgment on that superiority of Isuch] natural objects, not only
must our aesthetic power of judgment be far more cultivated, but also
so must the cognitive powers on which it is based.
In order for the mind to be attuned to the feeling of the sublime. it
must be receptive to ideas. For it is precisely nature's inadequacy to
the ideas- and this presupposes both that the mind is receptive to
ideas and that the imagination strains to treat nature as a schemaJ !
for them-that constitutes what both repels our sensibility and yet
attracts us at the same time, because it is a dominance IGewaltJ that
reason exerts over sensibility only for the sake of expanding it
commensurately with reason's own domain (the practical one) and
letting it look outward toward the infinite, which for sensibility is an
abyss. It is a fact that what is called sublime by us. having been
prepared through culture, comes across as merely repellent to a
person who is uncultured and lacking in the development of moral
ideas. In all the evidence of nature's destructive force IGewalt I. and
in the large scale of its might, in contrast to which his own is nonexistent,
he will see only the hardship, danger. and misery that would confront
anyone forced to live in such a place. Thus (as Mr. de Saussure
relates32 ) the good and otherwise sensible Savoyard peasant did not
hesitate to call anyone a fool who fancies glaciered mountains. He
might even have had a point, if Saussure had acted merely from fancy,
:llrSee Ak. 253 br.

II.

17.[

321Horace Benedict de Saussure (l74()-99). Swiss geologist, geographer, and botanist.
He traveled extensively in the Alps (he was only the third to climb Mont Blanc. in
1787), and recorded his observations in his V~VClges dans {es Alpes (1779. 1786).1

124

§ 29. ON THE MODALITY OF A JUDGMENT. . .

125

as most travelers tend to, in exposing himself to the dangers involved
in his observations, or in order that he might some day be able to
describe them with pathos. In fact, however, his intention was to
instruct mankind, and that excellent man got, in addition, the soulstirring sensation and gave it into the bargain to the readers of his
travels.
But the fact that a judgment about the sublime in nature requires
culture (more so than a judgment about the beautiful) still in no way
implies that it was initially produced by culture and then introduced
to society by way of (say) mere convention. Rather, it has its foundation in human nature: in something that, along with common sense,
we may require and demand of everyone, namely, the predisposition
to the feeling for (practical) ideas. i.e .• to moral feeling.
This is what underlies the necessity-which we include in our
judgment about the sublime-of the assent of other people's judgment to our own. For just as we charge someone with a lack of taste if
he is indifferent when he judges an object of nature that we find
beautiful, so we say that someone has no feeling if he remains
unmoved in the presence of something we judge sublime. But we
demand both taste and feeling of every person, and, if he has any
culture at all, we presuppose that he has them. But we do so with this
difference: taste we demand unhesitatingly from everyone, because
here judgment refers the imagination merely to the understanding,
our power of concepts; in the case of feeling, on the other hand,
judgment refers the imagination to reason, our power of ideas, and so
we demand feeling only under a subjective presupposition (though we
believe we are justified and permitted to require [fulfillment ofl this
presupposition in everyone): we presuppose moral feeling in man.
And so we attribute necessity to this Ikind ofl aesthetic judgment as
well.
In this modality of aesthetic judgments-their presumed necessitylies one principal moment for a critique of judgment. For it is this
necessity that reveals an a priori principle in them and lifts them out
of [the reach of) empirical psychology, in which they would otherwise
remain buried among the feelings of gratification and pain (accompanied only by the empty epithet of being a more refined feeling).
Instead this necessity places them, and by means of them our power
of judgment, into the class of those judgments that have a priori

266

126

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

principles at their basis, and hence brings them into transcendental
philosophy.

General Comment
on the Exposition
of Aesthetic
Reflective Judgments

267

In relation to the feeling of pleasure an object must be classed with
either the agreeable, or the beautiful. or the sublime. or the (absolutely)
good (iucundum, pulchrum, sublime, honestum).
The agreeable, as an incentive for desires, is always of the same
kind, wherever it may come from and however different in kind may
be the presentation (of sense, and of sensation regarded objectively33).
That is why what matters in judging its influence on the mind is only
the number of stimuli (simultaneous and successive), and, as it were,
only the mass of the agreeable sensation, so that this sensation can be
made intelligible only through its quantity. Nor does the agreeable
contribute to culture, but it belongs to mere enjoyment. The beautiful,
on the other hand, requires that we present a certain quality of the
object, and a quality that can be made intelligible and brought to
concepts (even though in an aesthetic judgment the beautiful is not
brought to concepts). It also contributes to culture, for it teaches us at
the same time to be mindful of purposiveness in the feeling of pleasure.
The sublime consists merely in a relation, for here we judge the
sensible [element I in the presentation of nature to be suitable for a
possible supersensible use. The absolutely good (the object of moral
feeling), as judged subjectively by the feeling it inspires, is the ability
of the subject's powers to be determined by the conception of a law
that obligates absolutely. It is distinguished above all by its modality:
33[l.e., in the meaning of the term 'sensation' where the sensation refers to an object,
rather than being a feeling and so referring only to the subject, like the agreeable
sensation about to be mentioned. Cf. § 3, Ak. 20S-06. Cf. also Ak. 207 br. n. 12; Kant
continues to use 'sensation' to mean 'feeling' as weILl

GENERAL COMMENT ON THE EXPOSmON . . .

127

a necessity that rests on a priori concepts and contains not just a
claim but also a command that everyone approve. Actually, the
absolutely good belongs not to aesthetic but to pure intellectual
judgment; by the same token, we attribute it to freedom rather than
to nature, and in a determinative rather than in a merely reflective
judgment. But the determinability of the subject by this idea-the
determinability, indeed, of a subject who can sense within himself, as
a modification of his state. obstacles in sensibility, but at the same
time his superiority to sensibility in overcoming these obstacles,
which determinability is moral feeling-is nevertheless akin to the
aesthetic power of judgment and its formal conditions inasmuch as it
allows us to present the lawfulness of an act done from duty as
aesthetic also, i.e., as sublime or for that matter beautiful, without
any loss in the feeling's purity, while such a loss would be unavoidable
if we sought to bring the feeling into a natural connection with the
feeling of the agreeable.
If we take the result from the exposition given so far of the
two kinds of aesthetic judgments, we arrive at the following brief
explications:
Beautiful is what we like when we merely judge it (and hence not
through any sensation by means of sense in accordance with some
concept of the understanding). From this it follows at once that we
must like the beautiful without any interest.
Sublime is what, by its resistance to the interest of the senses, we
like directly.
Both of these are explications of universally valid aesthetic judging
and as such refer to subjective bases. In the case of the beautiful, the
reference is to subjective bases of sensibility as they are purposive for
the benefit of the contemplative understanding. In the case of the
sublime, the reference is to subjective bases as they are purposive in
relation to moral feeling, namely, against sensibility but at the same
time, and within the very same subject, for the purposes of practical
reason. The beautiful prepares us for loving something, even nature,
without interest; the sublime, for esteeming it even against our interest (of sense).
The sublime can be described thus: it is an object (of nature) the
presentation of which determines the mind to think of nature's inability to attain to an exhibition of ideas.
If we speak literally and consider the matter logically, ideas cannot

268

128

269

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

be exhibited. But when in intuiting nature we expand our empirical
power of presentation (mathematically or dynamically), then reason,
the ability to Ithink I an independent and absolute totality, never fails
to step in and arouse the mind to an effort, although a futile one, to
make the presentation of the senses adequate to this [idea of) totality.
This effort, as well as the feeling that the imagination las it synthesizes empirical nature I is unable to attain to that idea, is itself an
exhibition of the subjective purposiveness of our mind, in the use of
our imagination, for the mind's supersensible vocation. And we are
compelled to subjectively think nature itself in its totality as the
exhibition of something supersensible, without our being able to
bring this exhibition about objectively.
For we soon come to realize that nature in space and time [i.e.,
phenomenal nature J entirely lacks the unconditioned, and hence
lacks also that absolute magnitude [i.e., totality] which, after all. even
the commonest reason demands. And this is precisely what reminds
us that we are dealing only with nature as appearance. which must yet
be considered in turn the mere exhibition of nature in itself (of which
reason has the idea). We cannot determine this idea of the supersensible any further, and hence we cannot cognize but can only think
nature as an exhibition of it. But it is this idea that is aroused in us
when, as we judge an object aesthetically, this judging strains the
imagination to its limit, whether of expansion (mathematically) or of
its might over the mind (dynamically). The judging strains the imagination because it is based on a feeling that the mind has a vocation
that wholly transcends the domain of nature (namely, moral feeling),
and it is with regard to this feeling that we judge the presentation of
the object subjectively purposive.
It is in fact difficult to think of a feeling for the sublime in nature
without connecting with it a mental attunement similar to that for
moral feeling. It is true that the pleasure we take directly in the
beautiful in nature also presupposes, as well as cultivates. a certain
liberality in our way of thinking, i.e., an independence of the liking
from mere enjoyment of sense; but here the freedom is still presented
more as in play than as subject to a law-governed task. But the latter
is what genuinely characterizes man's morality, where reason must
exert its dominance over sensibility, except that in an aesthetic judgment about the sublime we present this dominance as being exerted
by the imagination itself, as an instrument of reason.

GENERAL COMMENT ON THE EXPOSmON . . .

129

By the same token, a liking for the sublime in nature is only
negative (whereas a liking for the beautiful is positive ):34 it is a
feeling that the imagination by its own action is depriving itself of its
freedom, in being determined purposively according to a law different from that of its empirical use. The imagination thereby acquires
an expansion and a might that surpasses the one it sacrifices; but the
basis of this might is concealed from it; instead the imagination feels
the sacrifice or deprivation and at the same time the cause to which it
is being subjugated. Thus any spectator who beholds massive mountains climbing skyward, deep gorges with raging streams in them,
wastelands lying in deep shadow and inviting melancholy meditation,
and so on is indeed seized by amazement bordering on terror, by
horror and a sacred thrill; but, since he knows he is safe, this is not
actual fear: it is merely our attempt to incur it with our imagination,
in order that we may feel that very power's might and connect the
mental agitation this arouses with the mind's state of rest. In this way
we [feell our superiority to nature within ourselves, and hence also to
nature outside us insofar as it can influence our feeling of well-being,
For the imagination, acting in accordance with the law of association,
makes our state of contentment dependent on [somethingl physical;
but the same power, acting in accordance with principles of the
schematism of judgment (and hence, to that extent, in subordination
to freedom), is an instrument of reason and its ideas. As such, however,
it is a might [that allows us I to assert our independence of natural
influences, to degrade as small what is large according to the imagination in its first [role], and so to posit the absolutely large [or great)
only in his (the subject's) own vocation. In this reflection of the
aesthetic power of judgment, by which it seeks to elevate itself to the
point of being adequate to reason (though without having a determinate concept from reason), we present the object itself as subjectively
34[Cf. Edmund Burke (to whom Kant responds at Ak. 277-78), Philosophical Enquiry
Into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (1757): "[Sublimity and
beauty I are indeed ideas of a very different nature, one being founded on pain, the
other on pleasure ... " (Pt. III, Sect. xxvii). The pleasure on which beauty is founded is
"actual" pleasure (Pt. IV, Sect. v), because it is positive pleasure (Pt. I, Sect. iv); the
sublime gives rise only to "delight," which is not a positive pleasure but merely a
"relative" pleasure (Pt. I, Sect. iv) because it "turns on pain." (Pt. I, Sect. xviii), in the
sense that it is merely the cessation or diminution of pain (Pt. I, Sect. iv). There are
many more parallels between Kant's and Burke's accounts of beauty and (especially)
sublimity. I

130

270

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

purposive, precisely because objectively the imagination. [even Jin its
greatest expansion, is inadequate to reason (the power of ideas).
We must in all of this be mindful of the injunction given above,
namely, that the transcendental aesthetic of judgment must be coocemed solely with pure aesthetic judgments. Hence we must not take
for our examples such bealltiful or sublime objects of nature as
presuppose the concept of a purpose. For then the purposiveness
would be either teleological, and hence not aesthetic, or else be
based on mere sensations of an object (gratification or pain) and
hence not merely formal. Therefore, when we call the sight of the
starry sky sublime, we must not base our judgment upon any concepts of worlds that are inhabited by rational beings,3S and then
l conceive ofl the bright dots that we see occupying the space above
us as being these worlds' suns, moved in orbits prescribed for them
with great purposiveness; but we must base our judgment regarding it
merely on how we see it, as a vast vault encompassing everything, and
merely under this presentation may we posit the sublimity that a pure
aesthetic judgment attributes to this object. In the same way, when
we judge the sight of the ocean we must not do so on the basis of how
we think it, enriched with aU sorts of knowledge which we possess
(but which is not contained in the direct intuition), e.g., as a vast
realm of aquatic creatures, or as the great reservoir supplying the
water for the vapors that impregnate the air with clouds for the
benefit of the land, or again as an element that, while separating
continents from one another, yet makes possible the greatest communication among them; for aU such judgments will be teleological.
Instead we must be able to view the ocean as poets do, merely in
terms of what manifests itself to the eye- e.g., if we observe it while it
is calm, as a clear mirror of water bounded only by the sky; or, if it is
turbulent, as being like an abyss threatening to engulf every thingand yet find it sublime. The same applies to the sublime and beautiful
in the human figure. Here, too, we must not have in mind [zuriicksehen
auf], as bases determining our judgment, concepts of the purposes for
which man has all his limbs, letting the limbs' harmony with these
purposes influence our aesthetic judgment (which would then cease
to be pure), even though it is certainly a necessary condition of
351Kant discusses the possibility of extraterrestrial life elaborately (and movingly) in
his Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens (1755), Ak. I, 349-68.J

GENERAL COMMENT ON THE EXPOSITION...

131

aesthetic liking as well that the limbs not conflict with those purposes.
Aesthetic purposiveness is the lawfulness of the power of judgment in
its freedom. [Whether we then) like the object depends on [howl we
suppose [setzen wollen) the imagination to relate Ito it): but [for this
liking to occur I the imagination must on its own sustain the mind in a
free activity. If, on the other hand, the judgment is determined by
anything else, whether a sensation proper [Sinnesempfindung)36 or a
concept of the understanding, then the judgment is indeed lawful, but
it is not one made by a free power of judgment.
Sometimes we speak of intellectual beauty or sublimity. But, first,
these expressions are not quite correct. For beauty and sublimity are
aesthetic ways of presenting Ithings I, and if we were nothing but pure
intelligences37 (or, for that matter, if in thought we put ourselves in
the place of such [beings]). we would not present [things) in this way
at all. Second. even though these two [intellectual beauty and sublimity), as objects of an intellectual (moral) liking, are indeed compatible
with an aesthetic liking inasmuch as they do not rest on any interest,
it still remains difficult to make them compatible with it: for they are
to produce an interest, and yet, on the assumption that the exhibition
is to harmonize with the [kind of) liking involved in an aesthetic
judgment, this interest would have to be an interest of sense connected with the exhibition: but that would impair the intellectual
purposiveness and make it impure.
The object of a pure and unconditioned intellectual liking is the
moral law in its might, the might that it exerts in us over any and all of
those incentives of the mind that precede it. This might actually reveals
itself aesthetically only through sacrifice (which is a deprivationthough one that serves our inner freedom - in return for which it
reveals in us an unfathomable depth of this supersensible power,
whose consequences extend beyond what we can foresee). Hence,
considered from the aesthetic side (Le., in reference to sensibility),
the liking is negative. i.e .• opposed to this interest, but considered
from the intellectual side it is positive and connected with an interest.
361As distinguished from 'sensation' as meaning feeling. Cf. Ak. 291 incl. br. n. 19. (If
the aesthetic judgment lof liking, which is a feeling] were determined by sensation
proper, it would be a judgment about the agreeable, land "lawful" only empirically].
Cf. Ak. 2OS-{)6.) I

37[Cf. Ak. 233.]

271

132

272

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

It follows from this that if we judge aesthetically the good that is
intellectual and intrinsically purposive (the moral good), we must
present it not so much as beautiful but rather as sublime, so that it
will arouse more a feeling of respect (which disdains charm) than one
of love and familiar affection. For human nature does not of itself
harmonize with that good; it lean be made to harmonize with itl only
through the dominance that reason exerts over sensibility. Conversely,
too, what we call sublime in nature outside us, or for that matter in
nature within us (e.g., certain affects), becomes interesting only because
we present it as a might of the mind to rise above certain obstacles of
sensibility by means of moral principles.
Let me dwell a little on that last point. If the idea of the good is
accompanied by affect las its effect), this {affect) is called enthusiasm. 38
This mental state seems to be sublime, so much so that it is commonly alleged that nothing great can be accomplished without it.
But in fact any affect 39 is blind, either in the selection of its purpose,
or, if that were to have been given by reason, in [the manner of)
achieving it. For an affect is an agitation of the mind that makes it
unable to engage in free deliberation about principles with the aim of
determining itself according to them. Hence there is no way it can
deserve to be liked by reason. Yet enthusiasm is sublime aesthetically,
because it is a straining of our forces by ideas that impart to the mind
a momentum whose effects are mightier and more permanent than
are those of an impulse produced by presentations of sense. But
(strange though it seems) even Ithe state ofl being without affects
(apatheia, phlegma in significatu bono41 ) in a mind that vigorously
38[On enthusiasm as an affect, cf. [and contrast) the Anthropology. § 75. Ak. VII.
253-54; cf. also the Metaphysics of MoroLr. Ak. VI, 4OS-()9. J
39Affects differ in kind from passions. Affects relate merely to feeling, whereas

passions belong to our power of desire and are inclinations that make it difficult or
impossible for us to determine our power of choice through principles. Affects are
impetuous and unpremeditated. passions persistent and deliberate. Thus resentment in
the fonn of anger is an affect. in the fonn of hatred (vindictiveness) it is a passion.
Passion can never be called sublime, no matter what the circumstances; for while in an
affect the mind's freedom is impeded. in passion it is aboJished.4O
40[00 these distinctions. cf' the Antlrrop%gy, Ak. VII, 251-75 (see also ibid.• 235),
and the Metaphysics of MoraLr. Ak. VI. 407-()8.1
41[ln their favorabJe (namely. moral) senses. Cf, the Anthropology. Ak. VII, 252-54,
and the Metaphysics of Morals. Ak. VI. 408./

GENERAL COMMENT ON THE EXPOSmON . . .

133

pursues its immutable principles is sublime, and sublime in a far
superior way, because it also has pure reason's liking on its side. Only
a cast of mind of that sort is called noble-fthough! the term has
since come to be applied to things as well, such as a building, a
garment, a literary style, a person's bearing, and so on-namely, if it
arouses not so much amazement (VerwundelUng! (an affect [that
occurs! when we present novelty that exceeds our expectation) as
admiration [Bewundemng! (an amazement that does not cease once
the novelty is gone),42 which happens when ideas in their exhibition
harmonize, unintentionally and without art, without our aesthetic
liking.
Every affect of the VIGOROUS KIND (i.e., which makes us conscious
that we have forces to overcome any resistance, i.e., makes us conscious of our animus strenuus) is aesthetically sublime. e.g., anger,
even desperation (provided it is indignant rather than despondent
desperation). But an affect of the LANGUID kind (which turns the very
effort to resist into an object of displeasure, an animus languidus), has
nothing noble about it, though it may be classed with the beautiful of
the sensible kind. Hence emotions that can reach the strength of an
affect are very diverse as well. We have spirited [mutig! emotions.
and we have tender ones. When the latter increase to the level [i.e.,
strength] of an affect, they are utterly useless; and a propensity
toward them is called sentimentality. A sympathetic grief that refuses
to be consoled or that, if it concerns fictitious evils, is courted
deliberately even to the point where fancy deceives us into regarding
the evils as actual proves and creates a soul that is gentle but also
weak and that shows a beautiful side; we can call such a soul fanciful,
but not even so much as enthusiastic. None of the following are
compatible with anything that could be classed with beauty, let alone
sublimity, in a cast of mind: romances and maudlin plays; insipid
moral precepts that dally with (falsely) so-called noble attitudes but
that in fact make the heart languid and insensitive to the stern precept
of duty, and that hence make the heart incapable of any respect for
the dignity of the humanity in our own person and for human rights
4210n amazement and admiration, cf. below. Ak. 365. See also the Anthropology, Ak.
VII, 243 and 255. In one place (ibid., Ak. VII, 261), Kant gives the Latin 'admirari' for
'verwundern' rather than 'bewundern,' but while the Latin tenn can in fact stand for
either of these tenns, the English 'to admire' means only 'bewundern. 'I

273

134

274

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

(which are something quite different from human happiness) and thus
make it incapable of any firm principles in general; even a religious
discourse that recommends fawning and groveling and base ingratiation
and the abandonment of all reliance on our own ability to resist the
evil within us, instead of recommending a vigorous resolve for testing
what forces are left us despite all our frailty and for trying to overcome our inclinations; the false humility that posits self-contempt,
whining hypocritical repentance, and a merely passive frame of mind
as the only way we can please the supreme being.43
But even impetuous agitations of the mind-whether they are
connected with religious ideas and are called edification, or with
ideas involving a social interest and pertain merely to culture-can by
no means claim the distinction of being a sublime exhibition lof
ideas], no matter how much they may strain the imagination, unless
they leave us with a mental attunement that influences, at least
indirectly, our consciousness of our fortitude and resolution concerning what carries with it pure intellectual purposiveness (namely, the
supersensible). For otherwise all these emotions belong only to linner]
motion. which we welcome for the sake of our health. The agreeable
lassitude we feel after being stirred up by the play of affects is our
enjoyment of the well-being that results from the establishment of the
equilibrium of our various vital forces. This enjoyment comes to no
more in the end than what Oriental voluptuaries find so appealing
when they have their bodies thoroughly kneaded, as it were, and have
all their muscles and joints gently squeezed and bent-except that in
the first case the moving principle is for the most part within us,
whereas in the second it is wholly outside us. Thus many people
believe they are edified by a sermon that in fact builds no edifice (no
system of good maxims), or are improved by the performance of a
tragedy when in fact they are merely glad at having succeeded in
routing boredom. Hence the sublime must always have reference to
43[Apal't fMm The wnrtl '~nd: whieh ill a pm)'le!' name. eltp!'e!l.~ions referrillg 10 the
deity are not capitalized in this translation. For although ~me of these, e.g., 'Supreme
Being: would normally be capitalized in English. many other expressions that Kant
uses to refer to the deity would not (e.g .• 'original basis of the universe' IAk. 3921,
'supreme understanding as cause of !be world' [Ak. 3951, or even 'original being' in the
sense used by Spinoza [Ak. 393]). Capitalizing some but not others would have
the effect of attributing to Kant distinctions that he did not make. No such problem
arises in German, because there all nouns are capitalized. I

GENERAL COMMENT ON THE EXPOSmON . . .

135

our way 01 thinking, i.e., to maxims directed to providing the intellectual [side in usl and our rational ideas with supremacy over sensibility.
We need not worry that the feeling of the sublime will lose
[something] if it is exhibited in such an abstract way as this, which is
wholly negative as regards the sensible. For though the imagination
finds nothing beyond the sensible that could support it, this very
removal of its barriers also makes it feel unbounded, so that its
separation [from the sensible] is an exhibition of the infinite; and
though an exhibition of the infinite can as such never be more than
merely negative, it still expands the soul. Perhaps the most sublime
passage in the Jewish Law is the commandment: Thou shalt not make
unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in
-heaven or on earth, or under the earth, etc. This commandment
alone can explain the enthusiasm that the Jewish people in its civilized era felt for its religion when it compared itself with other
peoples, or can explain the pride that Islam inspires. The same holds
also for our presentation of the moral law, and for the predisposition
within us for morality. It is indeed a mistake to worry that depriving
this presentation of whatever could commend it to the senses will
result in its carrying with it no more than a cold and lifeless approval
without any moving force or emotion. It is exactly the other way
round. For once the senses no longer see anything before them, while
yet the unmistakable and indelible idea of morality remains, one
would sooner need to temper the momentum of an unbounded imagination so as to keep it from rising to the level of enthusiasm, than to
seek to support these ideas with images and childish devices for fear
that they would otherwise be powerless. That is also why governments have gladly permitted religion to be amply furnished with such
accessories: they were trying to relieve every subject of the trouble,
yet also of the ability, to expand his soul's forces beyond the barriers
that one can choose to set for him so as to reduce him to mere
passivity and so make him more pliable.
On the other hand, this pure, elevating, and merely negative exhibition of morality involves no danger of la1lD.ticism, which is the delusion
[Wahn) 01 wanting to SEE something beyond all bounds 01 sensibility,
i.e., of dreaming according to principles (raving with reason). The
exhibition avoids fanaticism precisely because it is merely negative.
For the idea 01 Ireedom is inscrutable and thereby precludes all
positive exhibition whatever; but the mora11aw in itself can sufficiently

275

136

276

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

and originally determine us, so that it does not even permit us to
cast about for some additional determining basis. If enthusiasm is
comparable to madness [Wahnsinn I. fanaticism is comparable to
mania [Wahnwitz). 44 Of these the latter is least of all compatible
with the sublime, because it is ridiculous in a somber [griiblerisch I
way[; for4 5 I in enthusiasm, an affect, the imagination is unbridled,
but in fanaticism, a deep-seated and brooding passion, it is ruleless. Madness is a passing accident that presumably strikes even
the soundest understanding on occasion; mania is a disease that
deranges it.
Simplicity (artless purposiveness) is, as it were, nature's style in
the sublime. Hence it is also the style of morality, which is a
second (namely, a supersensible) nature, of which we know only
the laws. without being able to reach, by means of intuition, the
supersensible ability within ourselves that contains the basis of this
legislation.
A further comment is needed. It is true that our liking both for the
beautiful and for the sublime not only differs recognizably from other
aesthetic judgments by being universally communicable, but by having this property it also acquires an interest in relation to society
(where such communication may take place). Yet we also regard
isolation from all society as something sublime, if it rests on ideas that
look beyond all sensible interest. To be sufficient to oneself and
hence have no need of society, yet without being unsociable, i.e.,
without shunning society, is something approaching the sublime, as is
any case of setting aside our needs. On the other hand, to shun people
either from misanthropy because we are hostile toward them or from
anthropophobia (fear of people) because we are afraid they might be
our enemies is partly odious and partly contemptible. There is, however,
a different (very improperly so-called) misanthropy, the predisposition to which tends to appear in the minds of many well-meaning
people as they grow older. This latter misanthropy is philanthropic
enough as regards benevolence [Wohlwollen]. but as the result of a
44[Cf. (and contrast) the Anthropology, Ak. VII, 215 (also 202).)
451The insertion replaces a mere period, and its point is to bring out the continuity
between the preceding sentence that brings in madness and mania, and the fol1owing
one, where the demonstrative adjectives in the original text can refer only to madness
and mania again, not to enthusiasm and fanaticism.)

GENERAL COMMENT ON THE EXPOSITION . . .

137

long and sad experience it has veered far away from a liking [Wohlgefallen 1 for people. We find evidence of this in a person's propensity
toward reclusiveness, in his fanciful wish that he could spend the rest
of his life on a remote country estate, or for that matter (in the case of
young people) in their dream of happily spending their lives with a
small family, on some island unknown to the rest of the world - all of
which novelists and writers of Robinsonades use so cleverly. Falseness,
ingratitude, injustice, whatever is childish in the purposes that we
ourselves consider important and great and in the pursuit of which
people inflict all conceivable evils on one another, these so contradict the idea of what people could be if they wanted to, and
so conflict with our fervent wish to see them improved, that, given
that we cannot love them, it seems but a slight sacrifice to forgo
all social joys so as to avoid hating them. This sadness, which does
not concern the evils that fate imposes on other people (in which
case it would be caused by sympathy~, but those that they inflict
on themselves (a sadness that rests on an antipathy involving principles), is sublime, because it rests on ideas, whereas the sadness
caused by sympathy can at most count as beautiful. Saussure, 46
as intelligent as he was thorough, in describing his Alpine travels says
of Bonhomme, one of the Savoy mountains, "A certain insipid sadness reigns there." Thus clearly he also knew an interesting sadness,
such as is inspired by a wasteland to which people would gladly
transfer themselves so as to hear or find out no more about the world,
which shows that such wastelands cannot, after all, be quite so
inhospitable as to offer no more to human beings than a most troublesome abode. This comment is intended only as a reminder that even
grief (but not a dejected kind of sadness) may be included among the
vigorous affects, if it has its basis in moral ideas. If, on the other hand,
it is based on sympathy, then it may indeed be lovable, but belongs
merely to the languid affects. My point is to draw attention to the fact
that only in the first case is the mental attunement sublime.

We can now also compare the transcendental exposition of aesthetic judgments we have just completed with the physiological
46[ See Ak. 265.]

277

138

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

one, regarding which work has been done by someone like Burfce47
and many acute men among us, so that we may see where a
merely empirical exposition of the sublime and of the beautiful
may lead. Burke. 48 who deserves to be mentioned as the foremost author in this way of treating the subject,49 discovers along
this route (p. 223 of [the German translation ofl his work) "that
the feeling of the sublime is based on the impulse toward selfpreservation and on fear. i.e., on a pain, a pain that, since it
does not go so far as actually to disarrange the parts of the body,
gives rise to agitations. And since these agitations clear the vessels, small or large, of dangerous and troublesome obstructions,
they are able to arouse agreeable sensations. These do not indeed
amount to a pleasure, but they still amount to a kind of pleasant
thrill, a certain tranquility mingled with terror."50 He attributes the
beautiful, which he bases on love (while insisting that desire be
kept apart from this love) "to the relaxing, slackening, and enervating of the body's fibres, and hence to a softening, dissolution,

471Edmund Burke (1729-97), British statesman and political thinker. His Philosophical
Enquiry Into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) gained him a
reputation in Britain. Abroad it was read with interest not only by Kant but, among
others, by Lessing, Mendelssohn, Schiller, and Diderot.1
48According to the German translation Iby Christian Garve (1742-98), German moral·
istl of his work entitled A Philosophical Enquiry Into the Origin of Our Ideas of the
Sublime and Beautiful (lthe translation: I Riga: Hartknoch, 1773).
49lKant's own Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime (1764)
(Ak. II, 205-56) had been mainly empirical. Cf. Donald W. Crawford, Kant's Aesthetic Theory (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. 19'i4) , pp. 8-11, 60. The
same applies of course to Kant's own Remarks on the Observations, Ak XX,
1-192 I

'In! Burke, Err'1."r}<, Pt. IV, Sed vu ".
!o

Illl the pain and rermr A.-e .0 modified s" nut
I;Jc lI.;-luli1ly nQx'Q\I$; ,f !h", P1Un !$ !w! ';l'n!~ ~Q vi9l~m;:~. ~mQ lb.", i",~!,}~ !~ !!'}(

conversllnt Iloout the presenl deslflu:tiuH uf ilia paflltm,
pBrt!,

u& lh~

l1m.mimta ~I~at !l\g

whether fine (It grou, (If 11 dllnge1'OU11lnd t1'OUblesrune eneumr'fllftcc, rl\cy i,,"

capable of producing delight; not pleasure, but a sort of delightful horror, a sort of
tranquility tinged with terror; which, as it belongs to self-preservation. is one of the
strongest of all the passions. Its object is the sublime." Cf. also above, Ak. 269 br.

n.34·1

GENERAL COMMENT ON THE EXPOSITION . ..

139

exhaustion, a fainting, a dying and melting away with delight"
(pp. 251-52 lof the translation].)51 To confirm this kind of explana·
tion he points not only to those cases where the feeling of the
beautiful and of the sublime may be aroused in us by the imagination
in connection with the understanding, but even to those where it
is aroused by the imagination in connection with sensation. 52 As
psychological observations these analyses of the phenomena involved
in our mind are exceedingly fine and provide rich material for the
favorite investigations of empirical anthropology. Nor can it be
denied that all presentations in us, no matter whether their object
is merely sensible or instead wholly intellectual, can in the subject
still be connected with gratification or pain, however unnoticeable
these may be (because all of them affect the feeling of life, and
none of them can be indifferent insofar as it is a modification of
the subject). It cannot even be denied that, as Epicurus maintained,
gratification and pain are ultimately always of the body,53 whether
they come from imagination or even from presentations of the
understanding. He maintained this on the ground that, in the absence
of Isome] feeling of the bodily organ, life is merely consciousness of
our existence, and not a feeling of being well or unwell, i.e., of the
furtherance or inhibition of the vital forces; for the mind taken by
itself is wholly life (the very principle of life), whereas any obstacles
or furtherance must be sought outside it and yet still within man
himself, and hence in the Imind's] connection with his body.
But if we suppose that our liking for the object consists entirely in
the object's gratifying us through charm or emotion, then we also
must not require anyone else to assent to an aesthetic judgment that
we make; for about that sort of liking each person rightly consults
only his private sense. But, if that is so, then all censure of taste will
SI[Ibid .• Pt. IV, Sect. xix: " ... [A] beautiful object presented to the sense, by causing
a relaxation of the body, produces the passion of love in the mind.... " And a little
earlier: .. , .. [B ]eauty acts by relaxing the solids of the whole system. There are all the
appearances of such a relaxation; and a relaxation somewhat below the natural tone
seems to me to be the cause of all positive pleasure. Who is a stranger to that manner of
expression so common in all times and in all countries, of being softened, relaxed,
enervated, dissolved, melted away by pleasure?"]
s2[Ibid.; for example, smoothness (Part IV, Sect. xx) and sweetness (Part IV, Sect. xxii).]
S3[See the Letter to Herodotus, V, "The Soul."]

278

140

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

also cease, unless the example that other people give through the
contingent harmony among their judgments were turned into a
command that we ~tool approve. At such a principle, however, we
would presumably balk, appealing to our natural right to subject to
our own sense, not to that of others, any judgment that rests on the
direct feeling of our own well-being.
It seems, then, that we must not regard a judgment of taste as
egoistic; rather, we must regard it necessarily as pluralistic by its
inner nature, i.e., on account of itself rather than the examples that
others give of their taste; we must acknowledge it to be a judgment
that is entitled to claim that everyone else ought also to agree with it.
But if that is so, then it must be based on some a priori principle
(whether objective or subjective), and we can never arrive at such a
principle by scouting about for empirical laws about mental changes.
For these reveal only how we do judge; they do not give us a command as to how we ought to judge, let alone an unconditioned one.
And yet judgments of taste presuppose such a command, because
they insist that our liking be connected directly with a presentation.
Hence, though we may certainly begin with an empirical exposition
of aesthetic judgments, so as to provide the material for a higher
investigation, still a transcendental discussion of taste is possible, and
belongs essentially to a critique of this ability. For if taste did not have
a priori principles, it could not possibly pronounce on the judgments
of others and pass verdicts approving or repudiating them with even
the slightest semblance of having the right to do so.
The remainder of the analytic of aesthetic judgment contains first
of all the deduction of pure aesthetic judgments, to which we now
tum.

DEDUCTION! OF PURE
AESTHETIC JUDGMENTS

§30
The Deduction of
Aesthetic Judgments
about Objects of Nature
Must Be Directed
Not to What We Call
Sublime in Nature
but Only to the Beautiful
Since an aesthetic judgment lays claim to universal validity for every
subject and hence must be based on some a priori principle or other,
it requires a deduction (i.e., a legitimation of its pretension). Such a
deduction is needed, in addition to an exposition of the judgment, if
the judgment concerns a liking or disliking for the form of the object.
llDeduktlon. The term means 'justification' or 'legitimation.' Cf, the Critique of Pure
Reason. A 84-92 = B 116-24. (What we call 'deduction' in formal logic is called by
Kant Ahleitung. 'derivation.' Cf. Ak. 412.) This justification of judgments of taste is
needed in addition to their exposition (which has just been completed), i.e., their
explication or examination (ef. ibid. as well as the Critique of Pure Reason. A 2J - B
38 and A 729-YJ = B 757-58,.j

141

279

142

280

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

Judgments of taste about the beautiful in nature are of this sort. For in
their case the purposiveness does have its basis in the object and its
shape, even though it does not indicate that we are referring the
object to other objects according to concepts (so as to give rise to a
cognitive judgment), but merely concerns the apprehension as such
of this form, insofar as that form manifests itself in the mind as
conforming to the power of concepts [the understanding] and the
power of their exhibition (which is the same as the power of apprehension [the imagination]). This is also why, concerning the beautiful in
nature, we can raise all sorts of questions about what causes this
purposiveness in nature's forms, e.g.: How are we to explain why
nature has so extravagantly spread beauty everywhere, even at the
bottom of the ocean, where the human eye (for which, after all, this
beauty is alone purposive) rarely penetrates?-and so on.
But then consider the sublime in nature, when our judgment about
it is purely aesthetic, unmixed with any concepts of perfection, i.e., of
objective purposiveness, in which case it would be a teleological
judgment. The sublime in nature can be regarded as entirely formless
or unshapely and yet as the object of a pure liking, manifesting a
subjective purposiveness in the given presentation. Hence the question arises whether this kind of aesthetic judgment also requires a
deduction of its claim to some (subjective) a priori principle or other,
in addition to an exposition of what we think in [making] the judgment.
We can answer this question adequately as follows. When we speak
of the sublime in nature we speak improperly; properly speaking,
sublimity can be attributed merely to our way of thinking, or, rather,
to the foundation this has in human nature. What happens is merely
that the apprehension of an otherwise formless and unpurposive
object prompts us to become conscious of that foundation, so that
what is subjectively purposive is the use we make of the object, and it
is not the object itself that isjudged to be purposive on account of its
form. ([That is, what is subjectively purposive is.] as it were, species
finalis accepta, non data. 2 ) That is why the exposition we gave of
judgments about the sublime in nature was also their deduction. For
when we analyzed these judgments in order to see what reflection by
the power of judgment they contain, we found that they contain a
purposive relation of the cognitive powers, which we must lay a priori
2[Purposive appearance as received, not as given. I

§ 30. THE DEDUCTION OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENTS. . .

143

at the basis of the power of purposes (the will) and which is therefore
itself a priori purposive; and that already provides the deduction, i.e.,
the justification of the claim of these judgments to universally necessary validity.
Hence the only deduction we shall have to attempt is that of
judgments of taste, i.e., judgments about the beauty in natural things;
that will suffice for a complete solution of the problem for the whole
aesthetic power of judgment.

§31
On the Method
of the Deduction
of Judgments of Taste
The obligation to provide a deduction for judgments of a [certain)
kind, i.e., a guarantee of their legitimacy, arises only if the judgment
lays claim to necessity; this it does even if the universality it demands
is subjective universality, i.e., if it demands everyone's assent, even
though it is not a cognitive judgment but only a judgment about the
pleasure or displeasure we take in a given object, i.e., [a judgment)
claiming [Anmaftung] a subjective purposiveness that is valid for
everyone, without exception [durchgangig]. but that is not to be
based on any concepts of the thing, since the judgment is one of taste.
Therefore, in the case of a judgment that demands subjective
universality, we are not dealing with a cognitive judgment, neither a
theoretical one based on the concept of a nature as such, as given by
the understanding, nor a (pure) practical one based on the idea of
freedom, as given a priori by reason. Hence what we must justify as a
priori valid is neither a judgment presenting what a [certain] thing is,
nor a judgment which says that I ought to carry something out so as to
produce a [certain] thing. So what we shall have to establish is merely
the universal validity, for the power of judgment as such, of a singular
judgment that expresses the subjective purposiveness of an empirical

281

144

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

presentation of the form of an object; establishing such validity will
serve to explain how it is possible for us to like something when we
merely judge it (without [the liking being determined by] sensation
proper [Sinnesempfindungj3 or [by] concept), and how it is possible
for everyone to be entitled to proclaim his liking as a rule for everyone else, just as our judging of an object for the sake of cognition
always [uberhaupt] has universal rules.
[Therefore,l since a judgment of taste is in fact of this sort, its
universal validity is not to be established by gathering votes and
asking other people what kind of sensation they are having; but it
must rest, as it were, on an autonomy of the subject who is making
a judgment about the feeling of pleasure (in the given presentation),
i.e., it must rest on his own taste; and yet it is also not to be derived
from concepts. Hence a judgment of taste has the following twofold
peculiarity, which is moreover a logical one; First, it has a priori
universal validity, which yet is not a logical universal validity governed
by concepts, but the universality of a singular judgment; second, it
has a necessity (which must always rest on a priori bases), and yet a
necessity that does not depend on any a priori bases of proof by the
presentation of which we could compel Jpeople to give] the assent
that a judgment of taste requires of everyone.
If we resolve these logical peculiarities, which distinguish a judgment of taste from all cognitive judgments, we shall have done all that
is needed in order to deduce this strange ability we have, provided
that at the outset we abstract from all content of the judgment, i.e.,
from the feeling of pleasure, and merely compare the aesthetic form
with the form of objective judgments as prescribed by logic. Let us
begin, then, by presenting these characteristic properties of taste,
using examples to elucidate them.

J[As distinguished from 'sensation' as meaning feeling, which is involved here. Cf.
Ak. 291 incl. br. n. 19. (If the Ifeeling of] liking were detennined by sensation proper, it
would be a liking for the agreeable. Cf. Ak. 205-06.) J

§32

First Peculiari!y of a
Judgment of Taste
A judgment of taste determines its object in respect of our liking
(beauty) [but] makes a claim to everyone's assent, as if it were an
objective judgment.
To say, This flower is beautiful, is tantamount to a mere repetition
of the flower's own claim to everyone's liking. The agreeableness of
its smell, on the other hand, gives it no claim whatever: its smell
delights [ergotzenl one person, it makes another dizzy. In view of this
[difference], must we not suppose that beauty has to be considered a
property of the flower itself, which does not adapt itself to differences
in people's heads and all their senses, but to which they must adapt
themselves if they wish to pass judgment on it? Yet beauty is not a
property of the flower itself. For a judgment of taste consists precisely
in this. that it calls a thing beautiful only by virtue of that characteristic in which it adapts itself to the way we apprehend it.
Moreover, whenever a subject offers a judgment as proof of his
taste [concerning some object I, we demand that he judge for himself:
he should not have to grope about among other people's judgments
by means of experience, to gain instruction in advance from whether
they like or dislike that object; so we demand that he pronounce his
judgment a priori, that he not make it [by way of] imitation, (say) on
the ground that a thing is actually liked universally. One would think,
however, that an a priori judgment must contain a concept of the
object, this concept containing the principle for cognizing the object.
But a judgment of taste is not based on concepts at all, and is not at
all a cognition but only an aesthetic judgment.
That is why a young poet cannot be brought to abandon his
persuasion that his poem is beautiful, neither by the judgment of his
audience nor by that of his friends; and if he listens to them, it is not
because he now judges the poem differently, but because, even if (at
least with regard to him) the whole audience were to have wrong
taste, his desire for approval still causes him to accommodate himself
(even against his judgment) to the common delusion. Only later on,

145

282

146

283

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

when his power of judgment has been sharpened by practice, will he
voluntarily depart from his earlier judgment, just as he does with
those of his judgments which rest wholly on reason. Taste lays claim
merely to autonomy; but to make other people's judgments the basis
determining one's own would be heteronomy.
It is true that we extol, and rightly so, the works of the ancients as
models, and call their authors classical, as if they form a certain noble
class among writers which gives laws to people by the precedent it
sets. This seems to point to a posteriori sources of taste and to refute
the autonomy of every subject's taste. But we might just as well say:
the fact that the ancient mathematicians are to this day considered to
be virtually indispensable models of supreme thoroughness and elegance in the synthetic method4 proves that our reason [only J imitates and is unable on its own to produce rigorous and highly intuitive
proofs by constructing concepts.s The same holds for all uses, no
matter how free, of our powers, including even reason (which must
draw all its judgments from the common a priori source): if each
subject always had to start from nothing but the crude predisposition
given him by nature, !many I of his attempts would fail, if other people
before him had not failed in theirs; they did not make these attempts
in order to tum their successors into mere imitators, but so that, by
their procedure, they might put others on a track whereby they could
search for the principles within themselves and so adopt their own
and often better course. In religion, everyone must surely find the
rule for his conduct within himself, since he is also the one who
remains responsible for his conduct and cannot put the blame for his
offenses on others on the ground that they were his teachers and
predecessors; yet even here an example of virtue and holiness will
always accomplish more than any universal precepts we have received
from priests or philosophers, or for that matter found within ourselves.
Such an example, set for us in history, does not make dispensable the
autonomy of virtue that arises from our own and original (a priori)
idea of morality, nor does it transform this idea into a mechanism of
imitation. Following by reference to a precedent, rather than imitating,
41The synthetic method proceeds from principles to their consequences. the analytic
method the other way. Cf. the Logic. Ak. IX. 149. and the Prolegomena. Ak. IV, 263,
27S, 276n. 279, and 365.1
S[Cf. Ak. 232 br. n. 51.1

§ 32.

FIRST PECULIARITY

147

is the right term for any influence that products of an exemplary
author may have on others; and this means no more than drawing on
the same sources from which the predecessor himself drew, and
learning from him only how to go about doing so. Among all our
abilities and talents, taste is precisely what stands most in need of
examples regarding what has enjoyed the longest-lasting approval in
the course of cultural progress, in order that it will not become
uncouth again and relapse into the crudeness of its first attempts; and
taste needs this because its judgment cannot be determined by concepts and precepts.

§33

Second Peculiarity of a
Judgment of Taste
A judgment of taste, just as if it were merely subjective. cannot be
determined by bases of proof.
If someone does not find a building, a view, or a poem beautiful,
then, first, he will refuse to let even a hundred voices, all praising it
highly, prod him into approving of it inwardly. He may of course act
as if he liked it too, so that people will not think that he lacks taste.
He may even begin to doubt whether he has in fact done enough to
mold his taste, by familiarizing himself with a sufficient number of
objects of a certain kind (just as someone who thinks he recognizes a
forest in some distant object that everyone else regards as a town will
doubt the judgment of his own eyes). And yet he realizes clearly that
other people's approval in no way provides him with a valid proof by
which to judge beauty; even though others may perhaps see and
observe for him, and even though what many have seen the same way
may serve him, who believes he saw it differently, as a sufficient basis
of proof for a theoretical and hence logical judgment, yet the fact that
others have liked something can never serve him as a basis for an
aesthetic judgment. If others make a judgment that is unfavorable to
us, this may rightly make us wonder about our own judgment, but it

284

148

285

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

can never convince us that ours is incorrect. Hence there is no
empirical basis of proof that could compel anyone to make [somel
judgment of taste.
Second, still less can a judgment about beauty be determined by
an a priori proof, in accordance with determinate rules. If someone
reads me his poem, or takes me to a play that in the end I simply
cannot find to my taste, then let him adduce Batteux or Lessing£> to
prove that his poem is beautiful, or [bring in] still older and more
famous critics of taste with all the rules they have laid down; moreover,
let certain passages that I happen to dislike conform quite well to
rules of beauty (as laid down by these critics and universally recognized):
I shall stop my ears, shall refuse to listen to reasons and arguments,
and shall sooner assume that those rules of the critics are false, or at
least do not apply in the present case, than allow my judgment to be
determined by a priori bases of proof; for it is meant to be a judgment
of taste, and not one of the understanding or of reason.
It seems that this is one of the main reasons why this aesthetic
power of judging was given that very name: taste. For even if someone lists all the ingredients of a dish, pointing out that I have always
found each of them agreeable, and goes on to praise this food-and
rightly so-as wholesome, I shall be deaf to all these reasons: I shall
try the dish on my tongue and palate, and thereby (and not by
universal principles) make my judgment.
I t is a fact that any judgment of taste we make is always a singular
judgment about the object. The understanding can, by comparing the
object with other people's judgment about their liking of it, make a
universal judgment, e.g.: All tulips are beautiful. But such a judgment
is then not a judgment of taste; it is a logical judgment, which turns an
object's reference to taste into a predicate of things of a certain
general kind. Only a judgment by which I find a singular given tulip
beautiful, i.e., in which I find that my liking for the tulip is universally
valid, is a judgment of taste. Its peculiarity, however, consists in the
fact that, even though it has merely subjective validity, it yet extends
its claim to all subjects, just as it always could if it were an objective
61Charles Batteux (1713-80), French philosopher and, in particular, aesthetician. and
author of several works; Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729-81), German dramatist and
aesthetician. J

§ 33.

SECOND PECULIARITY

149

judgment that rested on cognitive bases and that Iwe I could be
compelled [to make I by a proof.

§34

An Objective Principle
of Taste Is Impossiole
By a principle of taste would be meant a principle under which. as
condition. we could subsume the concept of an object and then infer
that the object is beautiful. That, however, is absolutely impossible.
For I must feel the pleasure directly in my presentation of the object,
and I cannot be talked into that pleasure by means of any bases of
proof. Hence, although, as Hume says, critics can reason more plausibly than cooks,? they still share the same fate. They cannot expect
the determining basis of their judgment Ito come I from the force of
the bases of proof, but only from the subject's reflection on his own
state (of pleasure or displeasure), all precepts and rules being rejected.
There is, however, something about which critics nonetheless can
and should reason, since doing so may serve to correct and broaden
our judgments of taste. I do not mean that they should set forth the
determining basis of this kind of aesthetic judgments in a universal
formula that we could [then] use. What they should do is investigate
7[Essays. Moral and Political (1741-42), Essay VIII, "The Sceptic": "There is something approaching to principles in mental taste, and critics can reason and dispute
more plausibly than cooks or perfumers. We may observe, however, that this uniformity among human kind hinders not, but that there is a considerable diversity in the
sentiments of beauty and worth, and that education, custom, prejudice, caprice, and
humour frequently vary our taste of this kind. You will never convince a man who is
not accustomed to Italian music and has not an ear to follow its intricacies that a Scots
tune is not preferable. You have not even any single argument beyond your own taste
which you can employ in your behalf; and to your antagonist his particular taSte will
always appear a more convincing argument to the contrary. If you be wise, each of you
will allow that the other may be in the right, and, having many other instances of this
diversity of taste, you will both confess that beauty and worth are merely of a relative
nature and consist in an agreeable sentiment, produced by an object in a partK:ular
mind, according to the peculiar structure and constitution of that mind,"[

286

150

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

our cognitive powers and what task these powers perform in these
judgments. and they should clarify by examples the reciprocal subjec·
tive purposiveness about which it was shown above that its form in a
given presentation is the beauty of the object of this presentation.
Hence the critique of taste is itself only subjective as regards the
presentation by which an object is given us: it is the art. or science. of
finding rules for the reciprocal relation that understanding and imagination have in the given presentation (without reference to prior
sensation or concept), and hence for their accordance or discordance,
and of determining them as regards their conditions. The critique of
taste is an art if it shows this only through examples; it is a science if
it derives the possibility of such judging from the nature of these
powers as cognitive powers as such. It is with the latter alone. with a
transcendental critique, that we are here concerned throughout. Its
aim is to set forth and justify the subjective principle of taste as an a
priori principle of the power of judgment. The critique that is an art
merely takes the physiological (in this case psychological) and hence
empirical rules by which taste actually proceeds, and (without thinking about ihowl they are possible) seeks to apply them to our judging
of objects of taste; and it criticizes the products of fine art, just as the
transcendental critique criticizes our very ability to judge them.

§35
The Principle of Taste
Is the Subjective Principle
of the Power of
ludgment as Such
A judgment of taste differs from a logical one in that a logical
judgment subsumes a presentation under concepts of the object,
whereas a judgment of taste does not subsume it under any concept at
all, since otherwise the necessary universal approval could be [obtained]
by compelling [people to give it]. But a judgment of taste does

§ 35. THE PRINCIPLE OF TASTE...

151

resemble a logical judgment inasmuch as it alleges a universality and
necessity, though a universality and necessity that is not governed by
concepts of the object and hence is merely subjective. Now since the
concepts in a judgment constitute its content (what belongs to the
cognition of the object), while a judgment of taste cannot be determined by concepts, its basis is only the subjective formal condition of
a judgment as such. The subjective condition of all judgments is our
very ability to judge, i.e., the power of judgment. When we use this
power of judgment in regard to a presentation by which an object is
given, then it requires that there be a harmony between two presentational powers, imagination (for the intuition and the combination of
its manifold) and understanding (for the concept that is the presentation of the unity of this combination). Now since a judgment of taste
is not based on a concept of the object (in the case of a presentation
by which an object is given), it can consist only in the subsumption of
the very imagination under the condition [which must be met) for the
understanding to proceed in general from intuition to concepts. In
other words, since the imagination's freedom consists precisely in its
schematizing8 without a concept, a judgment of taste must rest
upon a mere sensation,9 namely, our sensation of both the imagination in its freedom and the understanding with its lawfulness, as they
reciprocally quicken each other; i.e., it must rest on a feeling that
allows us to judge the object by the purposiveness that the presentation (by which an object is given) has insofar as it furthers the
cognitive powers in their free play. Hence taste, as a subjective power
of judgment, contains a principle of subsumption; however, this
subsumption is not one of intuitions under concepts, but, rather, one
of the power of intuitions or exhibitions (the imagination) under the
power of concepts (the understanding), insofar as the imagination in
its freedom harmonizes with the understanding in its lawfulness.
In attempting to discover this legitimating basis by means of a
deduction of judgments of taste, we can use as our guide only the
8[l.e., creating a schema; cf. Ak. 253 br. n. 17. Kant is about to say that in a judgment
of taste the imagination as such is subsumed under the understanding as such. Strictly
speaking, however, the imagination is subsumed onder the (indeterminate) schema of
the understanding as such; and this indeterminate schema is the "condition" which
Kant has just mentioned. J
9[ In the sense of feeling. in this case.]

287

152

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

fonnal peculiarities of this kind of judgments, i.e., we must consider
merely their logical form.

§36

On the Problem of a Deduction
of Judgments of Taste
288

With the perception of an object we can directly connect the concept
of an object as such. [for) which it contains the empirical predicates,
in order to give rise to a cognitive judgment. This is how an empirical
judgment is produced. lO Now this judgment is based on a priori
concepts of the systematic unity of the manifold of intuition; hence
we can think this manifold as the determination of an object. These
concepts (the categories) require a deduction, and this was indeed
provided in the Critique of Pure Reason. 11 which thus made it
possible to solve the problem: How are synthetic cognitive judgments
possible a priori? That problem, then, concerned the pure under·
standing's a priori principles and theoretical judgments.
But we can also directly connect with a perception a feeling of
pleasure (or displeasure) and a liking that accompanies the object's
presentation and serves it in the place of a predicate. This is how an
aesthetic judgment arises, which is not a cognitive judgment. Now if
an aesthetic judgment is not a mere judgment of sensation, but a
formal judgment of reflection that requires this liking from everyone
1O{"As far as empirical judgments have universal validity they are JUDGMENTS OF
but those that are v~id only subjectively I call mere JUDGMENTS OF
PERCEPTION. The latter require no pure concept of the understanding, but only the
logical connection of the perceptiollS in a thinking subject. Judgments of experience.
on the other hand, require, in addition to the presentations of sensible intuition, special
concepts produced originally in the understanding, and it is these concepts that make
the judgment of experience valid objectively": Prolegomena, Ak. IV, 298. Cf. the
Critique 0/ Pure Reason, A 120, A 374. B 422n.l
EXPERIENCE;

II[The metaphysical deduction (for this name, see B 159), A 65-83 _ B 90-116, is to
show what categories there are (in the understanding); the transcendental deduction.
A 84-130 and B 116-69, is to prove that these categories are objectively valid.l

§ 36. ON THE PROBLEM OF A DEDUCTION. . .

153

as necessary, then it must be based on something as its a priori
principle. This principle may well be merely subjective (in case an
objective one were to be impossible for judgments of this kind), but
even then it requires a deduction, in order that we may grasp how an
aesthetic judgment can lay claim to necessity. And that is the basis of
the problem with which we are now dealing: How are judgments of
taste possible? So this problem concerns the a priori principles that
the pure power of judgment [uses when it makes] aesthetic judgments,
i.e., judgments where it does not (as it does in theoretical judgments)
merely have to subsume under objective concepts of the understanding,
[so that] it is subject to a law,12 but where it is, subjectively, object to
itself as well as law to itself.
We can also think of this problem as follows: How is a judgment
possible in which the subject, merely on the basis of his own feeling
of pleasure in an object, independently of the object's concept, judges
this pleasure as one attaching to the presentation of that same object
in all other subjects, and does so a priori, i.e., without being allowed
to wait for other people's assent?
We can readily see that judgments of taste are synthetic; for they
go beyond the concept of the object, and even beyond the intuition of
the object, and add as a predicate to this intuition something that is
not even cognition: namely [a] feeling of pleasure (or displeasure).
And yet. that these judgments are, or want to be considered, a priori
judgments as regards the demand that everyone assent, a demand
they make despite the fact that their predicate (of one's own pleasure
[as) connected with the presentation) is empirical, is also already
implicit in the expressions used to make that claim. Hence this
problem of the critique of judgment is part of the general problem of
transcendental philosophy: How are synthetic judgments possible a
priori?13

121Cf, the Critique of Pure Reason, A 137-47

=

B 176-87, and below, Ak. 351-52.]

13]Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason. B 19. 'A priori'has here been construed adverbially,
as modifying 'possible.' It can also be read as an adjective modifying 'judgments,' so
that Kant's question reads, 'How are synthetic a priori judgments possible?' Either
reading can be supported by quotes in which the ambiguity does not arise, since Kant
switches frequently between these two ways of talking. See, e.g., the passage immedi·
ately following the question Kant just quoted, B 20.]

289

§37

What Is Actually
Asserted A Priori
about an Object in a
Judgment of Taste?
That the presentation of an object is directly connected with a
pleasure can only be perceived inwardly, and if we wished to indicate
no more than this, the result would be a merely empirical judgment.
For I cannot connect a priori a definite feeling (of pleasure or
displeasure) with any presentation, except in the case where an
underlying a priori principle in reason determines the will; but in that
case the pleasure (in moral feeling) is the consequence of that principle,
and that is precisely why it is not at all comparable to the pleasure in
taste: for it requires a determinate concept of a law, whereas the
pleasure in taste is to be connected directly with our mere judging,
prior to any concept. That is also why all judgments of taste are
singular judgments, because they do not connect their predicate, the
liking, with a concept but connect it with a singular empirical presentation that is given.
Hence it is not the pleasure, but the universal validity of this
pleasure, perceived as connected in the mind with our mere judging
of an object, that we present a priori as [a] universal rule for the
power of judgment, valid for everyone. That I am perceiving and
judging an object with pleasure is an empirical judgment. But that I
find the object beautiful. i.e., that I am entitled to require that liking
from everyone as necessary. is an a priori judgment.

154

§38
Deduction of
Judgments of Taste 14
If it is granted that in a pure judgment of taste our liking for the object
is connected with our mere judging of the form of the object, then
this liking is nothing but [our consciousness of] the form's subjective
purposiveness for the power of judgment, which we feel as connected
in the mind with the presentation of the object. Now, as far as the formal
rules of judging [as such] are concerned, apart from any matter
(whether sensation or concept), the power of judgment can be directed
only to the subjective conditions for our employment of the power of
judgment as such (where it is confined neither to the particular kind
of sense involved nor to a[ ny] particular concept of the understanding),
and hence can be directed only to that subjective [condition) which
we may presuppose in all people (as required for possible cognition as
such). It follows that we must be entitled to assume a priori that a
presentation's harmony with these conditions of the power of judgment
is valid for everyone. In other words, it seems that when, in judging an
object of sense in general, we feel this pleasure, or subjective pwposiveness of the presentation for the relation between our cognitive powers, then we must be entitled to require this pleasure from everyone. 15
1410n the problem as to where the deduction ends (specifically, the problem as to
whether the link of beauty to morality is still part of the deduction), see the Thanslator's
Introduction, lxi-lxvi.)

15To be justified in laying claim to universal assent to a judgment of the aesthetic
power of judgment. which rests merely on subjective bases, one need grant only the
following: (1) that in all people the subjective conditions of this power are the same as
concerns the relation required for cognition as such between the cognitive powers that
are activated in the power of judgment; and this must be true, for otherwise people
could not communicate their presentations to one another, indeed they could not even
communicate cognition; (2) that the judgment has taken into consideration merely this
relation (and hence the formal condition of the power of judgment) and is pure, i.e.,
mingled neither with concepts of the object nor with sensations as the judgment's
determining bases. But even if a mistake be made on the latter point, I6 this amounts to
nothing but an incorrect application, in a particular case, of an authority given to us by
a law, and in no way annuls the authority Iitself].
161Cf. Ak. 216 incl. hr. n. 30, as well as the Comment Kant is about to make, hut esp.
§ 39, Ak. 293, and § 40, Ak. 293-94.]

155

290

Comment

291

What makes this deduction so easy is that it does not need to justify
the objective reality of a concept; for beauty is not a concept of an
object, and a judgment of taste is not a cognitive judgment. All it
asserts is that we are justified in presupposing universally in all people
the same subjective conditions of the power of judgment that we find
in ourselves; apart from this it asserts only that we have subsumed the
given object correctly under these conditions. I? It is true that this
latter assertion involves unavoidable difficulties that do not attach to
the logical power of judgment (since there we subsume under concepts,
whereas in the aesthetic power of judgment we subsume under a
relation of imagination and understanding, as they harmonize with
each other in the presented form of an object, that can only be
sensed. so that the subsumption may easily be illusory [tfUgen)). But
this does not in any way detract from the legitimacy of the power of
judgment's claim in counting on universal assent, a claim that amounts
to no more than this: that the principle of judging validly for everyone
from subjective bases is correct. For as far as the difficulty and doubt
concerning the correctness of the subsumption under that principle is
concerned, no more doubt is cast on the legitimacy of the claim that
aesthetic judgments as such have this validity (and hence is cast
on the principle itself), than is cast on the principle of the logical
power of judgment (a principle that is objective) by the fact that
[sometimes] (though not so often and so easily) this power's subsumption under its principle is faulty as well. But if the question were, How
is it possible to assume a priori that nature is a sum [Inbegriff] of
objects of taste? that problem would have to do with teleology. For if
nature offered forms that are purposive for our power of judgment,
then this would have to be regarded as a purpose of nature belonging
essentially to its concept. But whether this assumption is correct is as
yet very doubtful. while the actuality of natural beauties is patent to
experience.

17[Cf. just above, n. 15 and br. n. 16.[

156

§39

On the Communicability
of a Sensation
Sensation, [construed] as what is real [i.e., material rather than
formal1'8 in perception and [hence as] referred to cognition, is called
sensatiun pruper. 19 The only way fur it tu be conceivable that what is
specific in the quality of such a sensation should be universally
[durchgiingig I communicable in a uniform way is on the assumption
that everyone's sense is like our own. This, however, we simply
181Cf. Ak. 189.1

19l5innesempfindung, i.e., Empfindung (sensation) as involving a (genuine) Sinn
(sense) and hence having to do with perception, rather than as meaningjee/ing. This is
the very same distinction that Kant has made before, though he did not then use the
tenn 'Sinnesempfindung' to make it: see §J, Ak. 205-()6, and cf. Ak. 203-04 and 266
incl. br. n. 33. Now although the literal meaning of this term is 'sensation of sense:
rendering it that way would make it perplexing, since the component terms are cognate
in English. 'Sensation proper' avoids this difficulty and still captures Kant's meaning:
feeling is not sensation proper, precisely because it does not have its own sense. It is
true that Kant sometimes uses even 'sense' in talking about feeling, especially in talking
about our "shared" or "common sense" (§ § 20-22, Ak. 237-40, and § -40, Ak. 293-96),
which he caus "not an outer" sense (M. 238), thus suggesting that it is the inner sense.
But in fact Kant does not consider it a (genuine) sense at 1111. Though he uses the term,
he uses it much more rarely in the context of feeling than he does the tenn 'sensation,'
and he uses it very reluctantly: see § 40, Ak. 293 and esp. 295, and cf. the Metaphysics
of Morals, Ak. VI, 400. Moreover, in the Anthropology (Ak. VII, 153) he says
expressly that, though we might (emphasis added) call feeling an interior se~, this is
not to be equated with the inner sense (the
e ttlrOiiii
Ich
i
cognize, .t:Mh~1;.J!:I!!A...m.eT~ ~~~s). And this view is consistent with the fact
t6a't1G:i't 8J.so-sayS that feeling is a receptiVity that "belongs to" or "is based on" inner
sense (Critique of Practical Reason, Ak. V, respectively 58 and BO. Section VIIl of the
First Introduction to the Critique of Judgment can be interpreted similarly: see esp.
Ak. 226', just before the Comment) and in so far can be called "sensible" (cf. Ak. 335
br. n. 76) or a feeling "of' inner sense (as at Ak. 228): inner sense, and through it even
the outer senses, besides engaging in sensation proper, are also to some extent
involved in feeling. Cf. § 3, Ak. 205. The alternative of rendering 'Sinnesemp/indung'
by some expression referring to an "organ" has the difficulty that inner sense does
not, strictly speaking, have an organ (so that 'Sinnesemp/indung' would wrongly
exclude inner sense, and the contrast with feeling would be lost): see Ak. 234 br.
n.55·1

157

158

292

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

cannot presuppose about such a sensation. Thus to a person who
lacks the sense of smell we cannot communicate this kind of sensation;
and even if he does not lack the sense, we still cannot be certain
whether he is getting the very same sensation from a flower that we
are getting. Yet people must be considered even more divergent
concerning the agreeableness or disagreeableness [they feell when
sensing one and the same object of sense, and we simply cannot
demand that everyone acknowledge [taking] in such objects the pleasure [that we take in theml. This kind of pleasure, since it enters the
mind through sense, so that we are passive, may be called pleasure of
enjoyment.
On the other hand, when we like an act for its moral character, this
liking is not a pleasure of enjoyment, but one that arises from our
spontaneous activity and its conformity with the idea of our vocation.
But this feeling, called moral feeling, requires concepts and is the
exhibition of a law-governed, rather than a free, purposiveness. By
the same token, the only way it can be communicated universally is
by means of reason, and, if the pleasure is to be of the same kind in
everyone, it must be communicated through quite determinate practical concepts of reason.
It is true that the pleasure we take in the sublime in nature,
since it is a pleasure involved in reasoning contemplation, also
lays claim to universal participation; and yet the feeling it presupposes is already different again: it is a feeling of our supersensible
vocation, a feeling which, however obscure it may be, has a moral
foundation. But I have no justification for simply presupposing
that other people will take account of this feeling of mine and feel a
liking when they contemplate the crude magnitude of nature. (We
certainly cannot attribute this liking to nature's aspect itself, since
that is closer to being terrifying.) Nonetheless, inasmuch as we should
on every suitable occasion take those moral predispositions into
account, I may require that liking too from everyone, but only
by means of the moral law, which is in turn based on concepts of
reason.
On the other hand, the pleasure we take in the beautiful is a
pleasure neither of enjoyment, nor of a law·govemed activity, nor yet
of a reasoning contemplation governed by ideas, but is a pleasure of
mere reflection. Without being guided by any purpose or principle
whatever, this pleasure accompanies our ordinary apprehension of an

§ 39. ON THE COMMUNICABILITY OF A SENSATION

159

object by means of the imagination, our power of intuition. in relation
to the understanding, our power of concepts. This apprehension
occurs by means of a procedure that judgment has to carry out to give
rise to even the most ordinary experience. The only difference is that
in the case of ordinary experience the imagination has to engage in
this procedure in order [for us] to [obtain] an empirical objective
concept, whereas in the present case (in aesthetic judging) it has to do
so merely in order to perceive that the presentation is adequate for
[giving rise to a] harmonious (subjectively purposive) activity of the
two cognitive powers in their freedom. i.e .• in order [for us] to feel the
presentational state with pleasure. This pleasure must of necessity
rest on the same conditions in everyone, because they are subjective
conditions for the possibility of cognition as such, and because the
proportion between these cognitive powers that is required for taste is
also required for the sound and common understanding that we may
presuppose in everyone. That is precisely why someone who judges
with taste (provided he is not mistaken in this consciousness and does
not mistake the matter for the form, i.e., charm for beauty) is entitled
to require the subjective purposiveness, Le., his liking for the object,
from everyone else as well, and is entitled to assume that his feeling
is universally communicable, and this without any mediation by
concepts.

§40

On Taste as a Kind of
Sensus Communis20
We often call the power of judgment a sense, when what we notice is
not so much its reflection as merely its result. We then speak of a
sense of truth, a sense of decency, of justice. etc. We do this even
though we know, or at least properly ought to know. that a sense
cannot contain these concepts, let alone have the slightest capacity to
21ltCf. § § 20-22. Ak. 237-40.1

293

160

294

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

pronounce universal rules, but that a conception of truth, propriety,
beauty, or justice could never enter our thoughts if we were not able
to rise above the senses to higher cognitive powers. [This] common
human understanding, which is merely man's sound ([butl not yet
cultivated) understanding, is regarded as the very least that we are
entitled to expect from anyone who lays claim to the name of human
being; and this is also why it enjoys the unfortunate honor of being
called common sense (sensus communis), and this. indeed, in such a
way that the word common (not merely in our language. where it is
actually ambiguous, but in various others as well) means the same as
vulgar-i.e., something found everywhere, the possession of which
involves no merit or superiority whatever.
Instead, we must Ihere I take sensus communis to mean the idea of
a sense shared Iby all of us I, i.e., a power to judge that in reflecting
takes account (a priori), in our thought, of everyone else's way of
presenting [something], in order as it were to compare our own
judgment with human reason in general and thus escape the illusion
that arises from the ease of mistaking subjective and private condi·
tions for objective ones, an illusion that would have a prejudicial
influence on the judgment. Now we do this as follows: we compare
our judgment not so much with the actual as rather with the merely
possible judgments of others, and Ithus) put ourselves in the position
of everyone else, merely by abstracting from the limitations that
[may] happen to attach to our own judging; and this in tum we
accomplish by leaving out as much as possible whatever is matter,
i.e., sensation, in the presentational state, and by paying attention
solely to the formal features of our presentation or of our presentational state. Now perhaps this operation of reflection will seem rather
too artful to be attributed to the ability we call common sense. But in
fact it only looks this way when expressed in abstract formulas.
Intrinsically nothing is more natural than abstracting from charm and
emotion when we seek a judgment that is to serve as a universal
rule.
[Let us compare with this sensus communis) the common human
understanding, even though the latter is not being included here as a
part of the critique of taste. The following maxims may serve to
elucidate its principles: (1) to think for oneself; (2) to think from the
standpoint of everyone else; and (3) to think always consistently. The
first is the maxim of an unprejudiced, the second of a broadened, the

§ 40. ON TASTE AS A KIND OF SENSUS COMMUNIS

161

third of a consistent way of thinking.21 The first is the maxim of a
reason that is never passive. A propensity to a passive reason, and
hence to a heteronomy of reason, is called prejudice; and the greatest
prejudice of all is superstition, which consists in thinking of nature as
not subject to rules which the understanding through its own essential
law lays down as the basis of nature. liberation from superstition is
called enlightenment: 22 for although liberation from prejudices generally may also be called enlightenment, still superstition deserves to
be called a prejudice preeminently (in sensu eminent,-23), since the
blindness that superstition creates in a person, which indeed it even
seems to demand as an obligation, reveals especially well the person's
need to be guided by others, and hence his state of a passive reason.
As for the second maxim concerning [a person's J way of thinking, it
seems that we usually [use a negative term and J call someone limited
(of a narrow mind as opposed to a broad mind) if his talents are
insufficient for a use of any magnitude (above all for intensive use).
But we are talking here not about the power of cognition, but about
the way of thinking Ithat involves J putting this power to a purposive
use; and this, no matter how slight may be the range and the degree of
a person's natural endowments, still indicates a man with a broadened
way of thinking if he overrides the private subjective conditions of his
judgment, into which so many others are locked, as it were, and
reflects on his own judgment from a universal standpoint (which he
can determine only by transferring himself to the standpoint of others).
The third maxim, the one concerning a consistent way of thinking, is
hardest to attain and can in fact be attained only after repeated
21[ef. the Logic. Ak. IX, 57, and the Anthropology. Ak. VII, 200, where these maxims
are said to be contained in the precept for attaining wisdom; see also ibid.• Ak. VII,
228-29.J

22We can readily see that, although enlightenment is easy as a thesis [in thesil. as a
proposal [in hypothesi I it is a difficult matter that can only be carried out slowly. For
although to be always self·legislative, rather than passive. in the use of one's reason, is a
very easy matter for someone who wants only to measure up to his essential purpose
and does not demand to know anything that is beyond his understanding; yet, since it is
hard to avoid striving for such knowledge, and since there will never be a shortage of
others who promise us with much assurance that they can satisfy our desire for it. it
must be very difficult to preserve or instil in [someone'51 way of thinking (especially
in the public's) that merely negative [e1ementl which constitutes enlightenment
proper.
23{ln the eminent sense of the term.J

295

162

296

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

compliance with a combination of the first two has become a
skill. We may say that the first of these maxims is the maxim of
the understanding, the second that of judgment, the third that of
reason.
Resuming now the thread from which I just digressed, I maintain
that taste can be called a sensus communis more legitimately than
can sound understanding, and that the aesthetic power of judgment
deserves to be called a shared sense24 more than does the intellectual one, if indeed we wish to use the word sense25 to stand for
an effect that mere reflection has on the mind, even though we
then mean by sense the feeling of pleasure. We could even define
taste as the ability to judge something that makes our feeling in a
given presentation universally communicable without mediation by a
concept.
The aptitude that human beings have for communicating their
thoughts to one another also requires that imagination and understanding be related in such a way that concepts can be provided with
accompanying intuitions, and intuitions in tum with accompanying
concepts, these intuitions and concepts joining to {form] cognition.
But here the harmony of the two mental powers is law-governed,
under the constraint of determinate concepts. Only where the imagination is free when it arouses the understanding, and the understanding,
without using concepts, puts the imagination into a play that is
regular [i.e., manifests regularity], does the presentation communicate itself not as a thought but as the inner feeling of a purposive state
of mind.
Hence taste is our ability to judge a priori the communicability of
the feelings that (without mediation by a concept) are connected with
a given presentation.
If we could assume that the mere universal communicability as
such of our feeling must already carry with it an interest for us
(something we are, however, not justified in inferring from the character of a merely reflective power of judgment), then we could explain
how it is that we require from everyone as a duty, as it were, the
feeling (contained] in a judgment of taste.
24Taste could be called a sensus communis aestheticus. and common understanding a

sensus 'communis logicus.
25[Emphasis added.)

§ 41

On Empirical Interest
in die Beautiful
That a judgment of taste by which we declare something to be
beautiful must not have an interest as its determining basis has been
established sufficiently above.26 But it does not follow from this that,
after the judgment has been made as a pure aesthetic one, an interest
cannot be connected with it. This connection, however, must always
be only indirect. In other words, we must think of taste as first of all
connected with something else, so that with the liking of mere reflection on an object there can Ithen) be connected, in addition, a
pleasure in the existence of the object (and all interest consists in
pleasure in the existence of an object). For what we say in [the case
of) cognitive judgments (about things in general) also holds for aesthetic judgments: a posse ad esse nOll valet consequentia. 27 This
something else may be something empirical, viz., an inclination inherent in human nature, or something intellectual, viz., the will's property of being determinable a priori by reason. Both of these involve a
liking for the existence of an object and hence can lay the foundation
for an interest in something that we have already come to like on its
own account and without regard to any interest whatever.
Only in society is the beautiful of empirical interest.28 And if we
grant that the urge to society is natural to man but that his fitness and
propensity for it, i.e., sociability, is a requirement of man as a creature with a vocation for society and hence is a property pertaining to
his humanity, then we must also inevitably regard taste as an ability to
judge whatever allows us to communicate even our feeling to everyone else. and hence regard taste as a means of furthering something
that everyone's natural inclination demands.
Someone abandoned on some desolate island would not, just for
himself. adorn either his hut or himself; nor would he look for
261See esp. the First Moment, Ak. 203-11.j
27[An inference from possible to actual is invalid. I
28[ef. Ak. 205 n. 10.j

163

297

164

298

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

flowers, let alone grow them, to adorn himself with them. Only in
society does it occur to him to be, not merely a human being, but
one who is also refined in his own way (this is the beginning of
civilization 29 ). For we judge someone refined if he has the inclination
and the skill to communicate his pleasure to others, and if he is not
satisfied with an object unless he can feel his liking for it in community with others. Moreover, a concern for universal communication is
something that everyone expects and demands from everyone else,
on the basis, as it were, of an original contract dictated by [our] very
humanity. Initially, it is true, only charms thus become important in
society and become connected with great interest, e.g., the dyes
people use to paint themselves (roucou among the Caribs and cinna·
bar among the Iroquois), or the flowers, sea shells, beautifully colored feathers, but eventually also beautiful forms (as in canoes,
clothes, etc.) that involve no gratification whatsoever, i.e., no liking
of enjoyment. But in the end, when civilization has reached its peak,
it makes this communication almost the principal activity of refined
inclination, and sensations are valued only to the extent that they are
universally communicable. At that point, even if the pleasure that
each person has in such an object is inconsiderable and of no significant interest of its own, still its value is increased almost infmitely by
the idea of its universal communicability.
This interest, which we indirectly attach to the beautiful through
our inclination to society and which is therefore empirical, is, however,
of no importance for us here. since we must concern ourselves only
with what may have reference a priori, even if only indirectly, to a
judgment of taste. For if even in this [pure I form [of a judgment of
taste] an interest were to reveal itself [as] connected with it, then taste
would reveal [how] our ability to judge [provides) a transition from
sense enjoyment to moral feeling. Moreover, not only would we then
have better guidance in using taste purposively, but we would also be
showing [that judgment is I a mediating link in the chain of man's a
priori powers,JO the powers on which all legislation must depend.
This much we can surely say about empirical interest in objects of
taste and in taste itself: in such an interest taste caters to inclination,
and no matter how refined this inclination may be, still the interest
291Cf. the Anthropology. § § 69-70, At. VII, 244-45.1
301Cf. Ak. 177 and 196.1

§ 41. ON EMPIRICAL INTEREST IN THE BEAUTIFUL

165

will also easily fuse with all the [other I inclinations and passions that
reach their greatest variety and highest degree in society; and if our
interest in the beautiful is based on these, then it can provide only a
very ambiguous transition from the agreeable to the good. But whether
taste, if taken in its purity, may not still be able to further this
transition - this we have cause to investigate.

§42

On Intellectual Interest
in the Beautiful
There are those who would like to regard every activity of man to
which his inner natural predisposition impels him as being directed to
the ultimate purpose of humanity, the morally good. These people
have, with the best intention. regarded it as a sign of a good moral
character to take an interest in the beautiful generally. But others
have, not without grounds, contradicted them by appealing to the
[fact ofl experience that virtuosi of taste, who not just occasionally
but apparently as a rule are vain, obstinate, and given to ruinous
passions, can perhaps even less than other people claim the distinction of being attached to moral principles. And hence it seems, not
only that the feeling for the beautiful is distinct in kind from moral
feeling (as indeed it actually is), but also that it is difficult to reconcile
the interest which can be connected with the beautiful with the moral
interest, and that it is impossible to do this by an [alleged I intrinsic
affinity between the two.
Now I am indeed quite willing to concede that an interest in the
beautiful in art (in which I include the artistic use of natural beauties
for our adornment, and hence for vanity's sake) provides no proof
whatever that [someone's I way of thinking is attached to the morally
good, or even inclined toward it. On the other hand, I do maintain
that to take a direct interest in the beauty of nature (not merely to
have the taste needed to judge it) is always a mark of a good soul; and
that, if this interest is habitual, if it readily associates itself with the

299

166

300

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

contemplation of nature, this [fact] indicates at least a mental
attunement favorable to moral feeling. But we must carefully bear in
mind that what I mean here is actually the beautiful/orms of nature,
while I continue to set aside the charms that nature tends to connect
so plentifully with them; for an interest in these, though also direct, is
yet empirical.
Consider someone who is all by himself (and has no intention of
communicating his observations to others) and who contemplates the
beautiful shape of a wild flower, a bird, an insect, etc., out of admiration and love for them, and would not want nature to be entirely
without them even if they provided him no prospect of benefit but
instead perhaps even some harm. Such a person is taking a direct
interest in the beauty of nature, and this interest is intellectual. That
is, not only does he like nature's product for its form, but he also likes
its existence, even though no charm of sense is involved; and he also
does not connect that existence with any purpose whatever.
One thing is worthy of note here, however. Suppose we had secretly
played a trick on this lover of the beautiful, sticking in the ground
artificial flowers (which can be manufactured to look very much like
natural ones) or perching artfully carved birds on the branches of
trees, and suppose he then discovered the deceit. The direct interest
he previously took in these things would promptly vanish, though
perhaps it would be replaced by a different interest, an interest of
vanity, to use these things to decorate his room for the eyes of others.
[What this example shows is that] the thought that the beauty in
question was produced by nature must accompany the intuition and
the reflection, and the direct interest we take in that beauty is based
on that thought alone. Otherwise we are left either with a mere
judgment of taste without all interest, or with one connected with
only an indirect interest, viz., an interest which refers to society and
which provides no safe indication of a morally good way of thinking.
This superiority of natural beauty over that of art, namely, thateven if art were to excel nature in form - it is the only beauty that
arouses a direct interest, agrees with the refined and solid [griJnd/ich I
way of thinking of all people who have cultivated their moral feeling.
A man who has taste enough to judge the products of fine art with the
greatest correctness and refinement may still be glad to leave a room
in which he finds those beauties that minister to vanity and perhaps to
social joys, and to turn instead to the beautiful in nature, in order to

§ 42. ON INTELLECTUAL INTEREST IN THE BEAUTIFUL

167

find there, as it were, a voluptuousness for the mind in a train of
thought that he can never fully unravel. If that is how he chooses, we
shall ourselves regard this choice of his with esteem and assume that
he has a beautiful soul, such as no connoisseur and lover of art can
claim to have because of the interest he takes in his objects [of art).
What, then, is the distinction [that prompts] so different an estimation of two kinds of objects [the beautiful in nature and in artl. even
though in the judgment of mere taste neither would vie for superiority
over the other?
We have a merely aesthetic power of judgment, an ability to judge
forms without using concepts and to feel in the mere judging of these
forms a liking that we also make a rule for everyone, though our
judgment is not based on an interest and also gives rise to none. On
the other hand, we also have an intellectual power of judgment. i.e.,
an ability for determining a priori with regard to mere forms of
practical maxims (insofar as such maxims qualify of themselves for
giving universal law) a liking that we make a law for everyone; this
judgment [too] is not based on any interest, yet it gives rise to one.
The pleasure or displeasure in the first judgment is called that of
taste; [inl the latter. that of moral feeling.
But reason also has an interest in the objective reality of the ideas
(for which, in moral feeling, it brings about a direct interest), i.e., an
interest that nature should at least show a trace or give a hint that it
contains some basis or other for us to assume in its products a lawful
harmony with that liking of ours which is independent of all interest
(a liking we recognize a priori as a law for everyone, though we
cannot base this law on proofs). Hence reason must take an interest in
any manifestation in nature of a harmony that resembles the mentioned
Ikind of] harmony, and hence the mind cannot meditate about the
beauty of nature without at the same time finding its interest aroused.
But in terms of its kinship this interest is moral. and whoever takes
such an interest in the beautiful in nature can do so only to the extent
that he has beforehand already solidly established an interest in the
morally good. Hence if someone is directly interested in the beauty of
nature, we have cause to suppose that he has at least a predisposition
to a good moral attitude)1
It will be said that this construal of aesthetic judgments in terms of
31[Cf. the Anthropology, § 69. Ak. VII, 244.1

301

168

302

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

a kinship with moral feeling looks rather too studied to be considered
as the true interpretation of that cipher through which nature speaks
to us figuratively in its beautiful forms. But, first of all, this direct
interest in the beautiful in nature is actually not common, but is
peculiar to those whose way of thinking is either already trained to
the good or exceptionally receptive to this training. But in view of the
analogy between a pure judgment of taste, which depends on no
interest whatever and [yet) makes us feel a liking that it also presents
a priori as proper for mankind generally, on the one hand, and a
moral judgment, which does the same from concepts, on the other
hand, someone with that way of thinking does not need to engage in
distinct, subtle, and deliberate meditation in order to be led by this
analogy to an interest in the object of the pure judgment of taste
which is just as strong and direct as his interest in the object of the
moral judgment; the only difference is that the first interest is free
while the second is based on objective laws. Consider, in addition.
how we admire nature, which in its beautiful products displays itself
as art, [i.e., as acting] not merely by chance but. as it were, intentionally,
in terms of a lawful arrangement and as a purposiveness without a
purpose; and since we do not find this purpose anywhere outside us,
we naturally look for it in ourselves, namely, in what constitutes the
ultimate purpose of our existence: our moral vocation. (The inquiry
into the basis that makes such a natural purposiveness possible will.
however. first come up in the teleology.)32
The fact that our liking for beautiful art in a pure judgment of taste
is not connected with a direct interest, as the liking for beautiful
nature is so connected, is also easily explained. For either art imitates
nature to the point of deception, in which case it achieves its effect by
being (regarded as) natural beauty. Or it is an art in which we can see
that it intentionally aimed at our liking; but in that case, though our
liking for the product would arise directly through taste. it would
arouse only an indirect interest in the underlying cause, namely. an
interest in an art that can interest us only by its purpose and never in
itself. Perhaps it will be said that this is also the case if an object of
nature interests us by its beauty only insofar as we link it to an
accompanying moral idea. However. it is not this link that interests us
32[As to what this basis is, see the Translator's Introduction, xciii-cii.j

§ 42. ON INTELLECTUAL INTEREST IN THE BEAUTIFUL

169

directly, but rather the beauty's own characteristic of qualifying for
such a link, which therefore belongs to it intrinsically.
The charms in beautiful nature, which we so often find fused, as it
were, with beautiful form. belong either to the modifications of light
(in coloring) or of sound (in tones). For these are the only sensations
that allow not merely for a feeling of sense, but also for reflection on
the form of these modifications of the senses, so that they contain, as
it were, a language in which nature speaks to us and which seems to
have a higher meaning. Thus a lily's white color seems to attune the
mind to ideas of innocence, and the seven colors [of the spectrum],
from red to violet, [similarly seem to attune it, respectively, to the
ideas ofl (1) sublimity, (2) courage, (3) candor, (4) friendliness, (5)
modesty, (6) constancy, and (7) tenderness. 33 A bird's song proclaims
his joyfulness and contentment with his existence. At least that is how
we interpret nature, whether or not it has such an intention. But in
order for us to take this interest in beauty, this beauty must always be
that of nature: our interest vanishes completely as soon as we notice
that we have been deceived, that only art was involved; it vanishes so
completely that at that point even taste can no longer find anything
beautiful, nor sight anything charming. What do poets praise more
highly than the nightingale's enchantingly beautiful song in a secluded
thicket on a quiet summer evening by the soft light of the moon? And
yet we have cases where some jovial innkeeper, unable to find such a
songster, played a trick-received with greatest satisfaction [initiallylon the guests staying at his inn to enjoy the country air, by hiding in a
bush some roguish youngster who (with a reed or rush in his mouth)
knew how to copy that song in a way very similar to nature's. But as
soon as one realizes that it was all deception, no one will long endure
listening to this song that before he had considered so charming; and
that is how it is with the song of any other bird. In order for us to be
able to take a direct interest in the beautiful as such, it must be
nature, or we must consider it so. This holds especially, however, if
we can even require others to take a direct interest in it. And we do in
fact require this; for we consider someone's way of thinking to be
coarse and ignoble if he has no feeling for beautiful nature (which is
33{Newton showed that the white color of sunlight can not only be broken up into, but
also recomposed from. "seven" spectral components: ted. orange, yellow. green. blUe.
indigo. violet: Opticks, Bk. 1. Pt. 11.1

303

170

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

what we call the receptivity for an interest in contemplating nature)
and sticks to the enjoyments of mere sense that he gets from meals or
the bottle.

§43

On Art in General
(1) Art is distinguished from nature as doing (jacere) is from acting or
operating in general (agere); and the product or result of art is
distinguished from that of nature. the first being a work (opus), the
second an effect (effectus).
By right we should not call anything art except a production
through freedom, i.e., through a power of choice that bases its acts on
reason. For though we like to call the product that bees make (the
regularly constructed honeycombs) a work of art, we do so only by
virtue of an analogy with art; for as soon as we recall that their labor
is not based on any rational deliberation on their part, we say at once
that the product is a product of their nature (namely, of instinct). and
it is only to their creator that we ascribe it as art.
lIt is true thatl if, as sometimes happens when we search through a
bog, we come across a piece of hewn wood, we say that it is a product
of art, rather than of nature, i.e., that the cause which produced it was
thinking of a purpose to which this object owes its form. Elsewhere
too, I suppose, we see art in everything that is of such a character that
before it became actual its cause must have had a presentation of it
(as even in the case of bees), yet precisely without the cause's having
lin facti thought of that effect. But if we simply call something a work
of art in order to distinguish it from a natural effect, then we always
mean by that a work of man.
(2) Art, as human skill, is also distinguished from science ([Le., we
distinguish] can from know), as practical from theoretical ability, as
technic from theory (e.g., the art of surveying from geometry). That is
exactly why we refrain from calling anything art that we can do the
moment we know what is to be done, Le., the moment we are

§ 43. ON ART IN GENERAL

171

sufficiently acquainted with what the desired effect is. Only if something lis such that] even the most thorough acquaintance with it does
not immediately provide us with the skill to make it, then to that
extent it belongs to art. Camper34 describes with great precision
what the best shoe would have to be like, yet he was certainly unable
to make one. 35
(3) Art is likewise distinguished from craft. The first is also called
free art, the second could also be called mercenary art. We regard
free art [as an art] that could only turn out purposive (i.e., succeed) if
it is play, in other words, an occupation that is agreeable on its own
account; mercenary art we regard as labor, i.e., as an occupation that
on its own account is disagreeable (burdensome) and that attracts us
only through its effect (e.g., pay), so that people can be coerced into
it. To judge whether. in a ranking of the guilds, watchmakers should
be counted as artists but smiths as craftsmen, we would have to take a
viewpoint different from the one adopted here: we would have to
compare [Proportion I the talents that each of these occupations
presupposes. Whether even among the so-called seven free arts a few
may not have been included that should be numbered with the
sciences, as well as some that are comparable to crafts. I do not here
wish to discuss. It is advisable, however, to remind ourselves that in
all the free arts there is yet a need for something in the order of a
constraint, or, as it is called, a mechanism. (In poetry, for example, it
is correctness and richness of language, as well as prosody and
meter.) Without this the spirit,36 which in art must be free and which
alone animates the work, would have no body at all and would
evaporate completely. This reminder is needed because some of the
more recent educators believe that they promote a free art best if
they remove all constraint from it and convert it from labor into mere
play.
3"lPeter Camper (1722-89), Dutch anatomist and naturalist. He is the author of
numerous works, the most important of which are on comparative anatomy.]
351n my part of the country, if you confront the common man with a problem like that
of Columbus and his egg, he will say: That is not an art. it is only a science. That is, if
you know it then you can do it; and he says just the same about all the alleged arts of
the conjurer. That of the tightrope dancer. on the other hand, he wiJI not at all decline
to call art.
~ Geist; cf. § 49. Ak. 313.]

304

§44

On Fine Art

305

There is no science of the beautiful [das Schone I, but only critique;
and there is no fine [schOn] science,37 but only fine art. For in a
science of the beautiful, whether or not something should be considered beautiful would have to be decided scientifically, i.e., through
bases of proof, so that if a judgment about beauty belonged to science
then it would not be a judgment of taste, As for a fine science: a
science that as a science is to be fine is an absurdity; for if, [treating
itl as a science, we asked for reasons and proofs, we would be put off
with tasteful phrases (bans mots). What has given rise to the familiar
expression,fine sciences. is doubtless nothing more than the realization,
which is quite correct, that fine art in its full perfection requires much
science: e.g., we must know ancient languages, we must have read the
authors considered classical, we must know history and be familiar
with the antiquities, etc.; and this is why these historical sciences
have, through a confusion of words, themselves come to be called
fine sciences, because they constitute the foundation and preparation
needed for fine art, and in part also because they have come to
include even a familiarity with the products of fine art (as in oratory
or poetry).
If art merely performs the acts that are required to make a possible
object actual, adequately to our cognition of that object, then it is
mechanical art; but if what it intends directly is [to arouse [ the feeling
of pleasure, then it is called aesthetic art. The latter is either agreeable
or fine art. It is agreeable art if its purpose is that the pleasure should
accompany presentations that are mere sensations,' it is fine art if its
purpose is that the pleasure should accompany presentations that are
ways of cognizing.
Agreeable arts are those whose purpose is merely enjoyment. They
include [the art of providing] all those charms that can gratify a party
at table, such as telling stories entertainingly, animating the group to
open and lively conversation, or using jest and laughter to induce a
37[Or "beautiful" science: Kant is responding. above all, to Alexander Gottlieb
Baumgarten and Georg Friedrich Meier. Cf. the Translator's Introduction.I-li.J

172

§ 44. ON FINE ART

173

certain cheerful tone among them38 -a tone such that, as is said,
there may be a lot of loose talk over the feast, and no one wants to be
held responsible for what he says, because the whole point is the
entertainment of the moment, not any material for future meditation
or quotation. (Such arts also include the art of furnishing a table so
that people will enjoy themselves, or include, at large banquets,
presumably even the table-music-a strange thing which is meant to
be only an agreeable noise serving to keep the minds in a cheerful
mood, and which fosters the free flow of conversation between each
person and his neighbor. without anyone's paying the slightest attention to the music's composition.) Also included in these arts are any
games that involve no further interest than that of making time go by
unnoticed.
Fine art, on the other hand, is a way of presenting that is purposive
on its own and that furthers, even though without a purpose, the
culture of our mental powers to [facilitate) social communication.
The very concept of the universal communicability of a pleasure
carries with it [the requirement) that this pleasure must be a pleasure
of reflection rather than one of enjoyment arising from mere sensation.
Hence aesthetic art that is also fine art is one whose standard is the
reflective power of judgment. rather than sensation proper. 39

§45

Fine Art Is an Art Insofar as
It Seems at the Same Time
to Be Nature
In [dealing with I a product of fine art we must become conscious that
it is art rather than nature, and yet the purposiveness in its form must
seem as free from all constraint of chosen rules as if it were a product
of mere nature. It is this feeling of freedom in the play of our
381Cf.

the Anthropology, Ak. VII, 2BO.1

39ISinnesemp/indung. see § 39, Ak. 291 inc!. br. n. 19.1

306

174

307

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

cognitive powers, a play that yet must also be purposive, which
underlies that pleasure which alone is universally communicable
although not based on concepts. Nature, we say, is beautiful [schon] if
it also looks like art; and art can be called fine [schOn] art only if we
are conscious that it is art while yet it looks to us like nature.
For we may say universally, whether it concerns beauty in nature
or in art: beautiful is what we like in merely judging it (rather than
either in sensation proper or through a concept). Now art always has
a determinate intention to produce something. But if this something
were mere sensation (something merely subjective), to be accompanied by pleasure, then we would [indeed] like this product in judging
it, ~butl only by means of the feeling of sense. If the intention were
directed at producing a determinate object and were achieved by the
art, then we would like the object only through concepts. In neither
case, then, would we like the art in merely judging it, i.e., we would
like it not as fine but only as mechanical art.
Therefore, even though the purposiveness in a product of fine art
is intentional, it must still not seem intentional; i.e., fine art must have
the look of nature even though we are conscious of it as art. And a
product of art appears like nature if. though we find it to agree quite
punctiliously with the rules that have to be followed for the product
to become what it is intended to be, it does not do so painstakingly. In
other words, the academic form must not show; there must be no hint
that the rule was hovering before the artist's eyes and putting fetters
on his mental powers.

§46

Fine Art Is the Art of Genius
Genius is the talent (natural endowment) that gives the rule to art.
Since talent is an innate productive ability of the artist and as such
belongs itself to nature, we could also put it this way: Genius is the
innate mental predisposition (ingenium) through which nature gives
the rule to art.

§ 46. FINE ART IS THE ART OF GENIUS

175

Whatever the status of this definition may be, and whether or not it
is merely arbitrary, or rather adequate to the concept that we usually
connect with the word genius (these questions will be discussed in the
following section), still we can prove even now that, in terms of the
meaning of the word genius adopted here, fine arts must necessarily
be considered arts of genius.
For every art presupposes rules, which serve as the foundation on
which a product, if it is to be called artistic, is thought of as possible
in the first place. On the other hand, the concept of fine art does not
permit a judgment about the beauty of its product to be derived from
any rule whatsoever that has a concept as its determining basis, i.e.,
the judgment must not be based on a concept of the way in which the
product is possible. Hence fine art cannot itself devise the rule by
which it is to bring about its product. Since, however, a product can
never be called art unless it is preceded by a rule, it must be nature in
the subject (and through the attunement of his powers) that gives the
rule to art; in other words, fine art is possible only as the product of
genius.
What this shows is the following: (1) Genius is a talent for producing something for which no determinate rule can be given, not a
predisposition consisting of a skill for something that can be learned
by following some rule or other; hence the foremost property of
genius must be originality. (2) Since nonsense too can be original. the
products of genius must also be models, i.e., they must be exemplary;
hence, though they do not themselves arise through imitation, still
they must serve others for this, Le., as a standard or rule by which to
judge. (3) Genius itself cannot describe or indicate scientifically how
it brings about its products, and it is rather as nature that it gives the
rule. That is why, if an author owes a product to his genius, he himself
does not know how he came by the ideas for it; nor is it in his power
[Gewalt I to devise such products at his pleasure. or by following a
plan, and to communicate Ihis procedure I to others in precepts that
would enable them to bring about like products. (Indeed. that is
presumably why the word genius is derived from [Latin) genius.
[which means) the guardian and guiding spirit that each person is
given as his own at birth,40 and to whose inspiration IEingebung)
those original ideas are due.) (4) Nature, through genius, prescribes
401Cf. the Anthropology, Ak. VII, 225.1

308

176

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

the rule not to science but to art, and this also only insofar as the art is
to be fine art.

§47

Elucidation and
Confirmation of
the Above Explication
of Genius

309

On this point everyone agrees: that genius must be considered the
very opposite of a spirit of imitation. Now since learning is nothing
but imitation, even the greatest competence. li.e .• 1 teachability
(capacity) qua teach ability, can still not count as genius. But even if
someone does not just take in what others have thought but thinks
and writes on his own, or even makes all sorts of discoveries in art and
science, still. even that is not yet the right basis for calling such a
mind (in contrast to one who is called a simpleton. because he can
never do more than just learn and imitate) a genius (great though
such a mind often is). For all of this could in fact have been done
through learning as well, and hence lies in the natural path of an
investigation and meditation by rules and does not differ in kind from
what a diligent person can acquire by means of imitation. Thus one
can indeed learn everything that Newton has set forth in his immortal
work on the principles of natural philosophy. however great a mind
was needed to make such discoveries; but one cannot learn to write
inspired 41 poetry. however elaborate all the precepts of this art may
be, and however superb its models. The reason for this is that Newton
could show how he took every one of the steps he had to take in order
to get from the first elements of geometry to his great and profound
discoveries; he could show this not only to himself but to everyone
else as well, in an intuitivelly clear I way, allowing others to follow. But
411 Geistreich: 'rich in spirit; Iiterally./

§47. ELUCIDATION AND CONFIRMATION.,.

177

no Homer or Wieland42 can show how his ideas, rich in fancy and yet
also in thought, arise and meet in his mind; the reason is that he
himself does not know, and hence also cannot teach it to anyone else.
In scientific matters, therefore, the greatest discoverer differs from
the most arduous imitator and apprentice only in degree, whereas he
differs in kind from someone whom nature has endowed for fine art.
But saying this does not disparage those great men, to whom the
human race owes so much, in contrast to those whom nature has
favored with a talent for fine art. For the scientists' talent lies in
continuing to increase the perfection of our cognitions and of all the
benefits that depend on [these), as well as in imparting that same
knowledge to others; and in these respects they are far superior to
those who merit the honor of being called geniuses. For the latter's art
stops at some point, because a boundary is set for it beyond which it
cannot go and which probably has long since been reached and
cannot be extended further. Moreover, the artist's skill cannot be
communicated but must be conferred directly on each person by the
hand of nature. And so it dies with him, until some day nature again
endows someone else in the same way, someone who needs nothing
but an example in order to put the talent of which he is conscious to
work in a similar way.
Since, then, [the artist's) natural endowment must give the rule to
(fine) art, what kind of rule is this? It cannot be couched in a formula
and serve as a precept, for then a judgment about the beautiful could
be determined according to concepts. Rather, the rule must be
abstracted from what the artist has done, i.e., from the product,
which others may use to test their own talent, letting it serve them as
their model, not to be copied [Nachmachung) but to be imitated
[NachahmungJ,43 How that is possible is difficult to explain. The
artist's ideas arOuse similar ideas in his apprentice if nature has
provided the latter with a similar proportion in his mental powers.
That is why the models of fine art are the only means of transmitting
421Christoph Martin Wieland (1733-1813), German poet and man of letters.)
43[Karl Vorliinder, editor of the Critique of Judgment in the Philosophische Bibliothek
edition. notes (v. 39a, 163, n. b) that Kant's manuscript read 'Nachahmung ...
Nachahmung' ('[not to bel imitated Ibut to be] imitated'), which was then "corrected"
to the reading found here, but that Kant presumably meant to write 'Nachahmung . ..
Nachfolge' ('[not to be] imitated [but to bel followed'), in line with what he says
elsewhere: see esp. Ak. 318 and 283.]

310

178

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

these ideas to posterity. Mere descriptions could not accomplish this
(especially not in the area of the arts of speech), and even in these arts
only those models can become classical which are written in the
ancient, dead languages, now preserved only as scholarly languages. 44
Even though mechanical and fine art are very different from each
other, since the first is based merely on diligence and learning but the
second on genius, yet there is no fine art that does not have as its
essential condition something mechanical, which can be encompassed
by rules and complied with, and hence has an element of academic
co"ectness. For something must be thought, as purpose, since otherwise the product cannot be ascribed to any art at aU, but would be a
mere product of chance. But directing the work to a purpose requires
determinate rules that one is not permitted to renounce. Now since
originality of talent is one essential component (though not the only
one) of the character of genius, shallow minds believe that the best
way to show that they are geniuses in first bloom is by renouncing all
rules of academic constraint, believing that they will cut a better
figure on the back of an ill-tempered than of a training-horse. Genius
can only provide rich material for products of fine art; processing this
material and giving it form requires a talent that is academically
trained, so that it may be used in a way that can stand the test of the
power of judgment. But it is utterly ridiculous for someone to speak
and decide like a genius even in matters that require the most careful
rational investigation. One does not quite know whether to laugh
harder at the charlatan who spreads all this haze, in which we can
judge nothing distinctly but can imagine all the more, or rather laugh
at the audience, which naively imagines that the reason why it cannot
distinctly recognize and grasp this masterpiece of insight is that large
masses of new truths are being hurled at it, whereas it regards the
detail (which is based on carefully weighed explications and academically correct examination of the principles) as only the work of a
bungler.

44jCf. Ak. 232 n. 49.1

§48

311

On the Relation of
Genius to Taste
Judging beautiful objects to be such requires taste,' but fine art itself,
i.e., production of such objects, requires genius.
If we consider genius as the talent for fine art (and the proper
meaning of the word implies this) and from this point of view wish to
analyze it into the powers that must be combined in order to constitute such a talent, then we must begin by determining precisely how
natural beauty, the judging of which requires only taste, differs from
artistic beauty, whose possibility (which we must also bear in mind
when we judge an object of this sort) requires genius.
A natural beauty is a beautiful thing; artistic beauty is a beautiful
presentation of a thing.
In order to judge a natural beauty to be that, I need not have a
prior concept of what kind of thing the object is [meant] to be; i.e., I
do not have to know its material purposiveness (its purpose). Rather,
I like the mere form of the object when I judge it, on its own account
and without knowing the purpose. But if the object is given as a
product of art, and as such is to be declared beautiful, then we must
first base it on a concept of what the thing is [meant) to be, since art
always presupposes a purpose in the cause (and its causality). And
since the harmony of a thing's manifold with an intrinsic determination of the thing, i.e., with its purpose, is the thing's perfection, it
follows that when we judge artistic beauty we shall have to assess the
thing's perfection as well, whereas perfection is not at all at issue
when we judge natural beauty (to be that). It is true that when we
judge certain objects of nature, above all animate ones, such as a
human being or a horse, we do commonly also take into account their
objective purposiveness in order to judge their beauty. But then, by
the same token, the judgment is no longer purely aesthetic, no longer
a mere judgment of taste. We then judge nature no longer as it
appears as art, but insofar as it actually is art (though superhuman
art), and [so we make a) teleological judgment that serves the aesthetic one as a foundation and condition that it must take into

179

312

180

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

account. Thus if we say, e.g., That is a beautiful woman, we do in fact
think nothing other than that nature offers us in the woman's figure a
beautiful presentation of the purposes [inherent] in the female build.
For in order to think the object in this way, through a logically
conditioned aesthetic judgment, we have to look beyond the mere
form and toward a concept.
Fine art shows its superiority precisely in this, that it describes
things beautifully that in nature we would dislike or find ugly.45 The
Furies, diseases, devastations of war, and so on are all harmful; and
yet they can be described, or even presented in a painting, very
beautifully. There is only one kind of ugliness that cannot be presented
in conformity with nature without obliterating all aesthetic liking and
hence artistic beauty: that ugliness which arouses disgust. For in that
strange sensation. which rests on nothing but imagination, the object
is presented as if it insisted, as it were, on our enjoying it even though
that is just what we are forcefully resisting; and hence the artistic
presentation of the object is no longer distinguished in our sensation
from the nature of this object itself, so that it cannot possibly be
considered beautiful. The art of sculpture, too, has excluded from its
creations any direct presentation of ugly objects, since in its products
art is almost confused with nature. Instead it has permitted [ugly
objects] to be presented by an allegory-e.g., death ([by] a beautiful
genius) or a warlike spirit ([by] Mars)-or by attributes that come
across as likable, and hence has permitted them only to be presented
indirectly and by means of an interpretation of reason rather than
presented for a merely aesthetic power of judgment.
Let this suffice for the beautiful presentation of an object, which is
actually only the form of a concept's exhibition, the form by which
this concept is universally communicated. Now, giving this form to a
product of fine art requires merely taste. The artist, having practiced
and corrected his taste by a variety of examples from art or nature,
holds his work up to it, and, after many and often laborious attempts
to satisfy his taste, finds that form which is adequate to it. Hence this
form is not, as it were, a matter of inspiration or of a free momentum
of the mental powers; the artist is, instead, slowly and rather painstakingly touching the form up in an attempt to make it adequate to his
451Cf. Aristotle. the Poetics, ch. iv. 1448b. and Edmund Burke. Enquiry Into the
Origin of Ou,. Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful. Pt. I. Section xvi.)

§ 48. ON THE RELATION OF GENIUS TO TASTE

181

thought while yet keeping it from interfering with the freedom in the
play of these powers.
But taste is merely an ability to judge, not to produce; and if
something conforms to it, that [fact) does not yet make the thing a
work of fine art: it may belong to useful and mechanical art, or
even to science, as a product made according to determinate rules
that can be learned and that must be complied with precisely. If
this product has been given a likable form, then this form is only
the vehicle of communication, and, as it were, a manner [adopted]
in displaying the product, so that one still retains a certain measure of freedom in this display even though it is otherwise tied to a
determinate purpose. Thus we demand that tableware, or, for that
matter, a moral treatise, or even a sermon should have this form
of fine art, yet without its seeming studied, but we do not on
that account call these things works of fine art. In fine art we
include, rather, a poem, a piece of music, a gallery of pictures, and
so on; and here we often find a woald-be work of fine art that
manifests genius without taste, or another that manifests taste without
genius.

§49

On the Powers of the Mind
Which Constitute Genius
Of certain products that are expected to reveal themselves at least in
part to be fine art, we say that they have no spirit, even though we
find nothing to censure in them as far as taste is concerned. A poem
may be quite nice and elegant and yet have no spirit. A story may be
precise and orderly and yet have no spirit. An oration may be both
thorough and graceful and yet have no spirit. Many conversations are
entertaining, but they have no spirit. Even about some woman we will
say that she is pretty, communicative, and polite, but that she has no
spirit. Well, what do we mean here by spirit?
Spirit [Geist] in an aesthetic sense is the animating principle in the

313

182

314

PART l. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

mind. 46 But what this principle uses to animate lor quicken I the
soul, the material it employs for this, is what imparts to the mental
powers a purposive momentum, i.e., imparts to them a play which is
such that it sustains itself on its own and even strengthens the powers
for such play.
Now I maintain that this principle is nothing but the ability to
exhibit aesthetic ideas: and by an aesthetic idea I mean a presentation of the imagination which prompts much thought, but to which no
determinate thought whatsoever, i.e., no [determinate] concept. can
be adequate, so that no language can express it completely and allow
us to grasp it. 47 It is easy to see that an aesthetic idea is the
counterpart (pendant) of a rational idea. which is, conversely, a
concept to which no intuition (presentation of the imagination) can
be adequate.
For the imagination ([in its role I as a productive cognitive power) is
very mighty when it creates,48 as it were, another nature out of the
material that actual nature gives it. We use it to entertain ourselves
when experience strikes us as overly routine. We may even restructure experience; and though in doing so we continue to follow analogical laws, yet we also follow principles which reside higher up, namely,
in reason (and which are just as natural to us as those which the
understanding follows in apprehending empirical nature). In this
process we feel our freedom from the law of association (which
attaches to the empirical use of the imagination); for although it is
under that law that nature lends us material, yet we can process that
material into something quite different, namely, into something that
surpasses nature.
Such presentations of the imagination we may call ideas. One
reason for this is that they do at least strive toward something that lies
beyond the bounds of experience, and hence try to approach an
exhibition of rational concepts (intellectual ideas), and thus [these
concepts I are given a semblance of objective reality. Another reason,
indeed the main reason, for calling those presentations ideas is that
they are inner intuitions to which no concept can be completely
46[ Cf. the Antllropology. Ak. VII. 225 and 246. Cf. also above. § 46, Ak. 308.)
471Cf. § 57. Comment I. Ak. 341-44.]
4810n the "productive" imagination. see Ak. 240 br. n. 66; and cf. Ak. 243 br. n. 73,
where Kant tells us in what sense the imagination is not creative.)

§ 49. ON THE POWERS OF THE MIND. . .

183

adequate. A poet ventures to give sensible expression to rational
ideas of invisible beings, the realm of the blessed, the realm of hell,
eternity, creation, and so on. Or, again, he takes [thingsl that are
indeed exemplified in experience, such as death, envy, and all the
other vices, as well as love, fame, and so on; but then, by means of an
imagination that emulates the example of reason in reaching [fori a
maximum, he ventures to give these sensible expression in a way that
goes beyond the limits of experience, namely, with a completeness for
which no example can be found in nature. And it is actually in the art
of poetry that the power [i.e., faculty J of aesthetic ideas can manifest
itself to full extent. Considered by itself, however, this power is
actually only a talent (of the imagination).
Now if a concept is provided with [llnterlegen I a presentation of
the imagination such that, even though this presentation belongs to
the exhibition of the concept, yet it prompts, even by itself, so much
thought as can never be comprehended within a determinate concept
and thereby the presentation aesthetically expands the concept itself
in an unlimited way, then the imagination is creative in [all of) this
and sets the power of intellectual ideas (i.e., reason) in motion: it
makes reason think more, when prompted by a [certain] presentation,
than what can be apprehended and made distinct in the presentation
(though the thought does pertain to the concept of the object
[presented I).
If forms do not constitute the exhibition of a given concept itself,
but are only supplementary [Neben-) presentations of the imagination,
expressing the concept's implications and its kinship with other
concepts, then they are called (aesthetic) attributes of an object, of
an object whose concept is a rational idea and hence cannot be
exhibited adequately. Thus Jupiter's eagle with the lightning in its
claws is an attribute of the mighty king of heaven, and the peacock is
an attribute of heaven's stately queen. [Through) these attributes,
unlike [through) logical attributes. [we) do not present the content of
our concepts of the sublimity and majesty of creation, but present
something different, something that prompts the imagination to spread
over a multitude of kindred presentations that arouse more thought
than can be expressed in a concept determined by words. These
aesthetic attributes yield an aesthetic idea, which serves the mentioned
rational idea as a substitute for a logical exhibition, but its proper
function is to quicken [beleben) the mind by opening up for it a view

315

184

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

into an immense realm of kindred presentations. Fine art does this
not only in painting or sculpture (where we usually speak of attributes);
but poetry and oratory also take the spirit that animates [beleben 1
their works solely from the aesthetic attributes of the objects, attributes
that accompany the logical ones and that give the imagination a
momentum which makes it think more in response to these objects
[dabeiJ, though in an undeveloped way, than can be comprehended
within one concept and hence in one determinate linguistic expression.
Here are some examples, though for the sake of brevity I must
confine myself to only a few.
The great king, in one of his poems, expresses himself thus:

316

Let us part from life without grumbling or regrets,
Leaving the world behind filled with our good deeds.
Thus the sun, his daily course completed,
Spreads one more soft light over the sky;
And the last rays that he sends through the air
Are the last sighs he gives the world for its well-being. 49
The king is here animating his rational idea of a cosmopolitan attitude,
even at the end of life, by means of an attribute which the imagination
(in remembering all the pleasures of a completed beautiful summer
day, which a serene evening calls to mind) conjoins with that presentation, and which arouses a multitude of sensations and supplementary presentations for which no expression can be found. On the other
hand, even an intellectual concept may serve, conversely, as an
attribute of a presentation of sense and thus animate that presentation by the idea of the supersensible; but [we 1may use for this only
the aesthetic [element 1 that attaches subjectively to our consciousness of the supersensible. Thus, for example, a certain poet, in
describing a beautiful morning. says: "The sun flowed forth, as seren49[Kant is giving a German translation (probably his own) of the following lines
written in French by Frederick the Great (Oeuvres de Frederic Ie Grand. 1846 ft" x, 203):
Oui, finissons sans trouble. et mourons sans regrets,
En {aissan! l'Univers combli de nos bien/aits.
Ainsi I )Istre du jour. au bout de sa carriere.
Repand sur l'horizon une douce lumiere.
Et les derniers rayons qu 'il darde dans /es airs
Som ses derniers soupirs qu'il donne I 'Univers.1

a

§ 49.

ON THE POWERS OF THE MIND. . .

185

ity flows from virtue."so The consciousness of virtue, even if we only
think of ourselves as in the position of a virtuous person, spreads in
the mind a multitude of sublime and calming feelings and a boundless
outlook toward a joyful future, such as no expression commensurate
with a determinate concept completely attains. 51
In a word, an aesthetic idea is a presentation of the imagination
which is conjoined with a given concept and is connected, when we
use imagination in its freedom, with such a multiplicity of partial
presentations that no expression that stands for a determinate concept can be found for it. Hence it is a presentation that makes us add
to a concept the thoughts of much that is ineffable, but the feeling of
which quickens our cognitive powers and connects language, which
otherwise would be mere letters, with spirit.
So the mental powers whose combination (in a certain relation)
constitutes genius are imagination and understanding. One qualification is needed, however. When the imagination is used for cognition,
then it is under the constraint of the understanding and is subject to
the restriction of adequacy to the understanding's concept. But when
the aim is aesthetic, then the imagination is free, so that, over and
above that harmony with the concept, it may supply, in an unstudied
way, a wealth of undeveloped material for the understanding which
the latter disregarded in its concept. But the understanding employs
this material not so much objectively, for cognition, as subjectively,
namely. to quicken the cognitive powers, though indirectly this does
serve cognition too. Hence genius actually consists in the happy
relation-one that no science can teach and that cannot be learned
by any diligence-allowing us, first, to discover ideas for a given
50[From Akademische Gedichte (Academic Poems) (1782), vol. i, p. 70, by 1. Ph. L.
Withof (172S-89), professor of morals, oratory, and medicine at Duisburg. Germany.
The original poem had 'goodness' instead of 'virtue.']
51Perhaps nothing more sublime has ever been said, or a thought ever been expressed
more sublimely, than in that inscription above the temple of Isis (Mother Nature): "I
am all that is. that was, and that will be, and no mortal has lifted my veil." Segller S2
made use of this idea in an ingenious vignette prefixed to his Naturlehre [Natural
Science], so as first to imbue the pupil, whom he was about to lead into this temple,
with the sacred thrill that is meant to attune the mind to solemn attentiveness.
52[Johann Andreas von Segner (1704-77), German physicist and mathematician at
Jena, GOttingen, and Halle. He is the author of several significant scientific works. He
introduced the concept of the surface tension of liquids.)

317

186

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

concept, and, second, to hit upon a way of expressing these ideas that
enables us to communicate to others, as accompanying a concept, the
mental attunement that those ideas produce. The second talent is
properly the one we call spirit. For in order to express what is
ineffable in the mental state accompanying a certain presentation and
to make it universally communicable-whether the expression consists in language or painting or plastic art-we need an ability [viz.,
spirit I to apprehend the imagination's rapidly passing play and to
unite it in a concept that can be communicated without the constraint of rules (a concept that on that very account is original, while
at the same time it reveals a new rule that could not have been
inferred from any earlier principles or examples).

318

If, after this analysis, we look back to the above explication of what
we call genius, we find: First, genius is a talent for art, not for science,
where we must start from distinctly known rules that determine the
procedure we must use in it. Second, since it is an artistic talent, it
presupposes a determinate concept of the product, namely, its purpose;
hence genius presupposes understanding, but also a presentation
(though an indeterminate one) of the material, i.e., of the intuition,
needed to exhibit this concept, and hence presupposes a relation of
imagination to understanding. Third. it manifests itself not so much
in the fact that the proposed purpose is achieved in exhibiting a
determinate concept, as, rather, in the way aesthetic ideas, which
contain a wealth of material [suitable] for that intention, are offered
or expressed; and hence it presents the imagination in its freedom
from any instruction by rules, but still as purposive for exhibiting the
given concept. Finally,fourth. the unstudied, unintentional subjective
purposiveness in the imagination's free harmony with the understanding'S lawfulness presupposes such a proportion and attunement
of these powers as cannot be brought about by any compliance with
rules, whether of science or of mechanical imitation, but can be
brought about only by the subject's nature.
These presuppositions being' given, genius is the exemplary originality of a subject's natural endowment in the free use of his cognitive
powers. Accordingly, the product of a genius (as regards what is
attributable to genius in it rather than to possible learning or academic instruction) is an example that is meant not to be imitated, but

§ 49. ON THE POWERS OF THE MIND.. .

187

to be followed by another genius. (For in mere imitation the element
of genius in the work-what constitutes its spirit-would be lost.) The
other genius, who follows the example. is aroused by it to a feeling of
his own originality, which allows him to exercise in art his freedom
from the constraint of rules, and to do so in such a way that art itself
acquires a new rule by this, thus showing that the talent is exemplary.
But since a genius is nature's favorite and so must be regarded as a
rare phenomenon, his example gives rise to a school for other good
minds, Le., a methodical instruction by means of whatever rules
could be extracted from those products of spirit and their peculiarity;
and for these [followers] fine art is to that extent imitation, for which
nature, through a genius, gave the rule.
But this imitation becomes aping if the pupil copies everything,
including even the deformities that the genius had to permit only
because it would have been difficult to eliminate them without diminishing the force of the idea. This courage [to retain deformities I has
merit only in a genius. A certain boldness of expression, and in
general some deviation from the common rule, is entirely fitting for a
genius; it is however not at all worthy of imitation, but in itself always
remains a defect that [any]one must try to eliminate, though the
genius has, as it were, a privilege to allow the defect to remain
[anyway], because the inimitable [element] in the momentum of his
spirit would be impaired by timorous caution. Mannerism is a different kind of aping; it consists in aping mere peculiarity (originality) as
such, so as to distance oneself as far as at all possible from imitators,
yet without possessing the talent needed to be exemplary as well. It is
true that we use the term mannerS3 in another way as well: Whenever we convey our thoughts, there are two ways (modi) of arranging
them, and one of these is called manner (modus aestheticus), the
other method (modus logicus );54 the difference between these two is
that the first has no standard other than the feeling that there is unity
in the exhibition lof the thoughts], whereas the second follows in [all
ofl this determinate principles; hence only the first applies to fine art.
But in art a product is called mannered only if the way the artist
conveys his idea aims at singularity and is not adequate to the idea.
Whatever is ostentatious (precious), stilted, and affected, with the
531Emphasis

added.]

541Cf. Ak. 355 br. n. 41.]

319

188

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

sole aim of differing from the ordinary (but without spirit), resembles
the behavior of those who, as we say, listen to themselves talking, or
who stand and walk as if they were on a stage so as to be gaped at,
behavior that always betrays a bungler.

§ SO

On the Combination of
Taste with Genius
in Products of Fine Art

320

If we ask which is more important in objects iSac hen ) of fine art,
whether they show genius or taste, then this is equivalent to asking
whether in fine art imagination is more important than judgment.
Now insofar as art shows genius it does indeed deserve to be called
inspired [geistreich), but it deserves to be called fine art only insofar
as it shows taste. Hence what we must look to above all, when we
judge art as fine art, is taste, at least as an indispensable condition
(conditio sine qua non). In order [for a work) to be beautiful, it is not
strictly necessary that i it) be rich and original in ideas, but it is
necessary that the imagination in its freedom be commensurate with
the lawfulness of the understanding. For if the imagination is left in
lawless freedom, all its riches (in ideas) produce nothing but nonsense,
and it is judgment that adapts the imagination to the understanding.
Taste, like the power of judgment in general, consists in disciplining (or training) genius. It severely clips its wings, and makes
it civilized, or polished; but at the same time it gives it guidance
as to how far and over what it may spread while still remaining
purposive. It introduces clarity and order into a wealth of thought,
and hence makes the ideas durable, fit for approval that is both
lasting and universal, and [hence I fit for being followed by others and
fit for an ever advancing culture. Therefore, if there is a conflict
between these two properties in a product. and something has to be
sacrificed, then it should rather be on the side of genius; and

§ SO. ON THE COMBINATION OF TASTE. . .

189

judgment, which in matters [Sac hen] of fine art bases its pronouncements on principles of its own, will sooner permit the imagination's
freedom and wealth to be impaired than that the understanding be
impaired.
Hence fine art would seem to require imagination, understanding,
spirit, and taste. 55

§ 51

On the Division
of the Fine Arts
We may in general call beauty (whether natural or artistic) the

expression of aesthetic ideas; the difference is that in the case of
beautiful [schOn] art the aesthetic idea must be prompted by a
concept of the object, whereas in the case of beautiful nature, mere
reflection on a given intuition, without a concept of what the object is
[meant] to be, is sufficient for arousing and communicating the idea
of which that object is regarded as the expression.
Accordingly, if we wish to divide the fine [schOn] arts, we can
choose for this, at least tentatively, no more convenient principle than
the analogy between the arts and the way people express themselves
in speech so as to communicate with one another as pedectly as
possible, namely, not merely as regards their concepts but also as
5~The first three abilities are first united by the fourth. Hume. in his historyS6
informs the English that, although they are in their works second to no other
people in the world as regards evidence of the first three properties considered
separately. in the property that unifies them they yet must yield to their neighbors. the
French. 57

56]History of Eng/and (1754--62).1

5711n the Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime (1764), Kant
says: "Among the peoples of this continent I think it is the [mlians and the French
who distinguish themselves from the rest by their feeling of the beautiful. but the
Germans, English. and Spanish who do 110 by their feeling for the sublime," (At,

11,243),/

190

321

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

regards their sensations. 58 Such expression consists in word. gesture. and tone (articulation, gesticulation, and modulation). Only
when these three ways of expressing himself are combined does the
speaker communicate completely. For in this way thought, intuition, and sensation are conveyed to others simultaneously and in
unison.
Hence there are only three kinds of fine arts: the art of speech.
visual art, and the art of the play of sensations (as outer sense
impressions). This division could also be arranged as a dichotomy: we
could divide fine art into the art of expressing thoughts and that of
expressing intuitions, and then divide the latter according to whether
it deals merely with form, or with matter (sensation). But in that case
the division would look too abstract, and less in keeping with ordinary concepts.
(1) The arts OF SPEECH are oratory and poetry. Oratory is the art
of engaging in a task of the understanding as lif it were} a free play of
the imagination; poetry is the art of conducting a free play of the
imagination as [if it were} a task of the understanding.
Thus the orator announces a task and, so as to entertain his
audience, carries it out as if it were merely a play with ideas. The
poet announces merely an entertaining play with ideas, and yet the
understanding gets as much out of this as if he had intended merely to
engage in its Iown] task. Now although the two cognitive powers,
sensibility and understanding, are indispensable to each other, still it
is difficult to combine them without lusing] constraint and without
their impairing each other; and yet their combination and hannony
must appear unintentional and spontaneous if the art is to be fine art.
Hence anything studied and painstaking must be avoided in art. For
fine art must be free art in a double sense: it must be free in the sense
of not being a mercenary occupation and hence a kind of labor,
whose magnitude can be judged, exacted, or paid for according to a
determinate standard; but fine art must also be free in the sense that,
though the mind is occupying itself, yet it feels satisfied and aroused
(independently of any pay) without looking to some other purpose.
58'fhe reader must not judge this sketch of a possible division of the fine arts as if it
were intended as a theory. It is onl}' one of a variety of attempts that can and should
still be made.

§ 51. ON THE DIVISION OF THE FINE ARTS

191

So while the orator provides something that he does not promise,
namely, an entertaining play of the imagination, yet he also takes
something away from what he promises and what is after all his
announced task, namely, that of occupying the understanding purposively. The poet, on the other hand, promises little and announces
a mere play with ideas; but he accomplishes something worthy of
[being called] a task, for in playing he provides food for the understanding and gives life to its concepts by means of his imagination.
Hence basically the orator accomplishes less than he promises, the
poet more.
(2) The VISUAL arts, i.e., the arts of expressing ideas in sensible
intuition (not by presentations of mere imagination that are aroused
by words), are those of sensible truth and those of sensible illusion.
The first kind is called plastic art, the second painting. Both express
ideas by making figures in space; plastic art offers figures to two
senses, sight and touch (though it offers them to touch without regard
to beauty), painting offers them only to sight. The aesthetic idea (the
archetype, or original image) underlies both of these arts, in the
imagination. But the figure that constitutes its expression (the ectype,
or derivative image) is given [differently in the two arts]: either with
corporeal extension (as the object itself exists), or as that extension is
pictured in the eye (i.e., as it appears in a plane). Differently put:
whatever the archetype is, [it] is referred-and this reference is made
a condition for reflection - either to an actual purpose or only [to} the
semblance of such a purpose.
To plastic art, the first kind of visual fine art, belong sculpture and
architecture. Sculpture is the art that exhibits concepts of things
corporeally, as they might exist in nature (though, as a fine art, it does
so with a concern for aesthetic purposiveness). Architecture is the art
of exhibiting concepts of things that are possible only through art,
things whose form does not have nature as its determining basis but
instead has a chosen purpose, and of doing so in order to carry out
that aim and yet also with aesthetic purposiveness. In architecture the
main concern is what use is to be made of the artistic object, and this
use is a condition to which the aesthetic ideas are confined. In
sculpture the main aim is the mere erpression of aesthetic ideas.
Thus statues of human beings, gods, animals, and so on belong to
sculpture; on the other hand, temples, magnificent buildings for

322

192

323

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

public gatherings, or again residences, triumphal arches, columns,
cenotaphs, and so on, erected as honorary memorials, belong to
architecture; we may even add to this all household furnishings (such
as the work of the cabinet maker and other such things that are
meant to be used). For what is essential in a work of architecture
is the product's adequacy for a certain use. On the other hand, a
mere piece of sculpture, made solely to be looked at, is meant
to be liked on its own account; though [in] such a work [sculptureJ exhibits [its ideal corporeally, yet the work is a mere imitation of nature-even though one that involves a concern for
aesthetic ideas-and so the sensible truth in it must not be carried
to the point where the work ceases to look like art and a product of
choice.
Painting, the second kind of visual art, exhibits sensible illusion
artistically connected with ideas. I would divide it into painting
proper, which renders nature beautifully, and landscape gardening,
which arranges nature's products beautifully. For painting proper
provides only the illusion of corporeal extension; landscape gardening,
while providing corporeal extension truthfully, provides only the illusion of the use and utility [the garden has I for purposes other than the
mere play of the imagination in the contemplation of its forms. 59
Landscape gardening consists in nothing but decorating the ground
with the same diversity [of things J (grasses, flowers, shrubs, and trees,
even bodies of water, hills, and dales) with which nature exhibits it to
our view, only arranged differently and commensurately with certain
ideas. But, like painting, this beautiful arrangement of corporeal
things is given only to the eye, because the sense of touch cannot
591t seems strange that landscape gardening could be regarded as a kind of painting
despite the fact that it exhibits its forms corporeally. It does, however, actually take its
forms from nature (at least at the very outset: the trees. shrubs, grasses, and flowers
from forest and field), and to this extent it is not art-whereas (say) plastic art is,
[though it also exhibits its forms corporeally]-and the arrangement it makes has as its
condition no concept of the object and its purpose (unlike the case of, say, architecture).
but merely the free play of the imagination in its contemplation. Hence to that extent it
does agree with merely aesthetic painting, which has no determinate topic (but by
means of light and shade makes an entertaining arrangement of air, land, and water).
All of this the reader should judge only as an attempt to combine the fine arts under
one principle-in this case the principle of the expression of aesthetic ideas (by
analogy with a language) - rather than regard it as a decisive derivation.

§ 51.

ON THE DIVISION OF THE FINE ARTS

193

provide a presentation of intuition of such a form. In painting in the
broad sense I would also include the decoration of rooms with
tapestries, brie-Ii-brae, and all beautiful furnishings whose sole function is to be looked at, as well as the art of dressing tastefully (with
rings, snuff-boxes, etc.). For a parterre with all sorts of flowers, a
room with all sorts of ornaments (including even ladies' attire) make a
kind of painting at some luxurious party, which, like paintings properly so called (those that are not intended to teach us, e.g., history or
natural science) are there merely to be looked at, using ideas to
entertain the imagination in free play, and occupying the aesthetic
power of judgment without a determinate purpose. No matter how
much the workmanship in all this decoration may vary mechanically,
requiring quite different artists, still any judgment of taste about what
is beautiful in this art is determined in the same way to this extent: it
judges only the forms (without regard for any purpose) as they offer
themselves to the eye, singly or in their arrangement, according to the
effect they have on the imagination. But how can we (by analogy)
include visual art under gesture in speech? What justifies this is Ithe
fact) that through these figures the artist's spirit gives corporeal
expression to what and how he has thought, and makes the thing itself
speak, as it were, by mime. This is a very common play of our fancy,
whereby to lifeless things is attributed a spirit that corresponds to
their form and speaks through them.
(3) The art of the BEAUTIFUL PLAY OF SENSATIONS (which are produced externally, while yet the play must be universally communicable)
can be concerned only with the ratio in the varying degrees of
attunement (tension) of the sense to which the sensations belong, i.e.,
with the sense's tone. And [given) this broad sense of the word ltone!.
we may divide this art into the artistic play of the sensations of
hearing and of sight,60 and hence into music and the art of color. It
is worthy of note that these two senses, besides having whatever
receptivity for impressions they require in order [for us) to obtain
concepts of external objects by means of these Isenses! , are also
capable of l having I a special sensation connected with that receptivity,
a sensation about which it is difficult to decide whether it is based on
6O[On hearing (including a reference to music) and sight, cf. the Anthropology,
§ § 18-19, Ak. VII, 155-57.,

324

194

325

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

sense or on reflection; and yet the ability to be affected in this way
may at times be lacking, even though the sense is not at all otherwise
deficient concerning its use for cognizing objects, or is perhaps even
exceptionally keen. In other words, we cannot say with certainty
whether a color or a tone (sound) is merely an agreeable sensation or
whether it is of itself already a beautiful play of [component) sensations and as such carries with it, as we judge it aesthetically, a
liking for its form. Just consider the rapidity of the vibrations of
light or, in the case of tones, of the air,61 which probably far
exceeds all our ability to judge directly in perception the ratio
in the temporal division [produced) by these vibrations. This fact
might well lead us to believe that we sense only the effect of these
vibrations on the elastic parts of our body, but that the temporal
division [produced I by them goes unnoticed and does not enter
into our judging, so that we connect only agreeableness with colors
and tones, not beauty in the composition of the colors and tones. We
must consider two points here, however. First, there is the mathematical one that can be made about the ratio of these vibrations in
music, and about our judging of this ratio; and it is plausible to judge
color contrast by analogy with music. Second. we can consult the
examples. rare though they are, of people who, with the best sight in
the world, have been unable to distinguish colors, or who, with the
keenest hearing, have been unable to distinguish tones. Moreover, for
those people who do have this ability, there is a definite [limit regarding their ability) to perceive a qualitative change (rather than merely
a change in the degree of the sensation) in the varying intensities
along the scale of colors or tones, and there is a similar limit on
the number of these varying intensities that can be distinguished
intelligibly. If we consider all of this, we may feel compelled to
regard sensation of color and tone not as mere sense impressions,
but as the effect of our judging of the form we find in the play of
many sensations. However, the difference that the one or the other
opinion would make to our judging of the basis of music would affect
the definition only in this: we would declare music either, as we
did above. to be the beautiful [schOn] play of sensations (of hearing). or [to be the play J of agreeable sensations. Only under the
first kind of explication will music be presented wholly as fine
61[Cf. Ak. 224 incl. br. n. 40.)

§ 51. ON THE DIVISION OF THE FINE ARTS

195

[schOn] art, while under the second it would be presented (at least in
part62 ) as agreeable art.

§ 52
On the Combination
of the Fine Arts
in One and the Same Product
Oratory may be combined with a pictorial exhibition of its subjects
and objects in a drama,' poetry may be combined with music in song,
and song at the same time with a pictorial (theatrical) exhibition in an
opera; the play of sensations in a piece of music may be combined
with the play of figures, [viz.,] in dance,' etc. Moreover, the exhibition
of the sublime may, insofar as it belongs to fine art, be combined with
beauty in a tragedy in verse, in a didactic poem, or in an oratorio; and
in these combinations fine [schOn I art is even more artistic. But
whether it is also more beautiful [schon] (given how great a variety of
different kinds of liking cross one another) may in some of these cases be
doubted. But what is essential in all fine art is the form that is purposive
for our observation and judging, rather than the matter of sensation
(i.e., charm or emotion), For the pleasure we take in purposive form is
also culture, and it attunes the spirit to ideas, and so makes it receptive
to more such pleasure and entertainment; in the case of the matter of
62[The point of this qualification (similarly for the word 'wholly,' earlier in the same
sentence) seems to be this: If we could not directly perceive and "notice" the form that
an individual tone or color has in the play of its (component) sensations (as discussed
in the first half of the paragraph), then the form in a composition from "many" such
tones or colors could be (fine art and) beautiful, rather than just agreeable, only "in
part": namely, to the extent that this form consists of relations other than the ratios
between the (not directly perceived) numbers of vibrations in the individual tones or
colors. On the other hand, this leaves us with the difficulty that (in the second half of
the paragraph, up to the last sentence) Kant seems to be saying that if we do not notice
the form of an individual tone or color then we could not notice any form in a
composition from many such tones or colors and hence could connect with this
composition "only" agreeableness, "not beauty."]

326

196

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

sensation, however, the aim is merely enjoyment, which leaves nothing
behind as an idea and makes the spirit dull, the object gradually disgusting, and the mind dissatisfied with itself and moody because it is
conscious that in reason's judgment its altunement is contrapurposive.
Unless we connect the fine arts, closely or remotely, with moral
ideas, which alone carry with them an independent liking, the second
of the two alternatives just mentioned is their ultimate fate. They
serve in that case only for our diversion, which we need all the more
in proportion as we use it to dispel the mind's dissatisfaction with
itself, with the result that we increase still further our uselessness and
dissatisfaction with ourselves. For the first of the two alternatives
[culture, and the spirit's altunement to ideas], it is generally the
beauties of nature that are most beneficial, if we are habituated early
to observe, judge, and admire them.

§53
Comparison of the
Aesthetic Value
of the Various Fine Arts
Among all the arts poetry holds the highest rank. (It owes its origin
almost entirely to genius and is least open to guidance by precept or
examples.) It expands the mind: for it sets the imagination free, and
offers us, from among the unlimited variety of possible forms that
harmonize with a given concept, though within that concept's limits,
that form which links the exhibition of the concept with a wealth of
thought to which no linguistic expression is completely adequate, and
so poetry rises aesthetically to ideas. Poetry fortifies the mind: for it
lets the mind feel its ability-free, spontaneous, and independent of
natural determination-to contemplate and judge phenomenal nature
as having [nachl aspects that nature does not on its own offer in
experience either to sense or to the understanding, and hence poetry

§ 53. COMPARISON OF THE AESTHETIC VALUE. . .

197

lets the mind feel its ability to use nature on behalf of and, as it were,
as a schema of the supersensible. Poetry plays with illusion, which it
produces at will, and yet without using illusion to deceive us, for
poetry tells us itself that its pursuit is mere play, though this play can
still be used purposively by the understanding for its business. Oratory [on the other hand I, insofar as this is taken to mean the art of
persuasion (ars oratoria), i.e., of deceiving by means of a beautiful
illusion, rather than mere excellence of speech (eloquence and style),
is a dialectic that borrows from poetry only as much as the speaker
needs in order to win over people's minds for his own advantage
before they judge for themselves, and so make their judgment unfree.
Hence it cannot be recommended either for the bar or for the pulpit.
For when civil laws or the rights of individual persons are at issue, or
the enduring instruction and determination of minds to a correct
knowledge and a conscientious observance of their duty are at issue,
then it is beneath the dignity of so important a task to display even a
trace of extravagant wit and imagination, let alone any trace of the art
of persuading people and of biasing them for the advantage of someone or other. For although this art can at times be employed for aims
that are legitimate and laudable intrinsically, it is still made reprehensible by the fact that [by dealing with those issuesl in this way [it)
corrupts the maxims and attitudes of the subjects, even if objectively
the action [they are persuaded to perform) is lawful; for it is not
enough that we do what is right, but we must also perform it solely on
the ground that it is right. Moreover, the mere distinct concept of
these kinds of human affairs has, even on its own, sufficient influence
on human minds to obviate the need to bring in and apply the
machinery of persuasion as well-it is enough if the concept is
exhibited vividly in examples and if there is no offense against
the rules of euphony of speech or the rules of propriety in the
expression of ideas of reason (these two together constitute excellence of speech). Indeed, since the machinery of persuasion can
be used equally well to palliate and cloak vice and error, it cannot
quite eliminate our lurking suspicion that we are being artfully
hoodwinked. In poetry [on the other hand 1 everything proceeds
with honesty and sincerity. It informs us that it wishes to engage in
mere entertaining play with the imagination, namely, one that harmonizes in form with the laws of the understanding; it does not seek

327

198

328

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

to sneak up on the understanding and ensnare it by a sensible
exhibition.63
After poetry, If our concern is with charm and mental agitation,65
I would place the art which is closer to it than any other art of speech,
and which can also be combined with it very naturally: the art of
music. For though it speaks through nothing but sensations without
concepts, so that unlike poetry it leaves us with nothing to meditate
about, it nevertheless does agitate the mind more diversely and
intensely, even if merely temporarily. However, it is admittedly more
a matter of enjoyment than of culture (the play of thought that it
arouses incidentally is merely the effect of an association that is
mechanical, as it were), and in reason's judgment it has less value than
any other of the fine arts. That is why, like any enjoyment, it needs to
be changed fairly often and cannot bear several repetitions without
making us weary. Its charm, so generally [allgemeinJ communicable,
seems to rest on this: Every linguistic expression has in its context a
tone appropriate to its meaning. This tone indicates, more or less, an
affect 66 of the speaker and in tum induces the same affect in the
listener too, where it then conversely arouses the idea which in
language we express in that tone [Ton 1. And just as modulation is. as
confess that a beautiful poem has always given me pure delight I Vergniigenl.
whereas reading the best speech of a Roman public orator. or of a contemporary
parliamentary speaker or preacher. has always been mingled with the disagreeable
feeling of disapproval of an insidious art, an art that knows how. in important matters.
to move people like machines to a judgment that must lose all its weight with them
when they meditate about it calmly. Rhetorical power and excellence of speech (which
together constitute rhetoric) belong to fine art; but oratory (ars aratoria), the art of
using people's weaknesses for one's own aims (no matter how good these may be in
intention or even in fact), is unworthy of any respect whatsoever. Moreover, both in
Athens and in Rome, it came to its peak only at a time when the state was hastening to
its ruin, and any true patriotic way of thinking was extinct. Someone who sees the
issues clearly and has a command of language in its richness and purity, as well as a
fertile imagination proficient in exhibiting his ideas and a heart vividly involved in the
true good, is the vir bonus dicendi peritus Ithe excellent man and expert speakerl. the
orator who speaks without art but with great force. as Cicero would have him,6i even
though he himself did not always remain faithful to this ideal,
631 must

328

b~Wilhelm Windelband notes (Ak. V, 529) that it was not Cicero who said this. but
(Marcus Porcius) Cato (the Elder, "the Censor." 234-149 B.c.).1

6S[Mental agitation (see Ak. 258. 334) is what emotion involves; cf. Ale. 245 and 226.]
66ICf. At. 272 n. 39.1

§ 53. COMPARISON OF THE AESTHETIC VALUE. . .

199

it were, a universal [aligemeinJ language of sensations that every
human being can understand, so the art of music [Tonkunstl employs
this language all by itself in its full force, namely. as a language of
affects; in this way it communicates to everyone [allgemein]. according
to the law of association, the aesthetic ideas that we naturally connect
with such affects. But since these aesthetic ideas are not concepts,
not determinate thoughts, the form of the arrangement of these
sensations (harmony and melody), which takes the place of the form
of a language, only serves to express, by means of [the I proportioned
attunement of the sensations, the aesthetic idea of a coherent whole
of an unspeakable wealth of thought, and to express it in conformity
with a certain theme that is the prevalent affect in the piece. (Since in
the case of tones this attunement rests on the numerical relation of air
vibrations that occur in uniform intervals of time-inasmuch as the
tones are combined simultaneously or successively [in harmony and
melody, respectivelyJ-it can be brought under certain rules mathematically.) Although we do not present this mathematical form through
determinate concepts, to such form alone is attached the liking that,
when we merely reflect on such a multitude of concomitant or
consecutive sensations, is connected with their play, as a condition.
valid for everyone, of this play's beauty; and it is with regard to this
form. alone that taste can claim the right to pronounce in advance
upon the judgment of everyone.
But mathematics certainly does not play the slightest part in the
charm and mental agitation that music produces. Rather, it is only the
indispensable condition (conditio sine qua non) of that ratio of the
impressions, in their combination as well as change, which enables us
to comprehend67 them; and thus they are kept from destroying one
another, so that they harmonize in such a way as to produce. by means
of affects consonant with [this ratio J, a continuous agitation and quickening of the mind, and thus they produce an appealing self-enjoyment.
If, on the other hand, we assess the value of the fine arts by the
culture [or cultivation! they provide for the mind, taking as our
standard the expansion of those powers that have to come together in
the power of judgment in order for cognition to arise, then music,
since it merely plays with sensations, has the lowest place among the
fine arts Gust as it may have the highest among those [whose value I
67[Zusammen/assen; cf. Ak. 252 br. n. 14.)

329

200

330

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

we assess by their agreeableness as well). So in this regard the visual arts
are far ahead of it; for by putting the imagination int<? a free play that
yet is also commensurate with the understanding, they carry on a task
at the same time: they bring about a product that serves the concepts
of the understanding as an enduring vehicle, a vehicle that commends
itself to these very concepts, for furthering their union with sensibility
and thereby the urbanity, as it were, of the higher cognitive powers.
The two kinds of art pursue quite different courses: music proceeds
from sensations to indeterminate ideas; the visual arts from determinate ideas to sensations. The latter [arts I produce a lasting impression,
the former only a transitory one. The imagination can recall the
lasting [impressions I and agreeably entertain itself with them; but the
transitory ones either are extinguished entirely or, if the imagination
involuntarily repeats them, they are more likely to be irksome to us than
agreeable. Moreover, music has a certain lack of urbanity about it. For,
depending mainly on the character of its instruments, it extends its
influence (on the neighborhood) farther than people wish, and so, as it
were, imposes itself on others and hence impairs the freedom of those
outside of the musical party. The arts that address themselves to the eye
do not do this; for if we wish to keep out their impressions. we need
merely tum our eyes away. The situation here is almost the same as with
the enjoyment [Ergotzung J produced by an odor that spreads far. Someone who pulls his perfumed handkerchief from his pocket gives all those
next to and around him a treat whether they want it or not, and compels
them, if they want to breathe, to enjoy [geniejJenJ at the same time,68
which is also why this habit has gone out of fashion. 69 Among the visual
681Cf. the Anthropology, Ak. VII, 158.1
69Those who have recommended that the singing of hymns be included at famiJy
prayer have failed to consider that by such a noisy (and precisely because of this
usually pharisaical) worship they impose great hardship on the public. since they
compel their neighbors to either join in the singing or put aside whatever they were
thinking about.10
70ICf. William Wallace, Kant (Philadelphia: Lippincott, n.d.l, p_ 42: "Kant. whose house
stood not far from the castle, was disturbed in his studies at one period by the noisy devotional exercises of the prisoners in the adjoining jail. In a letter to Hippel [Theodor
Gottlieb von Hippel, 1741-96, German writer and head mayor of KBnigsbergl. accordingly,
he suggested the advantage of closing the windows during the hymn-singings, and added
that the warders of the prison might probably be directed to accept less than sonorous
and neighbor-annoying chants as evidence of the penitent spirit of their captives." I

§ 53. COMPARISON OF THE AESTHETIC VALUE. . .

201

arts I would give priority to painting, partly because it is the art of
design and as such underlies all the remaining visual arts, partly
because it can penetrate much further into the region of ideas, and in
conformity with them can also expand the realm of intuition more
than the other visual arts can do.

§ 54

Comment
As we have frequently shown, there is an essential difference between
what we like when we merely judge it, and what gratifies us (i.e.,
what we like in sensation). The second is something that, unlike the
first, we cannot require of everyone. Gratification (even if its cause
happens to lie in ideas) seems always to consist in a feeling that a
person's life is being furthered generally [gesamt], and [this feeling]
thus includes furtherance of his bodily well-being, i.e., his health. 71
To this extent, then, when Epicurus claimed that all gratification is
basically bodily sensation,72 he was perhaps not mistaken but only
misunderstood himself in including intellectual and even practical
liking among the gratifications. If we bear this latter distinction in
mind, we can explain how a gratification can be disliked by the very
person who feels it (for example the joy felt by a needy but upright
person at being made the heir of his loving but stingy father), or how
profound grief may yet be liked by the person suffering it (as a
widow's sadness over the death of her worthy husband 7), or how a
71[ Health matters are discussed extensively in the Anthropology, Ak. VII; they are
also discussed in the Streit der Fakultiiten (Dispute among the IUniversity:S 1Schools
[RlkultatenJ), Ak. VII, 95-1 Hi, and in Kant's speech, De medicina corporis. quae
philosophorum est (On Medicine of the Body, as far as This IDiscipline I Belongs to
Philosophy) (1788), Ak. XV, 939-53.1

72\Cf. Ak. 266, end of br. n. 33.)
73!Cf. the Anthropology, Ak. VII, 262: ..... [AI widow who, as we say, will not let
anyone console her, i.e., stop the flow of her tears, is fostering her health, even though she
does not know this and actually does not want to know it." Cf. also ibid. At. VII, 237.)

331

202

332

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

gratification may be liked in addition (as our gratification in the
sciences we pursue), or how a pain (such as hatred, envy, or a thirst
for revenge) may be disliked in addition. The liking or disliking in
these cases is based on reason and is the same as approval or
disapproval. Gratification and pain, on the other hand. can rest only
on the feeling of being well or unwell (whatever the cause), oron the
prospect of possibly being so.
Any changing free play of sensations (that are not based on an
intention) gratifies us, because it furthers our feeling of health, and it
does not matter whether in our rational judgment we like the object
of this play, or like this gratification itself. Moreover, this gratification
can increase to the level of an affect even though we are not taking an
interest in the object itself, at least not one proportionate to the
affect's degree. We may divide such play into the play [or game I 01
chance, the play of tones [in music), and the play of thought [or of
wit). The first of these requires an interest, whether in vanity or in
our own profit, but one far less strong than the interest we take in the
manner according to which we pursue it. The play of tones requires
merely a change of sensations. each of which relates to affect. but
without having the strength [Grad] of an affect, and arouses aesthetic
ideas. The play of thought arises merely from the change of presentations in judgment; although it produces no thought that carries any
interest with it, it does quicken the mind.
How gratifying such play must be, without our having to assume an
underlying interested intention, is shown by all our evening parties;
for without play almost none of them could keep itself entertained.
But many affects are at play there-hope, fear, joy, anger. and scorn,
alternating constantly-and are so lively that they amount to an inner
motion that seems to further all the vital processes in the body, as is
proved by how sprightly the mind becomes as a result, even though
nothing has been won or learned. But since the play of chance is not
beautiful play, we shall here set it aside. But music and something to
laugh about are two kinds of play with aesthetic ideas, or for that
matter with presentations of the understanding, by which in the end
nothing is thought; it is merely the change they involve that still
enables them to gratify us in a lively way. This shows rather clearly
that in both of them the quickening is merely bodily, even though it is
aroused by ideas of the mind, and shows that all the gratification [we
find I at a lively party, extolled as being so refined and inspired,
consists [merely) in the feeling of health that is produced by an

§ 54. COMMENT

203

intestinal agitation corresponding to such play. It is not our judging
of the harmony we find in tones or in flashes of wit-this harmony,
with its beauty, merely serves as a necessary vehicle-but the furtherance of the vital processes in the body, the affect that agitates
the intestines and the diaphragm, in a word the feeling of health
(which we cannot feel without such prompting), which constitutes
the gmtification we find in the fact that we can reach the body
through the soul as well, and use the soul as the physician of the body.
In music this play proceeds from bodily sensation to aesthetic ideas
(of the objects of affects), and from these back again [to the body),
but with the force exerted on the body concentrated [vereinigt). In
jest74 (which, just as much as music, deserves to be considered more
an agreeable than a fine art) the play starts from thoughts, all of
which. as far as they seek sensible expression, engage the body also.
In the exhibition involved in jest, the understanding, failing to find
what it expected, suddenly relaxes, so that we feel the effect of this
slackening in the body by the vibration of our organs, which helps
restore their equilibrium and has a beneficial influence on our health.
Whatever is to arouse lively. convulsive laughter must contain something absurd (hence something that the understanding cannot like for
its own sake). Laughter is an affect that arises if a tense expectation is
transformed into nothing. This same transformation certainly does
not gladden the understanding. but indirectly it still gladdens us in a
very lively way for a moment. So the cause of this must consist both in
the influence that the presentation has on the body and in the body's
reciprocal effect on the mind-but not because the presentation is
objectively an object of our gratification (for how could an expectation that turned out to be false gratify us?), but solely because it is a
mere play of presentations which produces in the body an equilibrium of the vital forces.
Suppose someone tells us this story: An Indian at an Englishman's
table in Surat saw a bottle of ale being opened, and all the beer,
turned to froth, rushing out. The Indian. by repeated exclamations,
showed his great amazement.- Well. what's so amazing in that? asked
the Englishman.-Oh. but I'm not amazed at its coming out, replied
the Indian, but at how you managed to get it all in. - This makes us
laugh. and it gives us hearty pleasure. This is not because, say, we
think we are smarter than this ignorant man, nor are we laughing at
74!Cf. the Anthropology, § 79, Ak. VII, 261-{)S.]

333

204

334

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

anything else here that is to our liking and that we noticed through
our understanding. It is rather that we had a tense expectation that
suddenly vanished, [transformed] into nothing. Or suppose that the
heir of a rich relative wants to arrange for him a very solemn funeral
service, but complains that things are not quite working out: For (he
says), the more money I give my mourners to look grieved. the more
cheerful they look. - This evokes ringing laughter in us, and the
reason is that we have an expectation that is suddenly transformed
into nothing. We must be careful to note that it must be transformed
into nothing, not into the positive opposite of an expected object, for
that is always something and may frequently grieve us. For if someone
tells us a story that arouses great expectation in us, but at the close we
see immediately that it is untrue, this arouses our dislike. An example
of this is the story about people whose hair is said to have turned grey
overnight from great grief. Suppose, on the other hand, that in
response to a story like this some rogue gives us a longwinded account
of the grief of some merchant who, during his return trip from India
to Europe, with all his fortune in merchandise, was forced by a heavy
storm to throw everything overboard, and whose grief was such that it
made his wig turn grey that very night.-This will make us laugh; and
it gratifies us because we treat our own mistake in reaching for some
object that is otherwise indifferent to us, or rather the idea we had
been pursuing, as we might a ball: we continue to knock it back and
forth for a while, even though all we mean to do is seize [it} and hold
on to [itl. What arouses our gratification here is not that we are
dismissing sumeune as a liar ur a fuol. For even on its own account the
latter story, told with an assumed seriousness, would make a party
roar with laughter, whereas dismissing someone as a liar or a fool
would not ordinarily merit attention.
It is noteworthy that in all such cases the joke must contain something that can deceive us for a moment. That is why, when the
illusion vanishes, Itransformed] into nothing, the mind looks at the
illusion once more in order to give it another try, and so by a
rapid succession of tension and relaxation the mind is bounced
back and forth and made to sway; and such swaying, since whatever was stretching the string, as it were, snapped suddenly (rather
than by a gradual slackening), must cause a mental agitation and
an inner bodily agitation in harmony with it, which continues involuntarily, and which gives rise to fatigue while yet also cheering us
up (these are the effects of a[n inner) motion conducive to our health).

§ 54. COMMENT

205

For if we assume that all our thoughts are, in addition, in a harmonious connection with some agitation in the body's organs, then we can
pretty well grasp how, as the mind suddenly shifts alternately from
one position to another in order to contemplate its object, there
might be a corresponding alternating tension and relaxation of the
elastic parts of our intestines that is communicated to the diaphragm
(such as ticklish people feel). The lungs, meanwhile, rapidly and
intermittently expel air, and so give rise to an agitation that is conducive to our health. It is this agitation alone, and not what goes on in
the mind, that is the actual cause of our gratification in a thought [by)
which [we I basically present nothing. Voltaire said that heaven has
given us two things to counterbalance the many hardships in life:
hope and sleep.75 He might have added laughter, if only the means
for arousing it in reasonable people were as easy to come by, and
if the wit or whimsical originality needed for it were not just as
rare, as the talent is common for people to write, as mystical ponderers do, things that break your head, or to write, as geniuses do,
things that break your neck, or to write, as sentimental novelists do
(also, I suppose, sentimental moralists), things that break your heart.
It seems to me, therefore, that Epicurus may certainly be granted that
all gratification. even if it is prompted by concepts that arouse aesthetic ideas, is animal (i.e., bodily) sensation. For granting this does
not in the least impair the intellectual76 feeling of respect for moral
75[Henriade. chant 7.J
76( Geistig. The Geist here is obviously not the "spirit in an aesthetic sense," the "animat-

ing principle in the mind," our "ability to exhibit aesthetic ideas" (§ 49, Ak. 313). Since the
qualification, 'in an aesthetic sense,' is not repeated anywhere as Kant goes on to discuss
that kind of Geist. it would be misleading if 'spirit' were used again to render 'Geirt'in a
non aesthetic sense (except where the context clarifies what is meant, as it does, e.g., at
Ak. 466 and 467). 'Intellect' seems closest to what Kant has in mind here, in the broad
sense in which Kant has been using the term 'intellektuell' all along in this work. As for
the present case of intellectual feeling. it is true that in one place (Critique of Practical
Reason, Ak. V, 117) Kant says that 'intellectual (intellektuelll feeling' would be a
contradiction; for "811 feeling is sensible" (ibid., Ak. V, 75). Yet elsewhere he does talk
about intellectual feeling; he speaks of "intellectual [intellektuelll pleasure" (Anthropology.
Ak. VII. 230), and of "intellectual (intellektuellJ liking" (above, Ak. 271 and 230, and
below, Ak. 366). This seeming inconsistency can be resolved as follows. In calling a
feeling (the feeling of respect) intellectual, a qualification must be taken as understood:
this feeling too, qua feeling, is sensible, a receptivity, though one that does not have its
own sense (see the Metaphysics of Morals. Ak. VI, 400, and cf. above, Ak. 291 br. n.
19); but we may still call it intellectual insofar as the basis that gives rire to it is (rational
and as such) intellectual rather than sensible (Critique of Practical Reason, Ak. V,73).1

335

206

336

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

ideas. which is not gratification but self·esteem (of the humanity
within us) elevating us above the need for gratification-and indeed
does not impair even the less noble feeling of taste.
Something composed of both of these 1the bodily and the intellectual
feeling] is found in naivete. which is the eruption of the sincerity that
originally was natural to humanity and which is opposed to the art of
dissimulation that has become our second nature. We laugh at such
simplicity as does not yet know how to dissemble. and yet we also
rejoice in the natural simplicity here thwarting that an of dissimulation.
We were expecting the usual custom, the artificial utterance carefully
aimed at creating a beautiful illusion-and 10! there is uncorrupted,
innocent nature, which we did not at all expect to find, and which is
displayed by someone who also had no intention of doing so. Here the
beautiful but false illusion, which usually has great significance in our
judgment. is suddenly transformed into nothing, so that, as it were,
the rogue within ourselves is exposed; and this is what agitates the
mind alternately in two opposite directions, and is what also gives the
body a wholesome shaking. But lthe factI that something infinitely
better than all accepted custom, viz., integrity and character lLauterksit
der Denkungsart] (or at least the predisposition to it), is after all not
wholly extinct in human nature does mingle seriousness and esteem
with this play of the power of judgment. But since this phenomenon
manifests itself only for a little while, and since the art of dissimulation soon draws its veil over it again, regret is mingled in at the same
time. This regret is an emotion of tenderness which, since it is play,
can readily be combined with this sort of goodnatured laughter, and
usually is in fact 50 combined with it. At the same time, the person
who provides the food for this laughter is usually compensated for his
embarrassment at not yet being shrewd in the [usual] human fashion
by means of the tenderness involved. An art of being naive is therefore a contradiction; but there is certainly the possibility of presenting
naivete in a fictional character, and then it is fine, though also rare,
art. We must not confuse naivete with homely simplicity, which
refrains from covering nature over with artificiality only because it
does not understand the art of social relations very welL
The whimsical manner may also be included with whatever is cheerful and closely akin to the gratification derived from laughter, and
which belongs to originality of intellect, but which certainly does not
belong to the talent for fine art. For whimsicality. in its favorable

§ 54. COMMENT

207

sense, means the talent enabling us to put ourselves at will into a
certain mental disposition, in which everything is judged in a way
quite different from the usual one (even vice versa), but yet is judged
in conformity with certain principles of reason [present) in such a
mental attunement. A person who is subject to such changes involuntarily is moody [launisch). But someone who can adopt them at will
and purposively (so as to enliven his description of something by
means of a contrast arousing laughter) is called whimsical [launig),77
as is also the way he conveys [his thoughts]. However, this manner
belongs more to agreeable than to fine art, because the object of fine
art must always show itself as having some dignity; and so an exhibition of it requires a certain seriousness, just as taste does when it
judges the object.

77/0n moodiness vs. whimsicality, d. the Anthropology, § 62, Ak. VIl, 235.1

DIVISION II
DIALECTIC OF
AESTHETIC
JUDGMENT
§ 55
If a power of judgment is to be dialectical, then it must first of all
engage in reasoning. i.e., its judgments must claim universality and
must do so a priori;! for a dialectic consists in the opposition of such
judgments. So when aesthetic judgments of sense (about the agreeable and disagreeable) are incompatible. this incompatibility is not
dialectical. Even a conflict between different people's judgments of
taste does not constitute a dialectic insofar as each person appeals
merely to his own taste, since [to that extent) no one seeks to make his
judgment a universal rule. Hence we are left with only one concept of
a dialectic that could pertain to taste: that of a dialectic of the
critique of taste (rather than of taste itself) concerning the principles
of this critique. For when we consider the basis that makes judgments
lWe may designate a reasoning [vemunftelndl judgment (iudicium ratiocinans) to be
any judgment proclaiming itself to be universal, hence being capable of serving as the
major premise of a syllogism. But a judgment may be called a rational judgment
(judicium ratiQcinatum ) only if we think it as the conclusion of a syllogism and hence
as having an a priori basis. 2
2[[n the Critique of Pure Reason (A 311 = B 368), Kant distinguishes "conceptus
ratiocinati (correctly inferred concepts)" from "conceptus ratiocinantes (reasoning
[vemilnftelnde I concepts)," which he characterizes (differently and rather more negatively
than the reasoning judgments here) as concepts "obtained surreptitiously by the
semblance [Schein I of an inference."]

209

337

210

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

of taste as such possible, we find that concerning this basis conflicting
concepts arise naturally and inevitably. Hence there is only one way
for a transcendental critique of taste to include a part that can be
called a dialectic of the aesthetic power of judgment-namely, if we
find that the principles of this power give rise to an antinomy making
doubtful whether this power is lawful and hence also whether such a
power is intrinsically possible.

338

§56

Presentation of the

Antinomy of Taste
There are two commonplaces about taste. The following proposition
contains the first of these and is used by everyone who lacks taste but
tries to escape censure: Everyone has hir own taste. That amounts to
saying that the basis determining a judgment of taste is merely subjective (gratification or pain), and that such judgments have no right to
other people's necessary assent.
The second commonplace about taste, which is used even by those
who grant judgments of taste the right to speak validly for everyone,
is this: There is no disputing about taste. That amounts to saying that,
even though the basis determining II judgment of taste may be objective,
that basis still cannot be brought to determinate concepts; and hence
even proofs do not allow us to decide anything about such a judgment,
although we can certainly quarrel about it, and rightly so. For though
disputing and quarreling are alike in that Iwe J try to produce agreement between judgments by means of the mutual resistance between
them, disputing is different inasmuch as here we hope to produce this
agreement according to determinate concepts, by basing a proof on
them, so that we assume that the judgment is based on objective
concepts,' and in cases where we think that this cannot be done, we
judge that disputing also is impossible.
It is easy to see that between these two commonplaces a proposition is missing. This proposition is not in common use as a proverb,

§56. PRESENTATION OF THE ANTINOMY OF TASTE

211

but everyone still has it in mind. It is this: One can quarrel about taste
(though one cannot dispute about it). This proposition, however,
implies the opposite of the first proposition above [Everyone has his
own taste I. For if it is granted that we can quarrel about something,
then there must be some hope for us to arrive at agreement about it, and
so we must be able to count on the judgment's having bases that do not
have merely private validity and hence are not merely subjective. But
the above principle, Everyone has his own taste, says the direct opposite.
Hence the following antinomy emerges concerning the principle of
taste:
(1) Thesis: A judgment of taste is not based on concepts; for
otherwise one could dispute about it (decide by means of proofs).
(2) Antithesis: A judgment of taste is based on concepts; for
otherwise, regardless of the variation among [such judgments), one
could not even so much as quarrel about them (lay claim to other
people's necessary assent to one's judgment).

§ 57

Solution of the
Antinomy of Taste
There is only one way for us to eliminate the conflict between the
mentioned principles,3 on which we base all our judgments of taste
(and which are nothing but the two peculiarities of a judgment of
taste4 that were set out in the analytic); We must show that the
concept to which we refer the object in such judgments is understood
in different senses in those two maxims lor principles) of the aesthetic
power of judgment, and show that it is necessary for our transcendental power of judgment to adopt both these senses (or points of view in
judging) but that even the illusion arising from our confusion of the
two is natural and hence unavoidable.
31The thesis and antithesis.]
4rSee § 31. Ak. 281, and § § 32-33, Ak. 281-85.1

339

212

340

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

A judgment of taste must refer to some concept or other, for
otherwise it could not possibly lay claim to necessary validity for
everyone. And yet it must not be provable from a concept, because,
while some concepts can be determined, others cannot, but are
intrinsically both indeterminate and indeterminable. Concepts of the
understanding are of the first kind: for them there can be a corresponding sensible intuition whose predicates determine them. On the
other hand, reason has a concept of the second kind: the transcendental concept of the supersensible underlying all that intuition, so that
we cannot determine this concept any further theoretically.
Now, on the other hand, a judgment of taste does deal with objects
of sense-though not so as to determine a concept of these objects
for the understanding, since it is not a cognitive judgment. Rather,
this judgment is a singular intuitive presentation referred to the
feeling of pleasure, and hence is only a private judgment; and to this
extent its validity would be restricted to the judging individual: The
object is an object of likingfor me;5 the same may not apply to others:
Everyone bas his own taste.
And yet there can be no doubt that in a judgment of taste the
presentation of the object (and at the same time of the subject as
well) is referred more broadly [i.e., beyond ourselves], and this broader
reference is our basis for extending such judgments [and treating
them] as necessary for everyone. Hence this extension must be based
on some concept or other; but this concept must be one that no
intuition can determine, that does not permit us to cognize anything
and hence does not permit us to prove a judgment of taste; such
a mere concept is reason's pure concept of the supersensible6
underlying the object (as well as underlying the judging subject) as an
object of sense and hence as appearance. For unless we assumed
that a judgment of taste relies on some concept or other, we could
not save its claim to universal validity. Alternatively, if a judgment
of taste were based on a concept of the understanding, such as
that of perfection, even though merely a confused concept of per5[Cf. § 7, Ak. 212-13.)

;On Kant's mysterious switch from the indeterminate concept of nature's purposiveness
(Ak. 180-92 and the third Moment, Ak. 219-36) to the (indeterminate) concept of the
supersensible (specifically the supersensible as basis of that same purposiveness of
nature), see "Problem In in the Translator's Introduction.lxii-Ix;;i and xciv-xcviii.J

§ 57. SOLUTION OF THE ANTINOMY OF TASTE

213

fection, to which we could add the sensible intuition of the beautiful
as corresponding to it, then it would be possible at least intrinsically
to base a judgment of taste on proofs; but that contradicts the
thesis.
However, all contradiction disappears if I say this: A judgment of
taste is based on a concept (the concept of a general basis of nature's
subjective purposiveness for our power of judgment), but this concept does not allow us to cognize and prove anything concerning the
object because it is intrinsically indeterminable and inadequate for
cognition; and yet this same concept does make the judgment of taste
valid for everyone, because (though each person's judgment is singular and directly accompanies his intuition) the basis that determines
the judgment lies, perhaps, in the concept of what may be considered
the supersensible substrate of humanity.
What is needed to solve an antinomy is only the possibility that two
seemingly [dem Scheine nach) conflicting propositions are in fact not
contradictory but are consistent, even though it would surpass our
cognitive power to explain how the concept involved Ii.e., how what
the concept stands for) is possible. Showing this [consistency I will
also allow us to grasp [the facti that and Ithe reason) why this illusion
[Schein) is natural and unavoidable for human reason, and why this
illusion remains so even though it ceases to deceive us once we have
resolved the seeming contradiction.
For what gives rise to this antinomy is [the fact) that we treat the
concept presupposed by the universal validity of a judgment as if that
concept had the same meaning in the two conflicting judgments, and
yet two opposed predicates are asserted of it. Hence the thesis should
instead read: A judgment of taste is not based on determinate concepts;
but the antithesis should read: A judgment of taste is indeed based on
a concept, but on an indeterminate one (namely, that of the supersensible substrate of appearances); and then there would be no conflict
between the two.
Eliminating this conflict between the claims and counterclaims of
taste is the best we can do. It is absolutely impossible to provide a
determinate, objective principle of taste that would allow us to guide,
to test, and to prove its judgments, because then they would not be
judgments of taste. 7 As for the subjective principle-i.e., the inde7!Cf. §34, Ak. 285-86.1

341

214

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

terminate idea of the supersensible in us-as the sole key for solving
the mystery of this ability [i.e., taste I concealed from us even as to its
sources, we can do no more than point to it; but there is nothing we
can do that would allow us to grasp it any further.
The antinomy I have set forth and settled here is based on the
concept of taste in the proper sense, i.e., as an aesthetic power of
judgment that merely reflects; and I reconciled the two seemingly
conflicting principles [by showing] that they may both be troe, and
that is all we need. If, on the other hand, we assumed, as some do,
that the basis determining taste is agreeableness (because the presentation underlying a judgment of taste is singular), or, as others would
have it, that it is the principle of perfection (because the judgment is
universally valid), with the definition of taste formulated accordingly,
then the result would be an antinomy that we could not possibly settle
except by showing that the two opposed (but opposed [as contraries,] not as mere contradictories) propositions are both false; 8 and
that would prove the concept underlying both of them to be selfcontradictory. So we see that the elimination of the antinomy of
aesthetic judgment proceeds along lines similar to the solution of the
antinomies of pure theoretical reason in the Critique [0/ Pure
Reason]. 9 and we see here too-as well as in the Critique 0/ Practical Reason lO-that the antinomies compel us against our will to look
beyond the sensible to the supersensible as the point [where] all our a
priori powers are reconciled, since that is the only alternative left to
us for bringing reason into harmony with itself.

Comment I
342

Since we so frequently find occasion in transcendental philosophy to
distinguish ideas from concepts of the understanding, it may be useful
to introduce technical terms to mark the difference. I think there will
be no objection if I propose a few. Ideas, in the broadest sense, are
8[ Cf. the Logic, Ak. IX, 71. J
9[For these antinomies and their solution, see A 405-567 .. B 432-595.J
IO[Ak. V, 107-19.J

§ 57. SOLUTION OF THE ANTINOMY OF TASTE

215

presentations referred to an object according to a certain principle
(subjective or objective) but are such that they can still never become
cognition of an object. There are two kinds of ideas. One of these is
referred to an intuition, according to a merely subjective principle of
the mutual harmony of the cognitive powers (imagination and understanding); and these ideas are called aesthetic. The other kind is
referred to a concept, according to an objective principle, but these
ideas still can never yield cognition of the object; they are called
rational ideas. I I Rational ideas are transcendent concepts; they
differ from concepts of the understanding, which are called immanent
because they can always be supplied with an experience that adequately corresponds to them.
An aesthetic idea cannot become cognition because it is an intuition
(of the imagination) for which an adequate concept can never be
found. A rational idea can never become cognition because it contains a concept (of the supersensible) for which no adequate intuition
can ever be given.
I think we may call aesthetic ideas unexpoundable presentations
of the imagination, and rational ideas indemonstrable concepts of
reason. [But in saying this] I am presupposing that certainly neither
of them lacks a basis, but that (as I said above in explicating
ideas generally) they are produced according to certain principles
of the cognitive powers to which they belong (aesthetic ideas according to subjective principles, rational ideas according to objective
ones).
Concepts of the understanding must, as such, always be demonstrable (if by demonstrating we mean merely exhibiting, as we do in
anatomy Ifor example I2 ]; i.e., it must always be possible for the
object corresponding to such concepts to be given in intuition (pure
or empirical), because only in this way can they become cognitions.
The concept of magnitude can be given in the a priori intuition of
space, such as that of a straight line, and so on; the concept of cause
can be given in Ian intuition of] impenetrability, or lofl the impact of
bodies, etc. Hence both these concepts can be supported by an
empirical intuition, i.e., the thought of them can be illustrated
(demonstrated, displayed) in an example; and this possibility must
II [Or

'ideas of reason.' Emphasis added. I

121 Constructing a (pure) concept is also included. Cf. Ak. 232 br. n. 51.1

216
343

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

[always I be there, since otherwise we cannot be certain that the
thought is not empty, i.e., devoid of any object,13
In logic the terms demonstrable and indemonstrable are usually
applied only to propositions. But it would be better if there we talked
instead about propositions that are only indirectly certain and propositions that are directly certain. For pure philosophy also has proposi·
tions of both kinds, if we understand by them true propositions that
can be proved, or that cannot,14 For, as philosophy, it can indeed
prove [propositions I from a priori grounds, but cannot demonstrate
them, unless we totally abandon the meaning of the word demon·
strate (ostendere, exhibere), which means the same as to exhibit one's
concept [not only discursively but] in intuition as well (whether
in proving or merely in defining something). If this intuition is a
priori, [the exhibitionlSj is called the construction of the concept;16
but even if the intuition is empirical, [the exhibition] is still a display
of the object, which serves to assure us that the concept has objective
reality. For example, if an anatomist has set forth the concept of the
human eye discursively and goes on to dissect the eye to make the
concept intuitable, we say that he demonstrates this organ.
Accordingly, the rational concept of the supersensible substrate of
all appearances generally, or the rational concept of the supersensible
that must be regarded as underlying our power of choice in relation
to moral laws, i.e., the rational concept of transcendental freedom. is
an indemonstrable concept and a rational idea, simply because of the
type of concept it is; virtue too is such a concept, but [only] in degree.
For in the case of the concept of the supersensible, there is not even
an intrinsic possibility for anything corresponding to it in quality to be
given in experience, whereas in the case of virtue no empirical
product of our causality of freedom reaches the degree that the
rational idea of virtue prescribes to us as the rule.
Just as in the case of a rational idea the imagination with its
intuitions does not reach the given concept, so in the case of an
aesthetic idea the understanding with its concepts never reaches the
IlICf. the Critique of Pure Reason, B 291-93.'

141Cf. the Logic, Ak. IX. 71 and 110./
151Correcting 'welche' to 'welcher, ' as Windelband rightly recommends: Ak. V. 529.,

161Cf. Ak. 232 br. n. 51. and Ak. 351 hr. n. 31.1

§ 57. SOLUTION OF THE ANTINOMY OF TASTE

217

entire inner intuition that the imagination has and connects with a
given presentation. And since bringing a presentation of the imagination to concepts is the same as expounding it, aesthetic ideas may be
called unexpoundable presentations of the imagination (in its free
play). Later on I shall have occasion to make some further points
about aesthetic ideas. I? Here I shall merely point out that both kinds
of ideas, rational as well as aesthetic, must have their principles, and
both must have them in reason: the principles of rational ideas must
be objective principles of reason's employment, those of aesthetic
ideas subjective ones.
Hence GENIUS can also be explicated as the ability to
[exhibitl aesthetic ideas. 18 This [explication) indicates at the
same time why it is that, in products of genius, art (Le., production of
the beautiful) receives its rule from nature (the nature of the subject)
rather than from a deliberate purpose. For we must judge the
beautiful not according to concepts, but according to the purposive
attunement of the imagination that brings it into harmony with the
power of concepts as such. Hence the subjective standard for that
aesthetic but unconditioned purposiveness in fine art that is to lay
rightful claim to everyone's necessary liking cannot be supplied by
any rule or precept, but can be supplied only by that which is merely
nature in the subject but which cannot be encompassed by rules or
concepts-namely, the supersensible substrate (unattainable by any
concept of the understanding) of all his powers; and hence the
mentioned standard can be supplied only by [means ofl that by
reference to which we are to make all our cognitive powers harmonize,
[doing I which is the ultimate purpose given us by the intelligible
[element) of our nature. It is in this way alone, too, that this
purposiveness, for which we cannot prescribe an objective principle,
can be based a priori on a principle that is subjective and yet universally valid.

171See § 58, Ak. 350-51, and § 60, Ak. 355.1

181er. § 49, Ak. 313-14.1

344

Comment II

345

Here the following important point arises spontaneously: that there
are three kinds of antinomy of pure reason, all of which are still alike
inasmuch as they force reason to abandon the otherwise very natural
presupposition that objects of sense are things in themselves and
force reason to regard them instead as mere appearances that are
based on an intelligible substrate (something supersensible, the concept of which is only an idea and precludes cognition proper). If there
were no such antinomy, reason could never bring itself to accept such
a principle that so greatly narrows the area in which it can speculate
and could never bring itself to make sacrifices that have to involve the
complete destruction of so many hopes that were so brilliant otherwise.
For though reason's prospect of proportionately greater employment
in a practical respect has come to compensate it for the mentioned
loss, still it seems that reason cannot help being pained as it tries to
part with those hopes and to sever its old attachment.
That there are three kinds of antinomy is due to this: There are
three cognitive powers- viz., understanding, judgment, and reason.
Each of these (as a higher cognitive power) must have its a priori
principles. Hence, insofar as reason passes judgment on these principles themselves and their usc. it unrelentingly demands, for all of
them, the unconditioned for the given conditioned. And yet we can
never find this unconditioned if we regard the sensible as belonging to
things in themselves, instead of regarding the sensible as mere
appearance, based on something supersensible (the intelligible substrate of nature outside and within us) taken as thing in itself. And so
three antinomies arise: (1) fOT the cognitive power, an antinomy of
reason concerning the theoretical use of the understanding when this
use is extended up to the unconditioned; (2) for the feeling of pleasure and displeasure, an antinomy of reason concerning the aesthetic
use of judgment; (3) for the power of desire, an antinomy [of reason I
concerning the practical use of our intrinsically legislative reason.
These antinomies arise insofar as all these powers must have their
higher a priori principles and, in conformity with an inescapable
demand of reason, must be able both to judge and to determine their
object under these principles unconditionally as well.
Now regarding two of the antinomies of those higher cognitive

218

§ 57. SOLUTION OF THE ANTINOMY OF TASTE

219

powers, viz., the antinomies concerning their theoretical and practical use, we have already shown elsewhere l9 that they are inevitable
if in our theoretical and practical judgments we do not rely on [the
assumption of] a supersensible substrate for the given objects [and
take the latter I as appearances, but have shown there also that these
antinomies can be solved once we do so. As for the antinomy in our
use of the power of judgment in conformity with reason's demand and
as for the solution given for that antinomy here, there is no way it can
be avoided unless we adopt one of the following two alternatives. One
of these is to deny that an aesthetic judgment of taste is based on any
a priori principle whatever, so that [we would hold that I all claim to
necessary universal assent is a baseless, vain delusion and [hold thatl
a judgment of taste deserves to be considered correct only insofar as
there happen to be many people agreeing on it; actually even this Iwe
would hold I not because we suspect that there is an a priori principle
behind this harmony, but because (as with the taste of the palate)
there is a contingent uniformity in the organization of [different]
subjects. The other alternative is to assume that a judgment of taste is
actually a disguised rational judgment about the perfection we have
discovered in a thing and [in20] the reference of its manifold to a
purpose, so that basically the judgment is teleological, and we call it
aesthetic only because of the confusion that here attaches to our
reflection. On this alternative we could declare it unnecessary and
idle to solve the antinomy by means of transcendental ideas, and so
we could reconcile those laws of taste with objects of sense even if
these were things in themselves rather than mere appearances. However,
we have shown in several places 21 in the exposition of judgments of
taste that neither of these attempts to escape the antinomy will work
at all.
On the other hand, if it be granted that our deduction is at least on
the right track, even if not yet sufficiently clarified in all details. then
we are led to three ideas: first. the idea of the supersensible in
19[ Critique of Pure Reason, A 405-567
Ak. V, 107-19.1

=

B 432-595; Critique of Practical Reason,

2o[Reading 'der Beziehung' for 'die Bezlehung, 'thus connecting it with 'an, ' not with

'uber·'1
21[See § § 3-5 (Ak. 205-11), § 7 (Ak. 212-13), § 11 (Ak. 221), § § 13-15 (Ak. 223-29),
§ 18 (Ak. 236-37). as well as Ak. 266-67.1

346

220

PART 1. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

general, not further determined, as the substrate of nature; second,
the idea of the same22 supersensible as the principle of nature's
subjective purposiveness for our cognitive power; third, the idea of
the same supersensible as the principle of the purposes of freedom
and of the harmony of these purposes with nature in the moral
sphere.

§ 58

On the Idealism Concerning
the Purposiveness of
Both Nature and Art as
the Sole Principle of
Aesthetic Judgment

347

Note, first of all, that the principle of taste can be interpreted
in two basically different ways. We can say that taste always judges
by determining bases that are empirical and hence can be given
only a posteriori through our senses, or we can grant that taste
judges on a basis that is a priori. The former critique of taste
would be an empiricist one; the latter would be rationalistic. On
the empiricist 23 critique of taste the object of our liking would
not be distinct from the agreeable; on the rationalistic one, if the
judgment rested on determinate concepts, the object of our liking
would not be distinct from the good; and so [in either case I all
the beauty we find in the world would be denied, and we would have
nothing left in its place except a special term, which might perhaps
refer to a certain blend of those two kinds of liking. But we have
already shown that liking can have [not only empirical butl also
a priori bases, which are therefore consistent with the adoption of
22[On the assertion that the "three" supersensibles are the same, see the Translator's
Introduction, lxiii-lxiv.J
23[Emphasis removed. I

§ 58. IDEALISM CONCERNING THE PURPOSIVENESS. . .

221

rationalism as one's principle, even though such bases cannot be
encompassed by determinate concepts.
If we adopt the rationalistic interpretation of the principle of taste,
we may then interpret purposiveness either realistically or idealistically.
But we have seen that a judgment of taste is not a cognitive judgment
and that beauty is not a characteristic of the object when taken in its
own right. Hence the rationalistic interpretation of the principle of
taste can never be [the view] that in this judgment we think of the
purposiveness as objective, i.e., [the view] that the judgment is
theoretical and hence is also a logical judgment (even with [the
qualification that] our judging is confused) regarding the perfection
of the object, but [can] only [be the view] that the judgment is an
aesthetic one regarding the harmony, within the subject, of the
imagination's presentation of the object with the essential principles
of judgment as such. Hence even if we adopt rationalism as our
principle, there is only one way we can construe a judgment of taste
and the difference between a realistic and an idealistic interpretation
of it: on the realistic interpretation we assume that this subjective
purposiveness is an actual (intentional) purpose that nature (or art)
pursues, namely, harmony with our power of judgment; on the idealistic interpretation we assume only that the subjective purposiveness is
a purposive harmony-manifesting itself on its own, contingently and
without a purpose-with the needs of our power of judgment in
dealing with nature and those of its forms that are produced according to [its] particular laws.
The realistic interpretation of the aesthetic purposiveness of nature
finds much support in the beautiful formations in the realm of organized nature, for it certainly seems as if anything beautiful must have
been produced on the basis of an idea of it in the producing cause,
namely, a purpose that this cause pursued for the benefit of our
imagination. Consider flowers, blossoms. even the shapes of entire
plants. or consider the grace we see in the structure of various types
of animals, which is unnecessary for their own use but is selected. as it
were, for our taste. Consider above all the variety and harmonious
combination of colors, so likable and charming to our eyes (as in
pheasants. crustaceans, insects, down to the commonest flowers):
since these colors have to do merely with the surface, and even there
have nothing to do with the figure [i.e., (visible) structure] of these
creatures-which might be needed for these creatures' inner pur-

222

348

PART l.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

poses after all- it seems that their sole purpose is to be beheld from
the outside. All of this lends weighty support to the kind of explanation that relies on the assumption that nature pursues actual purposes
directed to our aesthetic power of judgment.
And yet this assumption cannot be upheld. Reason resists it with its
maxims to avoid, wherever possible, unnecessary multiplication of
principles. Above all, however, nature shows in all of its free formations a great mechanical tendency to produce forms that seem made,
as it were, for the aesthetic employment of our power of judgment;
and nature gives us no grounds whatever for supposing that [the
production of such forms I requires anything more than nature's
mechanism-considered as nothing but nature 24 -since nature's
mechanism can make these forms purposive for our judging of them
even if they are not based on any idea. In speaking of free formations
of nature, I mean those where, in a fluid at rest, one part (sometimes
merely caloric25 ) evaporates or separates from the fluid, and this
separation makes the remainder solidify and take on a definite shape
or fabric (figure or texture) that varies in accordance with what
difference in kind there is in the matter, but is exactly the same
whenever the ~atter is the same. This process does presuppose.
however. that we are dealing with what we call a true fluid. in other
words, a fluid in which the matter is completely dissolved. and not
with one that would have to be considered a mere mixture of a fluid
and solid particles merely suspended in it.
Under the described circumstances. formation then takes place,
not by a gradual transition from the fluid to the solid state, but as it
were by a leap: a sudden solidification called shooting; this transition
is also called crystallization. The commonest example of this type of
formation occurs when water freezes: At first straight slivers of ice
form in it; these join together at angles of sixty degrees. while others
similarly attach themselves to them at every point until all the water
24[I.e., without bringing in the supersensible substrate of nature and of nature's
mechanism.j
25[ Before it was discovered that heat is reducible to motion, heat was explained as due

to caloric (materia caloris), which was thought of as an unweighable elastic fluid that
could penetrate, expand and dissolve bodies. or dissipate them in vapor. In the De igne
(Concerning Fire) (1755). At. 1.371, Kant equates caloric with aether. the "matter
[Le., medium) of light." Cf. also the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, Ak.
IV, 530.)

§ 58. IDEALISM CONCERNING THE PURPOSIVENESS. . .

223

has turned to ice. So during this time the water between the slivers of
ice does not become more viscous gradually but is as perfectly fluid as
it would be at a much higher temperature, and yet it is quite as cold as
ice. The matter that separates, and at the moment of solidification suddenly escapes, is a considerable quantity of caloric; since it was required
merely to preserve fluidity, its departure does not leave the present
ice any colder than was the fluid water from which the ice just formed.
Many salts and rocks have a crystalline figure and are produced in
the same way by some kind of earth that has been dissolved in water
through some unknown mediation. The drusy configurations of many
minerals, such as cubical galena, red silver ore, and so on, very
probably form in the same way, i.e., also in water and by the shooting
of their particles, some cause forcing these particles to leave that
vehicle and to combine into definite external shapes.
But the same applies to the inside as well; any matter that was fluid
merely as a result of being heated, and that solidifies as it cools, will
show a definite texture when it is broken. This permits the judgment
that, if the matter's own weight or its contact with air had not
prevented it. then the shape peculiar to its kind would have shown on
the outside as well. This has been observed in some metals that, after
having been molten, had hardened on the outside but were still fluid
on the inside: when the inner still fluid portion was drained off, the
remaining inner portion would now quietly crystallize. Many such
mineral crystallizations, e.g., spars, hematite, and aragonite, often
result in exceedingly beautiful shapes, such shapes as art might invent;
and the halo in the grotto of Antiparos26 is merely the product of
water seeping through layers of gypsum.
It certainly seems that generally fluids are more ancient than
solids, and that both plants and animal bodies are made from fluid
nutritive matter, insofar as it takes form undisturbed. It is true that in
the case of nutritive matter this formation occurs above all in accordance with a certain original predisposition which is directed to purposes (and which. as I shall show in Part II, we must judge not
aesthetically but teleologically, with realism as the principle). But, in
view of the universal law of the affinity of all types of matter, perhaps
this formation occurs, in addition. freely and by crystallizing. We
26[Small island in the Cyclades, in Greece, noted for a splendid stalactite cavern on
the south coast. J

349

224

350

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

could compare this, e.g., with an atmosphere, a mixture of different
types of air; when the watery fluids that are dissolved in it separate
from it because the heat Ithe caloric J is leaving, they produce
snow-figures that, depending on what the particular mixture of air is at
the time, often have a shape that seems very artistic and is exceedingly beautiful. Now it is quite conceivable, and involves no infringement on the teleological principle by which we judge organization,
that the beauty in both the shape and the color of flowers, plumage, and
sea-shells can similarly be attributed to nature and its ability to
structure itself with aesthetic purposiveness as well-freely, without
following specific purposes but merely in accordance with chemical
laws, by depositing the matter needed for this organization.
But there is one fact that virtually proves the principle that the
purposiveness in the beautiful in nature is ideal, that we ourselves lay
this principle at the basis of all our aesthetic judgments, and that it
does not permit us to explain Inatural beauty I on the basis of a real
purpose pursued by nature for our presentational power-namely,
the fact that whenever we judge any beauty at all we seek the
standard for it a priori in ourselves, and that the aesthetic power of
judgment itself legislates concerning the judgment as to whether
something is beautiful or not. This could not be so if we adopted a
realistic interpretation of the purposiveness of nature, because then
we would have to learn from nature what to consider beautiful, and a
judgment of taste would be subject to empirical principles. In fact,
however, what counts in judging beauty is not what nature is, nor
even what purpose it (has J for us, but how we receive it. If nature had
created its forms for our liking, such a purposiveness of nature would
always be objective; it would not be a subjective purposiveness. based
on the play of the imagination in its freedom, where it is we who
receive nature with favor, not nature that favors us. This property of
nature- that when we judge certain of its products nature allows us to
perceive in the relation of our mental powers an inner purposiveness,
and one that is to be declared necessary and universally valid on the
basis of something supersensible-cannot be a natural purpose, or,
rather, we cannot judge it to be that. For if our judgment were
determined by such a purpose, it would be based on heteronomy; it
would not be free and based on autonomy, as a judgment of taste
should be.
This principle of the idealism concerning purposiveness can be

§ 58.

IDEALISM CONCERNING THE PURPOSIVENESS. . .

225

recognized even more distinctly in fine art. That the purposiveness in
fine art cannot be interpreted by assuming an aesthetic realism, with
the purposiveness [working] through sensations, (since then the art
would be not fine but merely agreeable art)-this much fine art
shares with beautiful nature. But in fine art it is obvious furthermore
that even a rationalistic interpretation of the principle of purposiveness
must presuppose that the purposes are ideal rather than real. For the
liking that arises from aesthetic ideas must not depend on our achieving determinate purposes (since then the art would be mechanical as
well as intentional); and yet fine art, as such, must be regarded as a
product of genius rather than of understanding and science, and
hence as getting its rule through aesthetic ideas, which are essentially
distinct from rational ideas of determinate purposes.
Just as we must assume that objects of sense as appearances are
ideal if we are to explain how we can determine their forms a priori,
so we must presuppose an idealistic interpretation of purposiveness
in judging the beautiful in nature and in art if the critique lof taste I is
to explain how there can be judgments of taste that claim a priori
validity for everyone (yet without basing on concepts the purposiveness
presented in the object).

§59

On Beauty ~ the
Symbol of Morality
Establishing that our concepts have reality always requires intuitions.
If the concepts are empirical, the intuitions are called examples. 27 If
they are pure concepts of the understanding, the intuitions are called
schemata. 28 But if anyone goes as far as to demand that we establish
the objective reality of the rational concepts (i.e., the ideas) for the
27[Cf. On the Progress of Metaphysics since Leibniz and Wolff (published in the year
of Kant's death, 1804), Ak. XX, 325.)
28[See Ak. 253 br. n. 17.]

351

226

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

sake of their theoretical cognition, then he asks for something
impossible, because absolutely no intuition can be given that would
be adequate to them.29
All hypotyposis (exhibition, subiectio ad adspectumYJ) consists in
making la concepti sensible, and is either schematic or symbolic. 11
In schematic hypotyposis there is a concept that the understanding
has formed, and the intuition corresponding to it is given a priori. In
symbolic hypotyposis there is a concept which only reason can think
and to which no sensible intuition can be adequate, and this concept
is supplied with an intuition that judgment treats in a way merely
analogous to the procedure it follows in schematizing; i.e., the treatment agrees with this procedure merely in the rule followed rather
than in terms of the intuition itself, and hence merely in terms of the
form of the reflection rather than its content.
29[See the Critique of Pure Reason. A 31()-4()

=

B 366-98.j

JO( Submission to inspection.j

31(Cf. On the Progress of Metaphysics since Leibnl'z and Wolff. Ak. XX, 279-80: To
provide a concept with objective reality, Kant says, i.e., to show that it is not empty but
is adequate for cognition, we must exhibit the concept. He goes on: "If we provide the
concept with objective reality straightforwardly Igeradezul (directe) by means of tbe
intuition that corresponds to it, rather than [indirectly or[ mediately, this act is called
schematism. But if the concept can be exhibited only [indirectly or) mediately, in its
implications [Folgen: cf. above, Ak. 315[ (indirecte), this act may be called tbe
symbolization of the concept. The first we do for concepts of the sensible, the second is
an expedient we use for concepts of the supersensible, which as such cannot actually
be exhibited, and given in any possible experience.... The symbol of an idea (or
rational concept) is a presentation of the object by analogy: i.e., we present the object
of the idea le.g., God; cE. below, Ak. 484 br. n. 107] in terms of the relation Iwhich
some other object, e.g., man, has[ to its \effectsor[ consequences [Folgen[ and which is
the same relation that we consider the object itself as having to its consequences, and
we do this even though the [two J objects themselves are quite different in kind. For
example, I may in this way present certain products of nature, e.g., organized things,
such as animals or plants, in relation to their cause, by presenting them like a watch in
its relation to man, as its author. The relation [I use here is] identical in the two [cases]:
it is causality as such, as a category; but the subject that has this relation [to its
effects] remains unknown to me in its intrinsic character. and hence I cannot exhibit it,
but can exhibit only that relation." cr. also De mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilis
forma et principiis (011 the Form and Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible World),
Ak. II, 396; On [thel Dignified Tone Recently Adopted in Philosophy. Ak. VIII, the n. on
399-401; the Prolegomena. § § 57-59, Ak. IV, 357~62; the Anthropology. Ak. VII, 191;
and contrast the "schematism of analogy," Religion within the Bounds of Reason
Alone. Ak. VI, the n. on 64-65. See also the Critique of Practical Reason. Ak. V,
7O-71.}

§ 59. ON BEAUTY AS THE SYMBOL OF MORALITY

227

The more recent logicians have come to use the word symbolic in
another sense that is wrong and runs counter to the meaning of the
word. They use it to contrast symbolic with intuitive presentation,
whereas in fact symbolic presentation is only a kind of intuitive
presentation. For the latter (the intuitive) can be divided into schematic
and symbolic presentation: both are hypotyposes, i.e., exhibitions
(exhibitiones), not mere characterizations, i.e., designations of concepts by accompanying sensible signs. Such signs contain nothing
whatever that belongs to the intuition of the object; their point is the
subjective one of serving as a means for reproducing concepts in
accordance with the imagination's law of association. They are either
words, or visible (algebraic or even mimetic) signs, and they merely
express concepts. 32
Hence all intuitions supplied for a priori concepts are either
schemata 33 or symbols. Schemata contain direct, symbols indirect,
exhibitions of the concept. Schematic exhibition is demonstrative.
Symbolic exhibition uses an analogy (for which we use empirical
intuitions as well), in which judgment performs a double function: it
applies the concept to the object of a sensible intuition; and then it
applies the mere rule by which it reflects on that intuition to an
entirely different object, of which the former object is only the
symbol. Thus a monarchy ruled according to its own constitutional
laws would be presented as an animate body, but a monarchy ruled by
an individual absolute will would be presented as a mere machine
(such as a hand mill); but in either case the presentation is only
symbolic. For though there is no similarity between a despotic state
and a hand mill, there certainly is one between the rules by which we
reflect on the two and on how they operate [Kausalitatl. This function [of judgment] has not been analyzed much so far, even though it
very much deserves fuller investigation; but this is not the place to
pursue it. Our language is replete with such indirect exhibitions
according to an analogy, where the expression does not contain the
actual schema for the concept but contains merely a symbol for our
reflection. Thus the words foundation (support, basis), to depend (to
32The intuitive (elementl in cognition must be contrasted with the discursive (i.e.,
conceptual I (not the symbolic). The former is either schematic and proceeds by
demonstration. or it is symbolic. a presentation in accordance with a mere analogy.
33(Cf. Ak. 253 br. n. 17.J

352

228

353

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

be held from above), to flow (instead of to follow) from something,
substance (the support of accidents, as Locke puts it34), and countless others are not schematic but symbolic hypotyposes; they express
concepts not by means of a direct intuition but only according to an
analogy with one, i.e., a transfer of our reflection on an object of
intuition to an entirely different concept, to which perhaps no intuition can ever directly correspond. If a mere way of presenting
[something I may ever be called cognition (which I think is permissible if this cognition is a principle not for determining the object
theoretically, as to what it is in itself, but for determining it practically,
as to what the idea of the object ought to become for us and for our
purposive employment of it), then all our cognition of God is merely
symbolic,35 Whoever regards it as schematic-while including in it
the properties of understanding, will, etc" whose objective reality is
proved only in worldly beings-falls into anthropomorphism,36 just
as anyone who omits everything intuitive falls into deism, which
allows us to cognize nothing whatsoever, not even from a practical
point of view)7
Now I maintain that the beautiful is the symbol of the morally
good; and only because we refer IRucksichtj the 'beautiful to the
morally good (we all do so [Beziehungj naturally and require all
others also to do so, as a duty) does our liking for it include a claim to
everyone else's assent,J8 while the mind is also conscious of being
ennobled, by this [referencel, above a mere receptivity for pleasure
derived from sense impressions, and it assesses the value of other
people too on the basis of [their having] a similar maxim in their
power of judgment. The morally good is the intelligible that taste has
in view, as I indicated in the preceding section;39 for it is with this
intelligible that even our higher cognitive powers harmonize, and
34[Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Bk. II, ch. xiii, 19.]

35[I.e., cognition by analogy. See above, Ak. 351 br. n. 31.]
36[Cf. AI", 457.,
37[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 631-33

=

B 659-61.1

38(On the force of this link of beauty to morality, see the Translator's Introduction.lxi
and lxv-Ix vi.]
the reference to the supersensible in § 58, Ak. 350. As Windelband points out,
however, (Ak. V, 529), Kant presumably meant § 57, Ak. 340-46.]

39[ See

§ 59. ON BEAUTY AS THE SYMBOL OF MORAUTY

229

without this intelligible contradictions would continually arise from
the contrast between the nature of these powers and the claims that
taste makes. In this ability [taste], judgment does not find itself
subjected to a heteronomy from empirical laws, as it does elsewhere
in empirical judging-concerning objects of such a pure liking it
legislates to itself, just as reason does regarding the power of desire.
And because the subject has this possibility within him, while outside
Ihim] there is also the possibility that nature will harmonize with it,
judgment finds itself referred to something that is both in the subject
himself and outside him, something that is neither nature nor freedom and yet is linked with the basis of freedom, the supersensible, in
which the theoretical and the practical power are in an unknown
manner combined and joined into a unity. I shall now bring up a few
points of this analogy [between the beautiful and the morally good].
noting at the same time what difference there is between them.
(1) The beautiful we like directly (but only in intuition refiect[ed
upon}. not in its concept, as we do morality). (2) We like it without
any interest. (Our liking for the morally good is connected necessarily
with an interest, but with an interest that does not precede our
judgment about the liking but is produced by this judgment in the
first place.) (3) In judging the beautiful, we present the freedom of
the imagination (and hence [of] our power40 lof} sensibility) as
harmonizing with the lawfulness of the understanding. (In a moral
judgment we think the freedom of the will as the will's harmony with
itself according to universal laws of reason.) (4) We present the
subjective principle for judging the beautiful as universal. i.e., as
valid for everyone, but as unknowable through any universal concept.
(The objective principle of morality we also declare to be universal(ly
valid]. i.e .• [valid] for all subjects, as well as for all acts of the same
subject, but also declare to be knowable through a universal concept.)
Hence not only is a moral judgment capable of [having] determinate
constitutive principles, but its possibility depends on our basing
the[se] maxims on those principles and their universality.
The common understanding also habitually bears this analogy in
40ISensibility is the lower cognitive power (cf. the Anthropology, § 40, Ak. VII, 196)
and as such is passive (whereas the higher cognitive powers are active). In the Critique
0/ Pure Reason (A 19 - B 33), Kant calls sensibility a capacity (Rihiglwit). rather than
a power (Vermogen). But elsewhere in the work it becomes clear that Kant intends the
two terms to be synonymous: see ibid.• A 51 a B 75, and cf. above, Ak. 177.l

354

230

PART I.

CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

mind, and beautiful objects of nature or of art are often called by
names that seem to presuppose that we are judging [these objects]
morally. We call buildings or trees majestic and magnificent, or
landscapes cheerful and gay; even colors are called innocent, humble,
or tender, because they arouse sensations in us that are somehow
analogous to the consciousness we have in a mental state produced by
moral judgments. Taste enables us, as it were, to make the transition
from sensible charm to a habitual moral interest without making too
violent a leap; for taste presents the imagination as admitting, even in
its freedom, of determination that is purposive for the understanding,
and it teaches us to like even objects of sense freely, even apart from
sensible charm.

§ 60
ApPENDIX

On Methodology

Concerning Taste

355

A critique that precedes a science is divided into elementology and
methodology. But this division is not applicable to a critique of taste,
since there neither is, nor can be, a science of the beautiful, and a
judgment of taste cannot be determined by means of principles. It is
true that in every art there is a scientific [element I whose concern is
that the object of this art be exhibited [or rendered J truthfully, and
which is indeed the indispensable condition (conditio sine qua non)
of fine art, though it is not itself fine art. So in fine art there is only
manner (modus), not method (methodus):41 the master must show
by his example [vormachen I what the student is to produce, and how.
He may in the end bring his procedure under universal rules, but
these are more likely to be useful to the student as occasional reminders
411Cf. the Logic. § 94, Ak. IX, 139: "All cognition, and a whole of cognition, must
conform to a rule. (A lack of rules is also a lack of reason.) This rule is either mariner
(which is freel or method (which is constraint)." Cf. also above, § 49, Ak. 318-19.1

§ roo APPENDIX. ON METHODOLOGY CONCERNING TASTE

231

of what the main features of that procedure are, than as prescriptions
of these features. And yet the artist must bear in mind a certain ideal;
art must keep this ideal in view even though in practice it never
achieves it in full. The master must stimulate the student's imagination until it becomes commensurate with a given concept; he must
inform the student if the latter has not adequately expressed the idea,
the idea that even the concept cannot reach because the idea is
aesthetic; and he must provide the student with sharp criticism. For
only in this way can the master keep the student from immediately
treating the examples offered him as if they were archetypes, models
that he should imitate as if they were not subject to a still higher
standard and to his own judgment, [an attitude) which would stifle his
genius, and along with it would stifle also the freedom that his
imagination has even in its lawfulness, the freedom without which
there can be no fine art, indeed not even a correct taste of one's own
by which to judge such art.
It seems that for all fine art, insofar as we aim at its highest degree
of perfection, the propaedeutic does not consist in [following) precepts but in cultivating our mental powers by exposing ourselves
beforehand to what we call humaniora; 42 they are called that presumably because humanity [Humanitat] means both the universal
feeling of sympathy, and the ability to engage universally in very
intimate communication. When these two qualities are combined,
they constitute the sociability that befits [our] humanity [Menschheit]
and distinguishes it from the limitation [characteristic I of animals.
There were peoples during one age whose strong urge to have sociability under laws, through which a people becomes a lasting commonwealth, wrestled with the great problems that surround the difficult
task of combining freedom (and hence also equality) with some
constraint (a constraint based more on respect and submission from
duty than on fear). A people in such an age had to begin by discovering
the art of reciprocal communication of ideas between its most educated and its cruder segments, and by discovering how to make the
improvement and refinement of the first harmonize with the natural
simplicity and originality of the second, finding in this way that mean
between higher culture and an undemanding nature constituting the
421 The humanities.}

356

232

PART I. CRITIQUE OF AESTHETIC JUDGMENT

right standard, unstatable in any universal rules, even for taste, which
is the universal human sense.
It is not likely that peoples of any future age will make those
models dispensable, for these peoples will be ever more remote from
nature. Ultimately, since they will have no enduring examples of
nature, they will hardly be able to form a concept of the happy
combination (in one and the same people)43 of the law-governed
constraint coming from highest culture [Kulturl with the force and
rightness of a free nature that feels its own value.
However, taste is basically an ability to judge the [way in which]
moral ideas are made sensible ([ it judges this J by means of a certain
analogy in our reflection about [these ideas and their renderings in
sensibility J); the pleasure that taste declares valid for mankind as
such and not just for each person's private feeling must indeed derive
from 44 this [link I and from the resulting increase in our receptivity
for the feeling that arises from moral ideas (and is called moral
feeling). Plainly, then, the propaedeutic that will truly establish our
taste consists in developing our moral ideas and in cultivating [KulturJ
moral feeling; for only when sensibility is made to harmonize with
this feeling can genuine taste take on a definite, unchangeable form.

43( Parentheses

added.(

44(On the force of this "derivativeness," see the Translator's Introduction. Ixiii and
lxv-lxvi·1

PART II

CRITIQUE OF
TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

357

§ 61

On Objective
Purposiveness of Nature
Transcendental principles do provide us with a good basis for assuming that nature in its particular laws is subjectively 1 purposive for
the ability of human jUdgment2 to take [it) in, making it possible to
connect the particular experiences to [form] a system of nature;3
and we can then expect that the many natural products in such a
system might include some that, as if adapted quite expressly to our
judgment, contain certain specific forms: forms that are commensurate with our judgment because, as it were, their diversity and unity
allow them to serve to invigorate and entertain our mental powers
(which are in play when we engage in judging) and hence are called
beautiful forms.
But the universal idea of nature as the sum total of sense objects4
gives us no basis whatever [for assuming) that things of nature serve
one another as means to purposes,s and that even their possibility
cannot adequately be understood except [as arising] through a causality in terms of purposes. For in the case of beautiful forms we were
dealing with the presentation6 of things, which is something in
ourselves, and hence it was readily conceivable, even a priori, how
such a presentation could be fit and suitable for attuning our cognitive powers in a way that is purposive within [us]; but we have no a
priori basis whatever for the following presumption: how purposes
that are not ours, and that we also cannot attribute to nature (since
we do not assume nature to be an intelligent being), yet are to
l[Emphasis added.,
2[ Urteilskraft. in this case.

a. Ak. 167 br. n. 4.,

3[Cf. the Introduction, IV-V. Ak. 179-86.,
4[This idea is what the mentioned transcendental principles spell out.'

'[Cr. Ak. 194, On Using Teleological Principles in Philosophy (1788), Ak. vm,
182.]
6[ Vorste/{ung, traditionally rendered as 'representation: See Ak. 175 br. n. 17 and
At. 203 br. n. 4.]

235

359

236

360

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

constitute, or could constitute, a special kind of causality, or at least a
quite distinct lawfulness of nature. Not only [do we have no a priori
basis for such a presumption,l but even experience cannot prove that
there actually are such purposes, unless we first do some subtle
reasoning and merely slip the concept of a purpose into the nature of
things rather than take it from objects and our empirical cognition7
of them, so that we would not so much cognize nature from objective
bases as use the concept of a subjective basis on which we connect
presentations within us, namely, the concept of a purpose, so that we
can grasp nature by analogy with that subjective basis.
Moreover, so far is objective purposiveness, as a principle for the
possibility of things of nature, from being connected necessarily with
the concept of nature that it is rather this very purposiveness to which
we primarily appeal in order to prove that it (nature) and its form are
contingent. For when we point, for example, to the structure of birds
regarding how their bones are hollow, how their wings are positioned
to produce motion and their tails to permit steering, and so on, we are
saying that all of this is utterly contingent if we go by the mere nexus
effectivus in nature and do not yet resort to a special kind of causality,
viz., the causality of purposes (the nexus lina/isS); in other words,
we are saying that nature, considered as mere mechanism, could have
structured itself differently in a thousand ways without hitting on
precisely the unity in terms of a principle of purposes, and so we
cannot hope to find a priori the slightest basis for that unity unless we
seek it beyond the concept of nature rather than in it.
Yet we are right to bring teleological judging9 into our investigation of nature, at least problematically, but only if we do this so as to
bring nature under principles of observation and investigation by
analogy with the causality in terms of purposes, without presuming to
explain it in terms of that causality. Hence teleological judging is
reflective, not determinative. Yet the concept of connections and
natural forms in terms of purposes does at least serve us as one more
principle for bringing nature's appearances under rules in those cases
7lErkenntnis. Cf. Ak. 167 br. n. 2.J

8{The distinction is between causal connection in terms of efficient causes (nexus
effectivus) and in terms of final causes (nexus [inaUs ).1
91Beurteilung On Kant's attempt to make a terminological distinction between
'beurteilen' and 'urteilen, ' see Ak. 169 br. n. 9.1

§ 61.

ON OBJECTIVE PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE

237

where the causal laws of nature's mere mechanism are not sufficient
to allow us to do so.1o For we adduce a teleological basis when we
attribute to the concept of an object-just as if that concept were in
nature (not in us)-a causality concerning [the production ofl an
object, or, rather, when we conceive of the object's possibility by
analogy with such a causality (which we find in ourselves) and so
think nature as techmcalll in what it itself can do. If, on the other
hand, we did not attribute to it such a way of operating, we would
have to present its causality as blind mechanism. Suppose, alternatively,
that we attributed to nature causes that act intentionally. and thereby
based teleology not merely on a regulative principle for merely
judging appearances, a principle to which l2 we could think nature as
being subject in its particular laws, but based teleology also on a
constitutive principle [that would allow us] to derive nature's products from their causes. On this alternative, the concept of a natural
purpose would belong no longer to reflective but to determinative
judgment. But then it would in fact not be judgment's own concept
(as is the concept of beauty, i.e., of formal subjective purposiveness);
instead it would be a rational concept 13 and hence would introduce a
new causality into natural science, even though in fact we only
borrow this causality from ourselves and attribute it to other beings
without wishing to assume that they and we are of the same kind.

IOICf. The Only Possible Basis of Proof for DemOrtStrating the Existence of God, At.
11,114·1
lllIn the sense derived from the Greek TlXV71 (b~chne), i.e., 'art' in the sense that
inel udes craft. )
12\Reading 'dem' for 'denen. 'j

1310r "concept of reason.")

361

DIVISION I
ANALYTIC OF
TELEOLOGICAL
JUDGMENT
§62
On Merely Formal, as
Distin~uIshed from
MaterIal, Objective
Purposiveness
All geometric figures drawn on a principle display a diverse objective
purposiveness, often admired: they are useful for solving many problems by a single principle, and each of them presumably in an infinite
variety of ways. This purposiveness is obviously objective and intellectual, and not merely subjective and aesthetic; for it means that the
figure is suitable for the production of many shapes that serve purposes,
and we cognize this purposiveness through reason. And yet this
purposiveness does not make the concept of the [geometric I object
itself possible, i.e., we do not regard the concept's [i.e., the figure'sl
possibility as depending on that use.
A figure that is as simple as the circle allows us to solve a multitude
of problems that, if we tried to solve them individually, would require
considerable apparatus; and this solution, one of the infinitely many
splendid properties of this figure, arises spontaneously, as it were. For
example, suppose we are to construct a triangle, and are given the

239

362

240

363

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGlCAL JUDGMENT

base and the vertical angle: tbis problem is indeterminate, i.e., it can
be solved in an infinite variety of ways; and yet the circle encompasses
them all, since it is the geometric locus for all triangles satisfying that
[given I condition. Or suppose two lines are to intersect so that the
rectangle under the two parts of the one line will be equal to the
rectangle under the two parts of the other: solving this problem seems
very difficult; but in fact all lines that intersect within a circle and are
bounded by its circumference divide automatically in this proportion.
The other curves in tum provide us with other purposive solutions
that we did not think of at all in Ithinking I the rule for their construction.
All conic sections, whether by themselves or when compared with
one another, and no matter how simple it may be to explicate their
concept, are fertile in principles for solving a multitude of possible
problems. It is a true joy to see how eagerly the ancient geometers 14
investigated these properties of such lines, not letting themselves be
disconcerted if asked by narrow minds of what use such knowledge
might be. Thus they investigated the properties of the parabola
without knowing the law of terrestrial gravitation, which would have
allowed them to apply the parabola to the trajectory of heavy bodies
(whose motion has a gravitational direction that may be regarded as
parallel to a parabola). Again, they investigated the properties of the
ellipse without suspecting that celestial bodies too had gravity, and
without knowing the law that governs gravity at varying distances
from the point of attraction and makes these bodies describe that
curve when they are in free motion. While these geometers were thus
unwittingly working for posterity, they took delight in a purposiveness
which, though it belonged to the nature [ Wesen) of things, could still
be exhibited completely a priori in its necessity. Plato, himself a
master of this science, was overcome by enthusiasm [when he saw)
that the original character of things is such that it can be discovered
without any experience whatever, and that the mind is able to derive
the harmony of beings from their supersensible principle; (to [these
beings J we must add the properties of numbers, with which the mind
plays in music). It was this enthusiasm that lifted Plato above empirical concepts to ideas that he thought could be explained only by an
intellectual community [between ourselves and) the origin of all
141Including Plato, who is about to be mentioned; cf. On (thel Dignified Tone
Recently Adopted in Philosophy, Ak. VIII. 391.]

§ 62. ON MERELY FORMAL ... OBJECTIVE PURPOSIVENESS

241

beings. No wonder he turned away from his school everyone who was
ignorant of geometry; for what Anaxagoras inferred from objects of
experience and their connection in terms of purposes, Plato meant to
derive from the pure intuition residing within the human intellect
[GeistIS]. For there is a necessity in what is purposive and of such a
character Ithat it seems I as if it had intentionally been so arranged for
our use, while yet it also seems to belong to the original nature
[Wesenl of things, without any concern as to Ihow] we might use it;
and this necessity is the basis for our great admiration of nature
INalur], not so much nature outside us as nature in our own reason.
Surely it is pardonable if, as the result of a misunderstanding, this
admiration gradually increased to the point of fanaticism. 16
This intellectual [intellektuell] purposiveness is indeed objective
(rather than subjective, like aesthetic purposiveness); but, as to how it
is possible, we can readily grasp this purposiveness, though only in a
universal way, as being merely formal (rather than real li.e., material]), that is, as a purposiveness that does not have to be regarded as
based on a purpose and hence does not require teleology. A circular
figure is an intuition that the understanding has determined according to a principle; I choose to assume this principle, presupposing it
as a concept, and apply it to a form of intuition (space) that is also
within me, a priori, as a mere presentation: and the unity of this
principle allows us to grasp the unity of many rules which result from
constructing that concept and which are purposive for all sorts of
aims we might have, even though we are not entitled to regard this
purposiveness as based on a purpose or on anything else whatsoever.
This is different from cases where I find order and regularity in an
aggregate, enclosed within certain boundaries, of things outside me:
e.g., in a garden, order and regularity among trees, flower beds,
walks, etc. For in these cases I cannot hope to infer a priori this order
and regularity from the way I have bounded a space in accordance
with this or that rule. For these are existing things that must be given
empirically if they are to be cognized and are not a mere presentation
IS[Cf. Ak. 335 hr. n. 76.1
16[uPlato ... was ... the father of all fanaticism [arousedl by means of philosophy":
On [thel Dignified Tone Recently Adopted in Philosophy, Ak. VIII. 398. (All translations given in footnotes are my own, and this fact is not indicated in each such footnote
individually.) J

364

242

365

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

in myself determined according to an a priori principle. Hence the
latter (empirical) purposiveness is [not formal but] real, and hence is
dependent on the concept of a purpose.
But we can also easily see why it is that we admire, and rightly so, a
purposiveness that we perceive, though perceive in the nature [Wesen I
of things (insofar as their concepts can be constructed): The diverse
rules whose unity (which is based on a principle) arouses this admiration are one and all synthetic and do not follow from a concept of the
object, e.g., that of a circle, but [finding] these rules requirels] that
this object is given in intuition. But that makes it seem as if the rules of
this unity had an empirical basis outside us and distinct from our presentational power,17 and hence as if the harmony [Obereinstimmung]
of the object with our understanding's need for rules were in itself
contingent and hence possible only through a purpose that aimed
expressly at this harmony. And yet this harmony [Harmonie], despite
all that purposiveness, is cognized a priori rather than empirically,
and that fact alone should make us realize that the space to which I
had to give determination (by means of imagination in conformity
with a concept) so as to make the object possible is not a characteristic of things outside me but a mere way of presenting (theml within
me; I should realize, therefore, that when I draw a figure in accordance with a concept, I introduce the purposiveness into the figure,
i.e., into my own way of presenting something that is given to me from
outside, whatever it may be in itself, rather than this something's
instructing me empirically about that purposiveness, and hence should
realize that I need no special purpose outside me in the object [to
account] for that purposive harmony. On the other hand, this consideration already requires a critical use of reason and hence cannot
already be contained in my very judging of the object concerning its
properties; and hence this judging [itselfl provides me with nothing
directly except unification of heterogeneous [heterogen I rules in a
principle (even with respect to what is heterogeneous [ungieichartigj
about them)-a principle whose truth I cognize a priori, without any
need for a special basis beyond my concept, or beyond my a priori
presentation in general. Now [the admiration here must be distinguished from amazement. I Amazement [Verwunderung I consists in
the mind's being struck by the fact that a presentation, and the rule it
17[For my use of 'power,' rather than 'faculty,' see Ak. 167 br. n. 3. J

§ 62. ON MERELY FORMAL ... OBJECTIVE PURPOSIVENESS

243

provides, cannot be reconciled with the principles that the mind
already presupposes, so that we begin to doubt whether we saw or
judged correctly. Admiration [BewunderungJ. on the other hand, is
an amazement that keeps returning even after that doubt is gone)8
Hence admiration is an entirely natural [naturlich J effect of that
purposiveness observed in the nature [Wesen] of things (as appearances), and to that extent there is also nothing wrong with such
admiration. For not only are we unable to explain the agreement
I Vereinbarung] of that form of sensible intuition (called space) with
our power of concepts (the understanding), [inasmuch] as it is precisely this [viz., purposive I agreement rather than some otber, but this
agreement also expands the mind; it makes it suspect, as it were, that
there is something else above and beyond those presentations of
sense, something which, although we do not know it, might hold the
ultimate basis for that [agreement or] harmony [Einstimmungl. It is
true that we also have no need to know this basis when we are dealing
merely with formal [even though formal objective J purposiveness of
our a priori presentations; but even just being forced to look in that
direction inspires in us at the same time an admiration for the object
that makes us do so.
The mentioned properties of geometric figures, and presumably of
numbers as well, are commonly called Itheir I beauty. 19 because they
have a certain a priori purposiveness for all sorts of cognitive uses
which is unexpected in view of how simple it is to construct these
figures. For example, people will speak of this or that beautiful
property of the circle, discovered in one way or another. Yet it is not
by an aesthetic judging that we find such a property purposive, not by
a judging without a concept, a judging that reveals to us a mere
subjective purposiveness in the free play of our cognitive powers;
rather. it is by an intellectual judging, according to concepts, and this
judging reveals distinctly an objective purposiveness, i.e., a suitability
for all sorts of purposes (of infinite diversity). Instead of calling such a
property of a mathematical figure its beauty, it would be better to call
it the figure's relative perfection. It would also be quite improper to

18[On amazement and admiration, cf. Ak. 272.1
19!Cf. Ak. 241-42.1

366

244

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

call it intellectual beauty,20 since then the word beauty would lose
all definite meaning, or intellectualliking21 would lose all superiority
over the liking of sense. It would be more plausible to call a
demonstration of such properties beautiful, since such a demonstration makes understanding and imagination, the powers of concepts
and of their a priori exhibition,22 respectively, feel invigorated. so
that here at least the liking is subjective, even though based on
concepts, whereas perfection carries with it an objective liking. (That
Iinvigoration of understanding and imaginationJ, when it is combined
with the precision that reason introduces, is called the demonstration's
elegance.)

§63

On Relative, as Distinguished
from Intrinsic,
Purposiveness of Nature

367

Only in one case does experience lead our power of judgment to the
concept of a purposiveness that is both objective and material lor
reali, i.e., to the concept of a purpose of nature-namely, when we
have to judge a relation of cause to effect23 which is such that we can
see it as law-governed only if we regard the cause's action as based on
the idea of the effect, with this idea as the underlying condition under
which the cause itself can produce that effect. We can do this in two
ways: we may regard the effect either as directly the product of art, or
as only the material that other possible natural beings employ in their
201Cf. Ak. 271.1
21( Wohlgefallen;

see Ak. 207 br. n. 14.,

22lDarstellung. traditionally rendered as 'presentation: See Ak. 232 br. n. 51.J
23Since pure mathematics cannot deal with the existence of things but can deal only
with their possibility, i.e., with an intuition corresponding to their concept, it cannot at
all deal with cause and effect. Hence all purposiveness taken note of there must be
regarded as merely formal, never as a natural purpose.

§ 63.

ON RELATIVE ... PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE

245

art; in other words, we may regard the effect either as a purpose, or as
a means that other causes employ purposively. The second purposiveness is called either usefulness (for human beings) or benefit
(for any other creature), and this second purposiveness is merely
relative, whereas the first is an intrinsic purposiveness of the natural
being.
For example, rivers carry along all sorts of soil on which plants can
grow. Sometimes they deposit it inland, but often also at their mouths.
On some coasts the high tide carries this mud over the land, or
deposits it along the shore. And if the low tide is kept, above all by
people, from carrying the mud off again, then the fertile land expands
and the vegetable kingdom takes over where fish and crustaceans
used to live. Probably in most cases it is nature itself that extended
the land in this way, and is doing so still, even if slowly. Here the
question arises whether we should judge this [process] to be a purpose of nature, since it is useful to human beings. (That it is useful for
the vegetable kingdom itself does not count, since the sea creatures
lose as much as the land gains.)24
An example of how certain natural things benefit other creatures
as a means (if we presuppose that these creatures are purposes) is the
following: There is no better soil for spruces than a sandy soil. Now as
the ancient sea withdrew from the land, it left behind so many tracts
of sand in these northern regions that this soil, so useless for any
cultivation otherwise, enabled extensive spruce forests to establish
themselves, for whose unreasonable destruction we often blame our
ancestors. And so we may ask: did nature pursue a purpose in
depositing these very ancient layers of sand, namely, to make spruce
forests possible there? This much is clear: if we assume that the
spruce forests are a purpose of nature, then we must also grant that
the sand is a purpose, though only a relative one, for which in tum the
beach and the withdrawal {of the ancient sea] were the means. For in
the series of mutually subordinated links in a connection of purposes,
each intermediate link must be regarded as a purpose (though, by the
same token, not as a final purpose), and its proximate cause is the
means to it. Thus if there were to be cattle, sheep, horses, etc. in the
world one day, then grass had to grow on the earth. And alkaline
plants [Salzkriiuter] had to grow in the deserts if camels were to
241 Parentheses added.]

368

246

369

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

thrive. Again, camels and other herbivorous animals had to abound if
there were to be wolves, tigers, and lions. Hence objective purposiveness
that is based on benefit is not an objective purposiveness of things
themselves; for in that case it would have to be impossible for us to
grasp how the sand, considered by itself, could be an effect caused by
the sea without our regarding the sea as having acted on a purpose,
and without our regarding the sand-its effect-as a work of art.
Rather, it is a purposiveness that is merely relative and that the thing
to which we attribute this purposiveness has merely contingently; and
although, among the examples just mentioned, the various kinds of
grass, considered by themselves, must be judged as organized products of nature and hence as artistic, nevertheless in relation to the
animals that feed on them they [must J be regarded as mere raw
material.
But man, because of the freedom he has in his causality, seems to
consider all natural things beneficial: many of them for foolish aims
(such as colorful bird feathers to adorn his clothes. or colored earths
or plant juices for makeup), but others for reasonable aims, such as
horses for riding, oxen and-in Minorca-even donkeys and pigs for
plowing. Yet in these cases we cannot even assume a relative purpose
of nature (directed to these uses). For man's own reason knows how to
make things harmonize with the notions 25 [Ein/iille I that were his
own choice, notions to which even nature did not predestine him.
Only If we assume that human beings were [meant J to live on the earth,
then there had to be at least the means without which they could not
subsist as animals, or eyen as (to however Iowa degree) rational animals.
In that case, however, those natural things that would be indispensable
for this would also have to be regarded as natural purposes.
We can easily see from this that extrinsic purposiveness (a thing's
being beneficial to others) can be regarded as an extrinsic natural
purpose only under the condition that the existence of what it benefits proximately or remotely is a purpose of nature in its own right.
This, however, we can never tell by merely examining nature;
and hence it follows that, although relative purposiveness points
hypothetically to natural purposes, it does not justify any absolute
teleological judgment.
25[Not in the technical sense of 'notion' found in the Critique 01 Pure Reason. A 320 =
B 377.J

§ 63. ON RELATIVE ... PURPOSIVENESS OF NATURE

247

In cold lands,26 snow protects crops from the frost. It makes it
easier for people to get together (by means of sleighs). In Lapland, the
people find animals (reindeer) that they use to get together. These
animals find adequate nourishment in a dry moss that they have to
scrape out for themselves from under the snow. But they are also
easily tamed, and willingly permit people to deprive them of their
freedom even though they could easily support themselves on their
own. For other peoples in the same frigid zone, the sea holds rich
supplies of animals that provide them not only with food and clothing,
and with timber that the sea floats to them, as it were, as building
material for their homes, but also with fuel for heating their huts. So
here we have an admirable collection of cases where nature relates to
a purpose; that purpose is the Greenlander, the Lapp, the Samoyed,
the Yakut, etc. And yet it is not clear why people should have to live
in those regions at aU. Therefore it would be hazardous and arbitrary
indeed if we judged that vapors fall from the air as snow, that currents
in the sea bring timber grown in warmer lands, and that large marine
animals replete with oil are there because the cause providing all
these natural products acts on the idea of an advantage for certain
wretched creatures. For even if there were none of that natural utility,
we would find that natural causes are fully adequate to make [things)
come out this way; rather, we ourselves would then consider it
impudent and rash even to. demand that there be such a predisposition and to require nature to pursue such a purpose (on the ground
that otherwise only people's extreme inability to get along with one
another could have scattered them all the way to such inhospitable
regions).

26[On this entire paragraph,

cr. Perpetual Peace,

Ak. VIII, 363-65.[

§64

On the Character
Peculiar to Things
[Considered J
as Natural Purposes

370

To say that a thing is possible only as a purpose is to say that the
causality that gave rise to it must be sought, not in the mechanism of
nature, but in a cause whose ability to act is determined by concepts.
And seeing that a thing is possible only as a purpose requires that the
thing's form could not have arisen according to mere natural laws,
laws we can cognize by understanding alone as applied to objects of
sense, but requires that even empirical cognition of this form in terms
of its cause and effect presupposes concepts of reason. [Thereforel
the form of such a thing is, as far as reason is concerned, contingent
in terms of all empiricallaws.27 But reason, even if it tries to gain
insight only into the conditions attached to the production of a
natural product, must always cognize not only the product's form but
the form's necessity as well. And yet in that given form it cannot
assume that necessity. Hence that very contingency of the thing's
form is a basis for regarding the product as if it had come about
through a causality that only reason can have. Such a causality would
be the ability to act according to purposes (i.e., a will), and in
presenting an object as possible only through such an ability we
would be presenting it as possible only as a purpose.
Suppose that someone coming to a seemingly uninhabited country
perceived a geometric figure, say a regular hexagon, traced in the
sand. As he reflected on this figure, working out a concept for it,
reason would make him aware, even if obscurely, of the unity of the
principle [requiredJ for producing this concept. And so, following
reason, he would not judge that such a figure is made possible by the
sand, the adjoining sea, the wind, or even animals that leave footprints familiar to him. or by any other nonrational cause; for it would
27[Cf. The Only Possible Basis 0/ Proof, Ak. II.IO?]

248

§ 64.

ON THE CHARACTER PECULIAR TO THINGS. . .

249

seem to him that coming across such a concept [a regular hexagon},
one that is possible only in reason, is so infinitely contingent that
there might as well be no natural law for it at all, and hence that such
an effect could also not have been caused by anything in nature,
which operates merely mechanically, but could have been caused only
by the concept of such an object, a concept that only reason can
provide and compare the object with. It would seem to him therefore
that, although this effect [the figure I can be considered a purpose, it
cannot be considered a natural purpose, but can be considered only a
product of art (vestigium hominis video 28 ).
If, on the other hand, we cognize something as a natural product
and yet are to judge it to be a purpose, and hence a natural purpose
-unless perhaps the very [thoughtl is contradictory-then we need
more lthan the above example provided J. I would say, provisionally,
that a thing exists as a natural purpose if it is both cause and effect of
itself (although lof itself! in two different senses). For this involves a
causality which is such that we cannot connect it with the mere
concept of a nature without regarding nature as acting from a purpose;
and even then, though we can think this causality, we cannot grasp it.
Before we analyze this idea of a natural purpose in full, let me
elucidate its meaning by [thel example [of a tree}.29
In the first place, a tree generates another tree according to a
familiar natural law. But the tree it produces is of the same species
[Gattung 30I. Hence with regard to its species the tree produces
itself: within its species, it is both cause and effect, both generating
itself and being generated by itself ceaselessly, thus preserving itself
as a species.
28["1 see the trace of a man." The allusion is to the De Architectura (On Architecture)
by Vitruvius (Marcus Vitruvius Pollio), architect and engineer in early imperial Rome
(the beginning of the preface to book vi): Aristippus philosophus Socraticus. naufragio
cum eiectus ad Rhodiensium litus animadvertlsset geometrica schemata descripta.
exclamallisse ad comites ita dicitur: Bene speremus. hominum enim vestigia video.
(Aristippus. the Socratic philosopher [c. 435-366 B.C .• founder of the Cyrenaic schooll.
was shipwrecked but reached the shore of Rhodes. There he noticed geometric figures
drawn [in the sandI, and is said to have shouted to his companions: There is hope, for 1
see traces of men.) I
29lCf. The Only Possible Basis of Proof, Ak. II, 114-15.[
3O[The literal meaning of the term is 'genus,' but to render it so would make it come
out, in contexts like this. rather more technical than is intended in the original term.,

371

250

372

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

Second, a tree also produces itself as an individual. It is true that
this sort of causation is called merely growth; but this growth must be
understood in a sense that distinguishes it completely from any increase
in size according to mechanical laws: it must be considered to be
equivalent to generation, though called by another name. [ForI the
matter that the tree assimilates is first processed by it until the matter
has the quality peculiar to the species, a quality that the natural
mechanism outside the plant cannot supply, and the tree continues to
develop itself by means of a material that in its composition is the
tree's own product. For though in terms of the ingredients that the
tree receives from nature outside it we have to consider it to be only
an educt,JI still the separation and recombination of this raw material show that these natural beings have a separating and forming
ability of very great originality; all our art finds itself infinitely outdistanced if it tries to reconstruct those products of the vegetable kingdom from the elements we obtain by dissecting them, or for that
matter from the material that nature supplies for their nourishment.
Third, part of the tree also produces itself inasmuch as there is a
mutual dependence between the preservation of one part and that of
the others. If an eye is taken from the leaf of one tree and set into the
branch of another, it produces in the alien stock a plant of its own
species, and so does a scion grafted onto the trunk of another tree.
Hence even in one and the same tree we may regard each branch or
leaf as merely set into or grafted onto it, and hence as an independent
tree that only attaches itself to another one and nourishes itself
parasitically. The leaves, too, though produced by the tree, also
sustain it in turn; for repeated defoliation would kill it, and its growth
depends on their effect on the trunk. There are other examples that I
shall mention only in passing, even though they are among the most
marvelous properties of organized creatures: if such beings are injured,
nature aids itself, and the loss of a part that was needed to sustain
[erhalten J adjoining ones is made up by the rest; if birth defects
occur, or deformities come about during growth, certain parts, on
account of their deficiencies or impediments, form in an entirely new
311Rather than a product. To produce (which means, even literally, to "bring forth")
something includes giving it its form; to educe something is merely to "bring out"
something that already has a (predetermined) form. Cf. Ak. 423-24.1

§ 64.

ON THE CHARACTER PECULIAR TO THINGS. . .

251

way so as to preserve rerhalten J what is there, and so produce an
anomalous creature.

§65
Things [Considered]
as Natural Purposes
Are Organized Beings
We said in the preceding section that if a thing is a natural product
but yet we are to cognize it as possible only as a natural purpose, then
it must have this character: it must relate to itself in such a way that it
is both cause and effect of itself. But this description is not quite
appropriate and determinate and still needs to be derived from a
determinate concept.
A causal connection, as our mere understanding thinks it, is one
that always constitutes a descending series (of causes and effects): the
things that are the effects, and that hence presuppose others as their
causes, cannot themselves in turn be causes of these others. This kind
of causal connection is called that of efficient causes (nexus effectivus).
But we can also conceive of a causal connection [Verbindung) in
terms of a concept of reason (the concept of purposes). Such a
connection, considered as a series, would carry with it dependence
both as it ascends and as it descends: here we could call a thing the
effect of something and still be entitled to call it, as the series ascends,
the cause of that something as well. This sort of causal connection
[VerkniipjungJ is easily found in the practical sphere (namely, in art).
For example, although a house is the cause of the money received for
rent, yet, conversely, the presentation [we formed] of this possible
income also caused the house to be constructed,32 This kind of
causal connection is called that of final causes (nexus jinalis). Perhaps it would be more appropriate to call the former causal connec32[Hence the income itself is the final cause (purpose) of the house (or of the house's
being constructed). I

252
373

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

tion that of real causes, the latter that of ideal causes, since these
terms would make it clear at the same time that there cannot be more
than these two kinds of causality.
Now in order for a thing to be a natural purpose, it must meet two
requirements. First, the possibility of its parts (as concerns both their
existence and their form) must depend on their relation to the whole.
For since the thing itself is a purpose, it is covered [be/apt) by a
concept or idea that must determine a priori everything that the thing
is to contain. But if we think of a thing as possible only in that3J way,
then it is merely a work of art. For it is then the product of a rational
cause distinct from the matter of the thing (lLe.,) distinct from the
thing's parts), [a cause which is] determined to exercise its causality
(in procuring and combining the parts) by the idea of a whole that is
possible through that idea (and [which] therefore lisJ not [a cause
(viz., the product's matter, i.e., its parts) determined to exercise its
causality I by nature34 outside the product).
A second requirement must be met if a thing that is a product of
nature is yet to have, within itself and its inner possibility, reference to
purposes, i.e., if it is to be possible only as a natural purpose, without
the causality of concepts, which rational beings outside it have. This
second requirement is that the parts of the thing combine into the
unity of a whole because they are reciprocally cause and effect of
their form. For only in this way is it possible that the idea of the whole
should conversely (reciprocally) determine the form and combination
of all the parts, not as cause-for then the whole would be a product
of art-but as the basis on which someone judging this whole cognizes the systematic unity in the form and combination of all the
manifold contained in the given matter.
Therefore in order for us to judge a body as being. in itself and in
its inner possibility, a natural purpose, what is needed is that all its
parts, through their own causality, produce one another as regards
both their form and combination, and that in this way they produce a
whole whose concept ([ if present) in a being possessing the causality
in terms of concepts that would be adequate for such a product}
could, conversely, be the cause of this body according to a principle,
33[Emphasis added.]
34[Emphasis added.]

§ 65.

THINGS AS NATURAL PURPOSES. . .

253

so that the connection of efficient causes could at the same time be
judged to be a causation through final causes.
In such a product of nature, just as each part exists only as a result
of all the rest, so we also think of each part as existing for the sake of
the others and of the whole, i.e., as an instrument (organ). But that is
not enough (for the part could also be an instrument of art, in which
case we would be presenting its possibility as depending on a purpose
as such Ibut not yet on a natural purposeD. Rather, we must think of
each part as an organ that produces the other parts (so that each
reciprocally produces the other). Something like this cannot be an
instrument of art, but can be an instrument only of nature, which
supplies all material for instruments (even for those of art). Only if a
product meets that condition [as well], and only because of this, will
it be both an organized and a self-organizing being, which therefore
can be called a natural purpose.
In a watch, one part is the instrument that makes the others move,
but one gear is not the efficient cause that produces another gear;
Iand hence I even though one part is there for the sake of another, the
former part is not there as a result of the latter. That is also the reason
why the cause that produced the watch and its form does not lie in
nature (the nature of this material), but lies outside nature and in a
being who can act according to the ideas of a whole that he can
produce through his causality. It is also the reason why one gear in the
watch does not produce another; still less does one watch produce
other watches, Iby] using (and organizing) other matter for this
[production]. It is also the reason why. if parts are removed from the
watch. it does not replace them on its own; nor, if parts were missing
from it when it was first built. does it compensate for this [lack] by
having the other parts help out, let alone repair itself on its own when
out of order: yet all of this we can expect organized nature to do.
Hence an organized being is not a mere machine. For a machine has
only motive force. But an organized being has within it formative
force, and a formative force that this being imparts to the kinds of
matter that lack it (thereby organizing them). This force is therefore a
formative force that propagates itself-a force that a mere ability [of
one thing] to move [another]35 (i.e., mechanism) cannot explain.
In considering nature and the ability it displays in organized products,
35tCf. the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, Ak. IV, 530.1

374

254

375

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

we say far too little if we call this an analogue of art, for in that case
we think of an artist (a rational being) apart from nature. Rather,
nature organizes itself, and it does so within each species of its
organized products; for though the pattern that nature follows is the
same overall, that pattern also includes deviations useful for selfpreservation as required by circumstances. We might be closer if we
call this inscrutable property of nature an analogue of life. But in that
case we must either endow matter, as mere matter, with a [kind of]
property ([viz., the property of life, as) hylozoism [does)36) that
conflicts with its nature [ Wesen). Or else we must supplement matter
with an alien principle (a soul) conjoined to it. But [that also will not
work. For I if an organized product is to be a natural product, then we
cannot make this soul the artificer that constructed it, since that
would remove the product from (corporeal) nature. And yet the only
alternative would be to say that this soul uses as its instrument
organized matter;37 but if we presuppose organized matter, we do
not make it a whit more intelligible. Strictly speaking, therefore, the
organization of nature has nothing analogous to any causality known
to us. 38 Beauty in nature may rightly be called an analogue of art,
since we attribute it to objects only in relation to our reflection on our
external intuition of them, and hence only on account of the form of
their surface. But intrinsic natural perfection, as possessed by those
things that are possible only as natural purposes and that are hence
called organized beings, is not conceivable or explicable on any
analogy to any known physical ability, i.e., ability of nature, not
even-since we too belong to nature in the broadest sense-on a
precisely fitting analogy to human art.
36( See Ak. 392 and 394-95.]

37[Cf. Ak. 424.]
380n the other hand, the analogy of these direct natural purposes can serve to
elucidate a certain [kind of] association [among people], though one found more often
as an idea than in actuality: in speaking of the complete transformation of a large
people into a state. which took place recently,39 the word organization was frequently
and very aptly applied to the establishment of legal authorities, etc., and even to the
entire body politic. For each member in such a whole should indeed be not merely a
means, but also a purpose; and while each member contributes to making the wbole
possible, the idea of that whole should in tum determine the member's position and
function.
391The allusion is probably to the formation of the United States of America.]

§ 65. THINGS AS NATURAL PURPOSES. . .

255

Hence the concept of a thing as in itself a natural purpose is not a
constitutive concept either of understanding or of reason. But it can
still be a regulative concept for reflective judgment, allowing us to use
a remote analogy with our own causality in terms of purposes generally,
to guide our investigation of organized objects and to meditate regarding their supreme basis-a meditation not for the sake of gaining
knowledge either of nature or of that original basis of nature, but
rather for the sake of [assisting] that same practical power in us Iviz.,
our reason] by analogy with which we were considering the cause of
the purposiveness in organized objects.
Hence organized beings are the only beings in nature that, even
when considered by themselves and apart from any relation to other
things, must still be thought of as possible only as purposes of nature.
It is these beings, therefore, which first give objective reality to the
concept of a purpose that is a purpose of nature rather than a
practical one, and which hence give natural science the basis for a
teleology, i.e., for judging its objects in terms of a special principle
that otherwise we simply would not be justified in introducing into
natural science (since we have no a priori insight whatever into the
possibility of such a causality).

§66

On the Principle for Judging
Intrinsic Purposiveness in
Organized Beings
This principle, which is also the definition of organized beings, is: An
organized product of nature is one in which everything is a purpose
and reciprocally also a means. 40 In such a product nothing is gratuitous,
purposeless, or to be attributed to a blind natural mechanism.
1O[Cf. On Using Teleological Principles in Philosophy (1788), Ak. VIII, 179-8l.!

376

256

377

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

Now in a way this principle must be derived from experience:
experience must prompt us to [adopt] it, namely, the kind of experience in which we engage methodically and which we call observation.
But because of the universality and necessity which that principle
claims [aussagen I for such purposiveness, it cannot rest merely on
empirical bases but must be based on some a priori principle, even if
this principle turns out to be merely regulative and those purposes
turn out to reside merely in the idea of the judging person and in no
efficient cause. Hence we may call the above principle a maxim for
judging the intrinsic purposiveness of organized beings.
It is a familiar fact that those who dissect plants and animals in
order to investigate their structure and gain insight into the reasons
why and to what end these plants and animals were given those very
parts, their position and combination, and were given precisely that
internal form assume this maxim as inescapably necessary-Le., the
maxim that nothing in such a creature is gratuitous. They appeal to it
just as they appeal to the principle of universal natural science-viz.,
that nothing happens by chance. Indeed, they can no more give up
that teleological principle than they can this universal physical principle.
For just as abandoning this physical principle would leave them
without any experience whatsoever, so would abandoning that teleological principle leave them without anything for guidance in observ·
ing the kind of natural things that have once been thought teleologically,
under the concept of natural purposes.
For the concept of natural purposes leads reason into an order of
things that is wholly different from that of a mere natural mechanism,
which we no longer find adequate when we deal with such natural
products. And hence the possibility of such a product is to be based
on an idea. But an idea is an absolute unity of presentation, whereas
matter is a plurality of things that cannot itself supply a determinate
unity for its combination. Therefore if the unity of the idea is to serve
as the very basis that determines a priori a natural law of the causality
Iresponsible I for a product with such a form in its combination, then
the purpose [the idea I of nature has to be extended to everything that
is in this product of nature. For once we take such an effect as a whole
beyond the blind mechanism of nature and refer it to a supersensible
basis as determining it, then we must also judge this effect wholly in
terms of that principle. There would be no basis for assuming that the
form of such a thing still depends in part on blind mechanism, since

§ 66. ON THE PRINCIPLE FOR JUDGING. . .

257

we would then be mixing heterogeneous principles and hence be left
without any safe rule by which to judge.
Now it is entirely possible that some parts in (say) an animal body
(such as skin, bone, or hair) could be grasped as accumulations
governed by merely mechanical laws. Still the cause that procures the
appropriate matter, that modifies and forms it in that way, and
that deposits it in the pertinent locations must always be judged
teleologically. Hence everything in such a body must be regarded as
organized; and everything, in a certain relation to the thing itself, is
also an organ in turn.

§67

On the Principle by
Which We Teleologically
Judge Nature in General
as a System of Purposes
We said above that extrinsic purposiveness of natural things does not
give us adequate justification for also considering them to be purposes of nature so as to explain their existence, and for treating-in
thought-their contingently purposive effects as the bases [responsible]
for their existence in terms of the principle of final causes. For
example, though rivers further communication among peoples who
live inland, that does not yet entitle liS to regard them as natural
purposes; nor may we so regard mountains because they contain the
sources of these rivers and the supply of snow required to sustain
them during rainless periods; nor again the slope of the land, which
carries that water away and allows the land to dry. For although these
features of the earth's surface were very necessary in order that the
vegetable and animal kingdoms could arise and be sustained, still
there is nothing about these features that forces us to assume a
causality in terms of purposes so as to account for their possibility.
The same holds for plants that man employs for his needs or his

378

258

379

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

enjoyment; it also holds for animals, such as camels, cattle, horses,
dogs, etc., for which man has such varied uses, sometimes as food and
sometimes to do work for him. that for the most part he finds them
quite indispensable. If things are such that we have no cause to regard
any of them as itself a purpose, then the extrinsic relation between
them can be judged purposive only hypothetically.
Judging a thing to be a natural purpose on account of its intrinsic
form is something quite different from considering the existence of
that thing to be a purpose of [i.e., pursued by] nature. 41 To make the
latter assertion we would need more than the concept of a possible
purpose; we would have to cognize the final purpose (scopus) of
nature. To do that, we would have to refer nature to something
supersensible, for the purpose of the existence of nature itself must be
sought beyond nature; and yet referring nature to something supersensible far surpasses all our teleological cognition of nature. The internal form of a mere blade of grass suffices to prove to our human
judging ability that the blade can have originated only under the rule
of purposes. But we arrive at no ~l [but only at a~heti~
~ I ~ if we disregard the internal form and organization, and
consider mstead extrinsic purposive relations as to what use other
natural beings make of the grass: how cattle need grass, and how
people need cattle as a means for their existence. We cannot arrive at
a categorical purpose in this way because, after all, we cannot see
why people should have to exist (a question it might not be so easy to
answer if we have in mind, say, the New Hollanders or the Fuegians);
rather, each such purposive relation rests on a condition that we have
to keep putting off: this condition (namely, the existence of a thing as
a final purpose) is unconditioned and hence lies wholly outside a
physicoteleological consideration of the world. But such a thing is
also not a natural purpose, since it (or its entire species) is not to be
regarded as a natural product.
Hence only as far as matter is organized does it necessarily carry
with it the concept of it as a natural purpose, because the specific
[purposive I form it has is at the same time a product of nature. But
this concept of a natural purpose leads us necessarily to the idea of all
of nature as a system in terms of the rule of purposes, and we must
41( But Kant sometimes uses 'purpose of nature' where he should say 'natural purpose:
and this inconsistency has been Jeft intact in the translation.]

§67. NATURE IN GENERAL AS A SYSTEM OF PURPOSES

259

subordinate all mechanism of nature to this idea according to principles of reason (at least in order to test nature's appearance against
this idea). The principle of reason applies to this idea only subjectively,
namely, as this maxim: Everything in the world is good for something
or other; nothing in it is gratuitous; and the example that nature
offers us in its organic products justifies us, indeed calls upon us, to
expect nothing from it and its laws except what is purposive in
[relation to J the whole.
It goes without saying that this principle [for judging nature
teleologically J holds only for reflective but not for determinative
judgment, that it is regulative and not constitutive. It only serves
us as a guide that allows us to consider natural things in terms
of a new law-governed order by referring them to an already given
basis [a purpose I as that which determines them. Thus we expand
natural science [NaturkundeJ in terms of a different principle, that
of final causes, yet without detracting from the principle of mechanism in the causality of nature. That is all the principle does;
it does not in any way allow us to decide whether anything we judge
in terms of it is an intentional purpose of nature: whether grass
is there for cattle or sheep. and these and all other natural things
are there for man. It is helpful to consider from this point of
view even things that we find disagreeable and contrapurposive in
particular respects. For example, we might say that the vermin that
plague people in their clothes, hair, or beds are there by a wise
provision of nature, namely, as an incentive to keep clean, which
even by itself is an important means for preserving our health. Or
we might say that the mosquitoes and other stinging insects that
make the wilderness areas of America so troublesome for the savages are so many prods to stir these primitive people to action,
such as draining the marshes and clearing the dense forests that
inhibit the flow of air, so that in this way, as well as by tilling the
soil, they will also make the place where they live healthier. There are
features in man's internal organization that seem to us to be contrary
to nature; but even these, if dealt with in this manner, provide an
entertaining and sometimes also instructive outlook into a teleological order of things to which we would not be led if we used no such
principle as this but considered them merely in physical terms. Some
say that when people or animals have a tapeworm, they were given it
to compensate, as it were, for some deficiency in their vital organs. I

260
380

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

would ask, similarly, whether dreams42 (there is no sleep without
dreams, even though we rarely remember them) might not be a
purposive arrangement made by nature. For when all the motive
forces of the bodily kind relax, dreams serve to thoroughly agitate the
vital organs by means of imagination and its great activity (which in
dreams usually reaches the level of an affect). Imagination frequently
does the same when we have gone to sleep with an overloaded
stomach; we then need this agitation all the more, and the imagination's
play is all the more lively. Therefore if no such force moved us
inwardly and made us restless and tired, for which we then blame the
dreams (though in fact these consequences of them may be conducive to our health), sleep would even in a healthy person probably be
a complete extinction of life.
Moreover, once nature has been judged teleologically, and the
natural purposes that we find in organized beings have entitled us to
the idea of a vast system of purposes of nature, then even beauty in
nature, i.e., nature's harmony with the free play of our cognitive
powers as we apprehend and judge its appearance, can similarly be
considered an objective purposiveness, namely, of the whole of nature
[regarded) as a system that includes man as a member. We may regard
nature as having held us in favor4 3 when it distributed not only
useful things but a wealth of beauty and charms as well; and we
may love it for this, just as its immensity may lead us to contemplate it
with respect and to feel that we ourselves are ennobled in this
contemplation - just as if nature had erected and decorated its splendid stage quite expressly with that aim.
The only point I want to make in this section is this: that once we
have discovered that nature is able to make products that can be
thought of only in terms of the concept of final causes, we are then
421F0r this account of dreams, cf. the Anthropology. § 37. Alt. VII. 189-90.]
43We said in the aesthetic part44 that we regard beautifu!1Ulture with fallor when we
like its form quite freely (without interest). For we are then making a mere judgment of
taste, in which we do not at all take into account for what purpose these natural
beauties exist: whether they have the purpose of arousing a pleasure in us, or whether
they do not at all refer to us as purposes. But in a teleological judgment we pay
attention also to this reference; and hence we may regard as afalIOro/nature ]the fact]
that it decided to further our culture by displaying so many beautiful shapes.
44{See Ak. 350, and

cr. Ak. 210.J

§67. NATURE IN GENERAL AS A SYSTEM OF PURPOSES

261

entitled to go further; we may thereupon judge products as belonging
to a system of purposes even if they (or the relation between them,
though [perhaps] purposive) do not require us, [so as to account] for
their possibility, to look for a different principle beyond the mechanism of blind efficient causes. For the idea of nature as a system of
nature already leads us, as concerns its basis, beyond the world of
sense, so that the unity of the supersensible principle must be considered valid not merely for certain species of natural beings, but just as
much for the whole of nature as a system.

§68

On the Principle of
Teleology as
a Principle Inherent
in Natural Science
Principles of a science are either inherent in it and are called indigenous (principia domestica); or they are based on concepts that can
have their place only outside the science, in which case they are
foreign principles (principia peregrina). Sciences containing foreign
principles base their doctrines on auxiliary propositions (lemmata),
i.e., they borrow some concept from another science and use it as a
basis for their own arrangement.
Every science is a system in its own right. It is not enough that in
building [something] in the science we follow principles and so proceed technically; we must also set to work with the science architectonically,45 treating it as a whole and independent building, not as
an annex or part of another building, though we may later construct,
starting from either building, a passage connecting the one to the other.
Thus if we introduce the concept of God into the context of
4SlOn this distinction, cf. the Critique of Pure Reason. A 832-51

=

B 860-79.)

381

262

382

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

natural science in order to make the purposiveness in nature explicable,
and then in turn use this purposiveness to prove that there is a God,
then neither natural science nor theology is intrinsically firm; a
vicious circle makes both uncertain, because they have allowed their
boundaries to overlap.
But the very expression, purpose of nature, is sufficient to guard
against this confusion [between those two sciences). It keeps us from
mingling natural science, and the occasion it gives us to judge its
objects teleologically. with our contemplation of God and hence with
a theological derivation [of these objects J. We must not consider it
unimportant whether the expression, purpose of nature, is interchanged
with that of a divine purpose in the arrangement of nature, let alone
whether the latter is passed off as more appropriate and more fitting
for a pious soul, on the ground that surely in the end we cannot get
around deriving those purposive forms in nature from a wise author
of the world. Rather, we must carefully and modestly restrict our·
selves to the expression that says no more than we know-viz.,
purpose of nature. For even before we inquire into the cause of nature
itself, we find that nature contains such products and engages in their
production. They are produced there in accordance with known
empirical laws; it is in terms of these laws that natural science must
judge its objects. And hence the causality in terms of the rule of
purposes [that is responsible] for those objects must also be sought
within natural science. Hence natural science must not leap over its
boundary in order to absorb, as an indigenous principle, something to
whose concept no experience whatever can be adequate and which
we are not entitled to dare approach until we have completed natural
science.
Natural characteristics that can be demonstrated a priori, and
whose possibility we can therefore see from universal principles
without any aid from experience, are absolutely necessary. Hence.
even if such characteristics carry with them technical purposiveness, they still cannot at all be included in the teleology of nature,
which is a method that belongs to physics and that we use to solve
problems of physics. Arithmetic analogies or geometric ones, or
also universal mechanical laws, no matter how strange and admirable
may seem to us [the ability) to unify in one principle [their) different and seemingly quite independent rules, still cannot on that

§ 68.

ON THE PRINCIPLE OF TELEOLOGY. . .

263

account claim that they can serve as bases for teleological explanations in physics. Even if they too deserve to be considered in the
universal theory of the purposiveness of natural things generally.
still that theory would belong elsewhere, namely, to metaphysics,
and would not constitute an inherent principle of natural science.
In the case of the empirical laws of natural purposes in organized
beings, on the other hand, it is presumably not only permissible,
but also unavoidable, to use the teleological way of judging as a
principle of natural science when dealing with a special class of its
objects.
Now in order to keep physics strictly within its bounds, we there
abstract entirely from the question as to whether natural purposes are
purposes intentionally or unintentionally, since otherwise we would
be meddling in extraneous affairs (namely, those of metaphysics). We
settle for regarding natural purposes as objects that are explicable
solely in terms of natural laws that must be conceived of by using the
idea of purposes as principle, and that are even internally cognizable
only in this way as regards their intrinsic form. Therefore we must
avoid any suspicion, in physics, that we might presume to mix something in with our bases of cognition that does not belong to physics at
all-viz., a supernatural cause. That is why, when in teleology we
speak of nature as if the purposiveness in it were intentional, we do so
in such a way that we attribute this intention to nature, i.e., to matter.
This serves to indicate that this term refers here only to a principle of
reflective, rather than of determinative, judgment. (It indicates this
inasmuch as no one would attribute to lifeless material an intention in
the proper sense of the term, and so no misunderstanding can arise.)
It indicates, therefore, that we are not trying to introduce [into
physics 1a special causal basis, but are trying to introduce only another
method for our use of reason in investigation - a method different
from the one in terms of mechanical laws-in order to compensate
for the inadequacy we find in the latter method when we search even
empirically for all the particular laws of nature. Thus, when we
apply teleology to physics, we do quite rightly speak of nature's
wisdom, parsimony, foresight, or beneficence. But in speaking this
way we do not turn nature into an intelligent [verstandigl being (since
that would be absurd), nor are we so bold as to posit a different,
intelligent being above nature as its architect, since that would be

383

264

384

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

presumptuous. 46 Rather, we use these terms only to designate a kind
of causality of nature by analogy with the causality we have in the
technical use of reason, since that helps us to keep in view the rule we
must follow in investigating certain products of nature.
Why, then, does teleology usually not constitute a distinct part of
theoretical natural science, but is employed by theology as a propaedeutic or transition? This is done so that, when we study nature in
terms of its mechanism, we keep to what we can observe or experiment on in such a way that we could produce it as nature does, at
least in terms of similar laws; for we have complete insight only into
what we can ourselves make and accomplish according to concepts.
But organization, as an intrinsic purpose of nature, infinitely surpasses
all our ability to exhibit anything similar through art. As for extrinsic
natural arrangements that we consider purposive (such as wind, rain,
and so on), physics does indeed examine the mechanism in them; but
it is quite unable to exhibit their reference to purposes insofar as this
reference is to be a condition that attaches to the cause necessarily,
since that necessi ty in the [causal J connection concerns nothing but
the connection of our concepts, and does not concern the character
of things.

46'fhe German word vermessen [presumptuous, but literally mismeasuredJ is a good
word, full of meaning. A judgment in which we forget to estimate the extent of our
powers (of understanding) may at times sound very humble, and yet it makes vast
claims and is very presumptuous. Of that sort are most of those judgments in which we
purport to exalt divine wisdom, by attributing the works of creation and preservation to
divine intentions that are actually meant to give credit to the wisdom of the very person
who does this subtle reasoning.

DIVISION II
DIALECTIC OF
TELEOLOGICAL
JUDGMENT
§69

What an Antinomy
of Judgment Is
When judgment determines, it has no principles of its own that form
the basis for concepts of objects. It is not autonomous; for it only
subsumes under laws or concepts that are given it as principles. By
the same token, it is exposed to no danger of having an antinomy of
its own and is exposed to no conflict in its principles. Thus [we found
that I transcendental judgment, which contains the conditions under
which we can subsume under categories, is not itself nomothetic; it
only specifies the conditions of sensible intuition under which a given
concept, a law of the understanding, can be given reality (i.e.,
application),l and it could never come to be at variance with itself
about that (at least not in terms of its principles).
When judgment reflects, on the other hand, it has to subsume
under a law that is not yet given, and bence must subsume under a
law that is in fact only a principle of reflection on [certain I objects for
which we have no objective law at aR, no concept of the object
adequate as a principle for the cases that occur. But since it is not
lief. the Critique 01 Pure Reason,

A 131-36

=

265

B 170-75.1

385

266

386

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

permissible to use the cognitive powers without principles, reflective
judgment will in those cases have to serve itself as a principle. Since
this principle is not objective and cannot provide an objectively
adequate basis for cognizing the object, it has to serve as a merely
subjective principle governing the purposive use of our cognitive
powers-i.e., our reflection on a [certain) kind of objects. So reflective judgment has maxims for cases involving such objects. These
maxims are necessary in order that we may cognize natural laws in
experience. For these maxims allow us to arrive at concepts, even if
these were to be concepts of reason; and reflective judgment needs
such concepts whenever it seeks so much as to get to know nature in
terms of its empirical laws. Now between these necessary maxims of
reflective judgment a conflict may arise, and hence an antinomy; and
this antinomy forms the basis for a dialectic. If two conflicting maxims
both have their basis in the nature of our cognitive powers, then this
dialectic may be called a natural one, an unavoidable illusion that we
must expose and resolve in the critique so that it will not deceive us.

§70

Presentation of That Antinomy
Insofar as reason deals with nature as the sum total of objects of outer
senses, it can use laws as a basis: in part understanding itself prescribes these laws a priori to nature, in part it can expand them
indefinitely by means of the empirical attributes that occur in
experience. To apply the first kind of laws, the universal laws of
material nature in general, judgment does not need a special principle
of reflection: for here it is determinative, since the understanding has
given it an objective principle. But [judgment does need a special
principle of reflection) for the particular laws, the laws that only
experience can reveal to us, and so in their case judgment must serve
itself as a principle. For the particular laws of nature can be so very
diverse and heterogeneous that, without such a principle to guide it,
judgment could not even search for and spot a law in the appearances

§ 70. PRESENTATION OF THAT ANTINOMY

267

of nature, and so could not even hope to reach a coherent empirical
cognition based on a thorough lawfulness of nature, i.e .• on the unity
of nature in terms of empirical laws. Now when [we find] such a
contingent unity of particular laws, it may happen that judgment
presupposes two maxims as it reflects [on this unity l: one of these the
understanding gives it a priori; the other it is prompted to [adopt) by
special experiences, experiences that bring reason into play so that
we may judge corporeal nature and its laws in terms of a special
principle. When judgment reflects on the basis of these two maxims,
it may happen that they do not seem quite compatible, so that a
dialectic arises that leaves judgment perplexed as to what principle [it
should follow) in its reflection.
The first maxim of judgment is this thesis: All production of
material things and their forms must be judged to be possible in terms
of merely mechanical laws.
The second maxim is this antithesis: Some products of material
nature cannot be judged to be possible in terms of merely mechanical
laws. (Judging them requires a quite different causal law-viz., that of
final causes.)
These maxims are regulative principles for our investigation [of
nature J. If we converted them into constitutive principles concerning
the possibility of the objects themselves, they would read:
Thesis: All production of material things is possible in terms of
merely mechanical laws.
Antithesis: Some production of material things is not possible in
terms of merely mechanical laws.
In this latter form, as objective principles for determinative judgment,
the two propositions would contradict each other, so that one of
them would have to be false; and so an antinomy would result. But
this antinomy would not be one of judgment, but instead would be a
conflict within the legislation of reason. Reason, however, cannot
prove either of these two principles, because we cannot have a
determinative a priori principle for the possibility of things in terms of
merely empirical laws of nature.
But if we consider instead the two maxims of a power of judgment
that reflects [i.e., the first thesis and antithesis above], the first of
those two maxims does in fact not contradict [the second J at all. For if
I say that I must judge all events in material nature, and hence also all
the forms that are its products, in terms of merely mechanical laws as

387

268

388

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

to [howl they are possible, then I am not saying that they are possible
in terms of mechanical laws alone (i.e., even if no other kind of
causality comes in). Rather, I am only pointing out that I ought
always to reflect on these events and forms in terms of the principle
of the mere mechanism of nature, and hence ought to investigate this
principle as far as I can, because unless we presuppose it in our
investigation [of nature I we can have no cognition of nature at all in
the proper sense of the term. But none of this goes against the second
maxim - that on certain occasions, in dealing with certain natural
forms (and, on their prompting, even with all of nature), we should
probe these and reflect on them in terms of a principle that differs
entirely from an explanation in terms of the mechanism of nature: the
principle of final causes. For doing so does not void reflection in
terms of the first maxim; rather, we are told to follow it as far as we
can. 2 Nor does the second maxim say that those forms would not be
possible in terms of the mechanism of nature.3 It asserts only that
human reason, if it obeys the first maxim and acts accordingly, will
never be able to discover the slightest basis for what is specific in a
natural purpose, though it may acquire other cognitions of natural
laws. And this assertion leaves it undecided whether in the inner basis
of nature itself, which we do not know, the physical·mechanical
connection and the connection in terms of purposes may not, in the
same things, be linked in one principle. It is only that our reason is
incapable of reconciling them in such a principle; therefore, when
judgment reflects (on a subjective basis), rather than determines (in
which case it follows an objective principle of the possibility of things
themselves), then in the case of certain forms in nature it has to think
of their possibility as based on a principle that differs from that of
natural mechanism.

21"More than is commonly done": ThE Only Possible Basis of Proof (1763), Ak. II.
115 and 126. Cf. also the Critique of Pure Reason. A 691 = B 719, On Using
Teleological PrinCIples in Philosophy (1788), Ak. VIII, 159-60, and the Universal
Natural History and Theory of the Heavens (1755). Ak. I, 331··n. See also below, § 81,
Ak. 421-22 incl. br. n. 8.J
31Compare and contrast The Only Possible Basis of Proof. Ak. II, 114.J

§ 71

Preliminary to the Solution
of the Above Antinomy
We are quite unable to prove that organized natural products cannot
be produced through the mere mechanism of nature. For we have no
insight into the first inner basis [responsible) for the endless diversity
of the particular natural laws, because they are contingent for us
since we cognize them only empirically; and so we cannot possibly
reach the inner and completely sufficient principle of the possibility
of nature (this principle lies in the supersensible). Hence our reason,
whose concept of causality is greatly restricted if reason has to
specify it a priori, cannot possibly tell us whether nature's productive
ability, which is quite adequate for whatever seems to require merely
that nature be like a machine, is not just as adequate for [things} that
we judge to be formed or combined in terms of the idea of purposes,
[or) whether things [considered) to be actual natural purposes (which
is what we must necessarily judge them to be) are in fact based on a
wholly different kind of original causality, namely, an architectonic
understanding, which cannot at all lie in material nature nor in its
intelligible substrate. On the other hand, it is just as indubitably
certain that the mere mechanism of nature cannot provide our cognitive power with a basis on which we could explain the production of
organized beings. Hence the following principle is entirely correct for
reflective judgment, however rash and unprovable it would be for
determinative judgment: that [to account) for the very manifest connection of things in terms of final causes we must think a causality
distinct from mechanism-viz., the causality of an (intelligent) world
cause that acts according to purposes. Applied to reflection, this
principle is a mere maxim of judgment; and the concept of that
causality is a mere idea. We make no claim that this idea has reality,
but only use it as a guide for reflection, which meanwhile continues to
remain open to [the discovery of I any basis for a mechanical explanation and never strays from the world of sense. On the other hand, if
the principle were determinative, it would be an objective principle
prescribed by reason; and judgment, to determine [anything), would

269

389

270

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

have to subject itself to it. But if it does so, then it strays beyond the
world of sense and into the transcendent, and perhaps will be misled.
Hence all semblance of an antinomy between the maxims of strictly
physical (mechanical) and teleological (technical) explanation rests
on our confusing a principle of reflective judgment with one of
determinative judgment, and on our confusing the autonomy of reflective judgment (which holds merely subjectively for our use of reason
regarding the particular empirical laws) with the heteronomy of determinative judgment, which must conform to the laws (universal or
particular) that are given by understanding. 4

§72

On the Various
Systems Concerning
the Purposiveness of Nature

390

No one has ever doubted the correctness of the principle [which says I
that we must judge certain things in nature (organized beings) and
their possibility in terms of the concept of final causes, even if we
demand [to use I this principle only as a guide for observing these
things so as to become acquainted with their character, without
presuming to investigate their first origin. Therefore, the only possible
question is whether this principle is merely subjectively valid, merely
a maxim of our judgment, or whether it is an objective principle of
nature that says that nature has not only its mechanism (governed by
mere laws of motion), but also another kind of causality, that of final
causes, with the mechanical causes (the motive forces) [functioning)
as mere intermediate causes that are subject to the final causes.
Now we could leave this speculative question or problem quite
4[This paragraph seems to suggest that the solution of the antinomy of teleological
judgment is already complete. But in fact this paragraph is only preliminary to that
solution, as the heading of this section indicates. On this problem, and on the actual
solution of the antinomy, see the Translator's Introduction, lxxxviii-xciii incl. n, 90.]

§ 72. ON THE VARIOUS SYSTEMS. . .

271

undecided and unsolved. For if we settle for speculating5 within the
bounds of mere cognition of nature, the above maxims [mechanistic
and teleological J are sufficient for us to study nature to the extent of
our human powers, and to probe its most hidden secrets. So [if in fact
we tI)' to do more than this,] it must be that reason has a certain
suspicion, or that nature gives us a hint, as it were, that if we use the
concept of final causes we could perhaps reach beyond nature and
connect nature itself to the highest point in the series of causes. Why
not stop our investigation of nature (even though we have not yet
advanced far in it), or at least suspend it for a while, and try first to
find out where that stranger in natural science, the concept of natural
purposes, may lead us?
At this point, however, the undisputed maxim above should be
turned into a problem, a problem that opens up a wide field for
controversy: Does the connection in terms of purposes in nature
prove that nature has a special kind of causality? Or is it, rather, that
this connection, considered in itself and according to objective
principles, is identical with the mechanism of nature, or rests on one
and the same basis? Perhaps, on the latter alternative, it is just that in
many natural products this basis is often too deeply hidden for our
investigation, and so we try a subjective principle instead, the principle of art, i.e., of causality in terms of ideas, attributing this causality to nature by analogy. This expedient does in fact succeed in many
cases, though in some it seems to fail; but in any case it does not
entitle us to introduce a kind of causation into natural science that is
distinct from the causality in terms of merely mechanical laws of
nature. Given that we find something purposelike in nature's products,
let us call nature's procedure (causality) a technic, and let us then
divide this technic into an intentional and an unintentional one
(technica intentionalis and technica naturalis). By an intentional
technic I mean that nature's ability to produce [things[ in terms of
final causes must be considered a special kind of causality; by an
unintentional technic I mean that this ability is basically quite identical with the mechanism of nature, and that we have falsely interpreted
the contingent agreement of that ability with our concepts and rules
of art, namely, as a special kind of natural production, whereas in fact
5iOn speculating and theorizing. see Ak. 454 br. D. 51.1

391

272

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

it is merely [the result of] a subjective condition under which we
judge that ability.
Now as we talk about the systems that try to explain nature as
concerns final causes, we must note carefully that the dispute among
all of them is dogmatic-i.e., the dispute is about objective principles
concerning the possibility of things, whether through causes that act
intentionally or only [lauter] those that act unintentionally, and by no
means is the dispute about the subjective maxim as to what mere
judgment we should make concerning the cause of such purposive
products. On the latter alternative the principles, though disparate,
might well still be reconcilable; on the former, the principles are
opposed as contradictories, so that they are incompatible and annul
each other.
The systems that deal with the technic of nature, i.e., with nature's
power to produce [things] in terms of the rule of purposes, are of
two kinds: one interprets natural purposes idealistically, the other
realistically. The idealistic interpretation maintains that all purposiveness of nature is unintentional,' the realistic interpretation maintains that some of this purposiveness (the purposiveness in organized
beings) is intentional, from which we could then infer. as a hypothesis,
the consequence that the technic of nature is intentional, i.e., a
purpose, even as concerns all other products of nature in their relation to the whole of nature.
(1) The ideaUstic interpretation of purposiveness (I always mean
objective purposiveness here) then interprets the natural determination [that gives rise] to the purposive form of its products either as
casualistic or as fatalistic. The casualistic principle refers matter to
the physical basis [responsible] for its form-the laws of motion; the
fatalistic principle refers it to the hyperphysicai basis of matter and of
all of nature. The system that espouses the casualistic interpretation-it
is attributed to Epicurus or Democritus-is so manifestly absurd, if
taken literally, that we must not let it detain us. But it is not so easy to
refute the system that espouses the fatalistic interpretation. (Its author
is said to be Spinoza, even though it is to all appearances much older
than that.) This system appeals to something supersensible, which
therefore our insight cannot reach. What makes the refutation of this
system so difficult is the fact that its concept of the original being is
quite unintelligible. But this much is clear: in this system the connection in terms of purposes in the world must be considered uninten-

§ 72. ON THE VARIOUS SYSTEMS. . .

273

tional (for though the system derives the connection from an original
being, it derives it not from that being's understanding, and hence
not from its intention, but from the necessity of its nature and
from the unity in the world that stems from that nature). Hence the
fatalistic interpretation of purposiveness is also idealistic.
(2) The realistic interpretation of the purposiveness of nature is
also either physical or hyperphysical. The physical version regards
the purposes in nature as based on the analogue of a Imentall power
that acts according to intentions- the life of matter (where that life is
either in the matter, or due to an inner animating principle, viz., a
world soul); this view is called hylozoism. The hyperphysical version
derives the purposes in nature from the original basis of the universe,
namely, an intelligent being (endowed with life originally) that produces according to intentions; this view is theism. 6

§73

None of the Above
Systems Accomplishes
What It Alleges to Accomplish
What do all those systems try to do? They try to explain our teleological judgments about nature, and they go about this in two different
ways: some of them deny that these judgments are true and hence
declare them to constitute an idealistic interpretation of nature
(presented as art); the others acknowledge them as true and promise
6J'his shows that, in most of the speculative matters of pure reason, and as far as
dogmatic a<;sertion~ are concerned. the schools of philosophy have usually tried all the
solutions that are possible for a certain problem. Thus, on Ithe problem ofl the
purposiveness of nature, some have tried lifeless matter or a lifeless God, others a
living matter or else a living God. For us there is no alternative except, if necessary. to
drop all these objective assertions, and instead to weigh our judgment critically merely
in its relation to our cognitive powers, so as to provide the principle of that purposiveness
with a validity that, if not dogmatic, is yet the validity of a maxim and is sufficient for
the safe use of reason.

392

274

393

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

to establish [how J a nature is possible in terms of the idea of final
causes.
(1) The systems that defend the idealistic interpretation of final
causes in nature are of two types. Some of them, while granting the
principle of these final causes a causality in terms of laws of motion
(where this causality is responsible for the purposive existence of
natural things), deny that it foRows intentions: they deny that intentions
determine it to produce [things J purposively, i.e., that a purpose is the
cause. This is how Epicurus explains [the purposiveness in natureJ.
He completely denies the distinction of a technic of nature from mere
mechanism. Instead he adopts blind chance to explain not only
[nature'sJ technic, Le., why [nature's) products harmonize with our
concepts of a purpose, but even nature's mechanism, i.e., how the
causes of this production are determined to this [productionJ according to laws of motion. Hence nothing has been explained, not even
the illusion in our teleological judgments, so that the alleged idealism
in them has by no means been established.
Spinoza, on the other hand, wants to relieve us of [any need toJ
inquire into the basis that makes purposes of nature possible, and
wants to deprive the idea of this basis of all reality. He does this by
refusing to count them as products at all. Instead he regards them as
accidents that inhere in an original being; and he attributes to this
being, the substrate of those natural things, not causality regarding
these things, but merely subsistence. Thus Spinoza does indeed provide natural forms with something that all purposiveness requiresviz., unity in their basis. (For the original being is unconditionally
necessary, and so arc all natural things, which inhere in it as accidents.) But the unity of a purpose, [which is also required for such
purposiveness,J cannot be thought unless the natural forms are also
contingent; and yet Spinoza has taken this contingency away from
them and has thus also deprived these forms of everything intentional,
and has deprived the original basis of natural things of all understanding.
[Thus J Spinozism does not accomplish what it tries to accomplish.
It tries to offer a basis that will explain why things of nature are
connected in terms of purposes (which it does not deny), but all it
points to is the unity of the subject in which they all inhere. But even
if Spinozism be granted [the claim] that the beings of the world exist
in this way, this does not yet make the [resultingJ ontological unity the
unity of a purpose, and certainly does not allow us to grasp the latter

§ 73. NONE OF THE ABOVE SYSTEMS. . .

275

unity. For the unity of a purpose is a very special kind of unity. It does
not follow at all from a connection of things (beings of the world) in
one subject (the original being), but always carries with it reference to
a cause that has understanding. Rather, even if we were to unite all
these things in a simple subject, the unity will amount to reference to
a purpose only if we also think of these things, first, as inner effects of
the substance as a cause, and, second, as having been caused by this
substance through its understanding. Unless these formal conditions
are met, all unity is mere natural necessity; and if we nevertheless
attribute it to things that we present as external to one another, then it
is blind necessity. Of course we could use the expression, purposiveness
of nature, for what the schoolmen call the transcendental perfection
of things (relative to their own essence), which means [merely) that
all things have in them everything that is required for being a thing of
that kind rather than being a thing of some other kind. But [to make
this move) is to play a childish game with words in the place of
concepts. For on this view we must think of all things as purposes, so
that being a thing and being a purpose are one and the same, and so
basically there is nothing that especially deserves to be presented as a
purpose.
So when Spinoza reduced our concepts of purposive [things) in
nature to the consciousness that Ithese things and) we ourselves are
within an all-encompassing (though at the same time simple) being,
and sought that purposive form merely in the unity of that being, he
clearly must have intended to interpret the purposiveness of that form
merely idealistically rather than realistically. But even that he was
unable to do, because the mere presentation of the unity of the
substrate cannot give rise to the idea of even so much as an unintentional purposiveness.
(2) As for the realistic interpretation of natural purposes, there are
those who not only assert this realism but also think they are explaining
it. They believe they have insight into at least the possibility of a
special kind of causality, the kind [found I in causes that act intentionally;
for if they did not believe they had this insight. then they could not
even attempt to explain those natural purposes. For even if we are to
make a hypothesis that Iwe acknowledge to) be very daring. we must
have certainty that the basis we have assumed for it is at least
possible, [so that weI can be sure that the concept of that basis has
objective reality.

394

276

395

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

And yet we cannot even think of living7 matter [as postulated by
one form of hylozoism8 ] as possible. (The Ivery] concept of it
involves a contradiction, since the essential character of matter is
lifelessness, [in Latin] inertia.) Is it possible that [as the other form of
hylozoism says] there is a matter endowed with life [by something
else], and that nature as a whole is [thus] an animal? This possibility
must be used only as far as experience manifests such matter in the
organization lof beings] within lim KleinenJ nature, and [even thenl
only with great caution (if we are trying to support a hypothesis about
purposiveness in nature as a whole lim GrojJen]). But we certainly
have no a priori insight into whether such matter is possible. But this
means that our explanation can only move in a circle: we try to derive
the natural purposiveness in organized beings from the life of matter,
while yet we are familiar with this life only in organized beings and
hence cannot form a concept of the possibility of this purposiveness
unless we have experienced such beings. Hence hylozoism does not
accomplish what it promises.9
That leaves theism. It too cannot dogmatically provide a basis that
accounts for the possibility of natural purposes, and so provide a key
to teleology. But it does have one advantage over all [other] bases
[that have been offered] to explain these purposes-viz., theism is
best able to rescue the purposiveness of nature from idealism; for it
attributes an understanding to the original being and [sol introduces
an intentional causality [to account I for the production of natural
purposes.
For [theism to succeed in its explanation, J we would first of all have
to prove, adequately for determinative judgment, that the unity of a
purpose, which we find in matter, could not possibly result from the
mere mechanism of nature. Only such a proof would entitle us to
postulate determinately that the basis of this unity lies beyond nature.
7[ln the Critique of Practical Reason (Ak. V, 9n), life is defined (narrowly) as "the
ability of a being to act according to laws of the power of desire." In the Metaphy~ics of
MorClls (Ak. VI, 211), Kant defines it similarly as "the ability of a being to act in
conformity with its presentations." Cf. also above, § 72, Ak. 392.]
8["Hylozoism endows everything with life, whereas mClteriCllism. strictly considered,
kills everything": Dreams of cl Spirit·Seer. Ak. II, 330.]

9[Hylozoism "would be the death of all natural philosophy": Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, Ak. IV, 544.]

§ 73. NONE OF THE ABOVE SYSTEMS. . .

277

But in fact all we can make out is that the character and limits of our
cognitive powers (which give us no insight into the first, inner basis of
even this mechanism) force us to give up any attempt to find in matter
a principle Ithat implies J determinate references lof this matter] to a
purpose, so that we are left with no other way of judging nature's
production of things as natural purposes than in terms of a supreme
understanding as cause of the world. That basis. however. [holds]
only for reflective and not for determinative judgment, and is absolutely
incapable of justifying any objective assertion.

§74

The Reason W~ It Is
Impossible to Treat
the ConceQt of a Technic
of Nature Dogmatically
Is That a Natural Purpose
Is Inexplicable
We treat a concept (even an empirically conditioned one) dogmatically if we consider it as contained under, and determine it in accordance with, another concept of the object such that this other concept
amounts to a principle of reason. We treat a concept merely critically
if we consider it only in relation to our cognitive power. and hence in
relation to the subjective conditions under which we think it, without
venturing to decide anything about its object. Hence dogmatic treatment of a concept has the force of law for determinative judgment.
critical treatment merely for reflective judgment.
Now the concept of a thing as a natural purpose is one that
subsumes nature under a causality that is conceivable only [as exercised] by reason; this subsumption then allows us to use that [causalJ
principle in order to judge what experience gives us of that object.
But in order to use the concept of a thing as a natural purpose

396

278

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

dogmatically, for determinative judgment, we would first have to be
sure that it has objective reality, since otherwise we could not subsume any natural thing under it. Now it is true that the concept of a
thing as a natural purpose is empirically conditioned, i.e .• a concept
that is possible only under certain conditions given in experience. lO
Yet it is a concept that cannot be abstracted from experience but is
possible only in terms of a rational principle [that we use J in judging
the object. Since this is the sort of principle it is, we have no way of
seeing and establishing dogmaticaUy that it has objective reality (i.e.,
that an object conforming to it is possible). [Therefore.1 we do not
know whether the concept is an objectively empty one that [we use I
merely [for I reasoning (conceptus ratiocinans), or is a rational concept,
a concept that is a basis for cognition and is confirmed by reason
(conceptus ratiocinatus).11 Hence we cannot treat this concept dogmatically, for determinative judgment-i.e., not only are we unable to
tell whether or not things of nature considered as natural purposes
require for their production a causality of a very special kind (a
causality in terms of intentions), but we cannot even ask the question.
For reason is quite unable to prove the concept of a natural purpose,
i.e., that it has objective reality. (In other words. the concept is not
constitutive for determinative judgment, but merely regulative for
reflective judgment.)
That [the objective reality ofl the concept of a thing as a natural
purpose cannot be proved by reason is clear from this: as concept of a
natural product it contains natural necessity; and yet, as concept of
that same thing as a purpose, it contains at the same time a contingency (relative to mere laws of nature) of the form of the object.
Hence, if this is not to be contradictory. then the concept must
contain not only a natural basis that makes the thing possible, but also
a basis that makes possible nature itself and its reference to something that is not empirically cognizable nature (but is supersensible)
and hence is not cognizable for us at all, [a reference I by which we
can judge the [object of the I concept in terms of a causality other
than that of natural mechanism when we try to decide on its possibility.
Hence the concept of a thing as a natural purpose is transcendent for
determinative judgment if we consider the object through reason
IO[And to that extent it might seem that it must have objective reality. 1
I1[Cf. Ak. 337 br. n.

2.1

§ 74.

WHY IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO TREAT. . .

279

(even though for reflective judgment it may be immanent as concerns
objects of experience), and hence we cannot provide it with the
objective reality [needed] for determinative judgments. This explains
why all the systems that might be devised to treat dogmatically the
concept of natural purposes and the concept of nature as a whole
having coherence in terms of final causes cannot decide anything
whatsoever by way of either objective affirmation or objective negation.
For if we subsume things under a concept that is merely problematic,
then we do not know whether we are judging about something or
nothing, and hence the synthetic predicates of the concept (here,
e.g., whether it is an intentional or an unintentional purpose of nature
that, in thought, we add to the production of the things) can yield
only problematic judgments, whether affirmative or negative, about
the object. The concept of a causality through purposes ([ i.e., the
concept] of art) does indeed have objective reality, as does also the
concept of a causality in terms of the mechanism of nature. But the
concept of a natural causality in terms of the rule of purposes-and
even more so the concept of a being which is the original basis of
nature, viz., a being such as cannot at all be given us in experiencewhile thinkable without contradiction, is nevertheless inadequate for
[making I dogmatic determinations. For we cannot derive such a
concept from experience, nor is it required to make experience
possible; and hence we have nothing that could assure us that the
concept has objective reality. But suppose even that we could get this
assurance: Once I have determinately stated that certain things are
products of divine art, how can I still include them among products of
nature, when it was precisely because nature cannot produce such
things in terms of its [own I laws that I had to appeal to a cause distinct
from it?

397

§75
The Concept of an
Objective Purposiveness
of Nature Is a
Critical Principle of Reason
for OUf Reflective Judgment

398

There is clearly a big difference between saying that certain things of
nature, or even all of nature, could be produced only by a cause that
follows intentions in determining itself to action, and saying that the
peculiar character of my cognitive powers is such that the only way I
can judge [how] those things are possible and produced is by conceiving,
[to account] for this preduction, a cause that acts according to
intentions, and hence a being that produces Ithings] in a way analogous to the causality of an understanding. If I say the first, I am trying
to decide something about the object, and am obliged to establish
that a concept I have assumed has objective reality. If I say the
second, reason determines only [how I must] use my cognitive powers
commensurately with their peculiarity and with the essential conditions [imposed by] both their range and their limits. Hence the first is
an objective principle for determinative judgment, the second a
subjective principle for merely reflective judgment and hence a maxim
imposed on it by reason.
For if we want to investigate the organized products of natufe by
continued observation, we find it completely unavoidable to apply
[unterlegen J to nature the concept of an intention, so that even for
our empirical use of reason this concept is an absolutely necessary
maxim. Now, obviously, once we have adopted such a guide for
studying nature and found that it works, we must at least try this
maxim of judgment on the whole of nature too, since this maxim may
well allow us to discover many further laws of nature that would
otherwise remain hidden to us since our insights into the inner [nature J
of its mechanism is so limited. But while that maxim of judgment is
useful when applied to the whole of nature, it is not indispensable

280

§ 75. THE CONCEPT OF AN OBJECTIVE PURPOSIVENESS...

281

there, since the whole of nature is not given us as organized (in the
strictest sense of organized as given above I2 ). But when we deal with
those products of nature that we can judge only as having intentionally been formed in just this way rather than some other, then we
need that maxim of reflective judgment essentially, if we are to
acquire so much as an empirical cognition of the intrinsic character
of these products. For we cannot even think them as organized things
without also thinking that they were produced intentionally.
Now if we present the existence or form of a thing as possible
[only I under the condition [that there is] a purpose, then the concept
of the thing is inseparably connected with the concept that the thing
is contingent (in terms of natural laws). That is also why those natural
things that we find possible only as purposes constitute the foremost
proof that the world as a whole is contingent, and are the sole basis
for a proof that holds both for common understanding and for the
philosopher: that this whole depends on and has its origin in a being
that exists apart from the world and (given how purposive these forms
are) is moreover intelligent. Hence these things are the sole basis for
proving that teleology cannot find final [ Vollendung) answers to its
inquiries except in a theology.13
But what does even the most complete teleology of all prove in the
end? Does it prove, say, that such an intelligent being14 exists? No;
all it proves is that, given the character of our cognitive powers, i.e.,
in connecting experience with the supreme principles of reason, we
are absolutely unable to form a concept of [how) such a world is
possible except by thinking of it as brought about by a supreme cause
that acts intentionally. Hcnce we cannot objectively establish the
proposition: There is an intelligent original being; we can do so only
subjectively, for the use of our judgment as it reflects on the purposes
in nature, which are unthinkable on any principle other than that of
an intentional causality of a supreme cause.
If we tried, from teleological bases, to establish dogmatically the
proposition that such an intelligent being exists. we would get entangled
in difficulties from which we could not extricate ourselves. For such
121See § § 65-66, Ak. 372-77.]
131Cf. §85, Ak. 436-42.1
141As to why expressions such as this are not capitalized in this translation. see above,
Ak. 273 br. n. 43.1

399

282

400

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

inferences would have to presuppose the proposition that the organized beings in the world are impossible except through a cause
that acts intentionally. This means that we would have to be willing to assert that, [merely) because we need the idea of purposes
in order to study these things in their causal connection and to
cognize the lawfulness in that connection, we are also justified
in presupposing that every thinking and cognizing being is subject to the same need as a necessary condition, and hence that
this condition attaches to the object rather than merely to our[selves,
as) subject[s). But there is no way that such an assertion can be
upheld. For purpeses in nature are not given to us by the object: we
do not actually observe purposes in nature as intentional ones, but
merely add this concept [to nature's products) in our thought,
as a guide for judgment in reflecting on these products. [And) an
a priori justification for accepting such a concept, as having objective
reality, is even impossible for us. Hence there is absolutely no pro~
osition left us except one that rests on subjective conditions only.
the conditions under which judgment reflects commensurately with
our cognitive powers. This proposition, if expressed as holding
objectively and dogmatically, would read: There is a God. But
in fact the proposition entitles us human beings only to this restricted formula: The purposiveness that we must presuppose even
for cognizing the inner possibility of many natural things is quite
unthinkable to us and is beyond our grasp unless we think of it,
and of the world as such, as a product of an intelligent cause (a
God).
Now if this proposition, which is based on an indispensable [and I
necessary maxim of our judgment, is perfectly satisfactory for all
speculative and practical uses of our reason from every human point
of view, then indeed I would like to know just what we have lost if we
cannot also prove it valid for higher beings, i.e., prove it from pure
objective bases (to which unfortunately our powers do not extend).
For it is quite certain that in terms of merely mechanical principles of
nature we cannot even adequately become familiar with, much less
explain, organized beings and how they are internally possible. So
certain is this that we may boldly state that it is absurd for human
beings even to attempt it, or to hope that perhaps some day another
Newton might arise who would explain to us, in terms of natural laws
unordered by any intention, how even a mere blade of grass is

§ 75. THE CONCEPT OF AN OBJECTIVE PURPOSIVENESS. . .

283

produced,15 Rather, we must absolutely deny that human beings
have such insight. On the other hand, it would also be too presumptuous for us to judge that, supposing we could penetrate to the principle
in terms of which nature made the familiar universal laws of nature
specific, there simply could not be in nature a hidden basis adequate
to make organized beings possible without an underlying intention
(but through the mere mechanism of nature). For where would we
have obtained such knowledge? Probabilities are quite irrelevant
here, since we are concerned with judgments of pure reason. Hence
we can make no objective judgment whatever, whether affirmative or
negative, about the proposition as to whether there is a being who
acts according to intentions and who, as cause (and hence author) of
the world, is the basis of the beings we rightly call natural purposes.
Only this much is certain: If at any rate we are to judge by what our
own nature grants us to see (subject to the conditions and bounds of
our reason), then we are absolutely unable Ito account] for the
possibility of those natural purposes except by regarding them as
based on an intelligent being. This is all that conforms to the maxim
of our reflective judgment and so to a basis that, though in the
subject. attaches inescapably to the human race.

§76

Comment
The following contemplation would greatly deserve elaborate treatment in transcendental philosophy; 16 but here I insert it only as a
digression intended for elucidation (not as a proof of what I have set
forth here).
Reason is a power of principles, and its ultimate demand [for
principles] aims at the unconditioned. Understanding, on the other
hand, always serves reason only under a certain condition, one that
15[Cf. the Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens (1755). Ak. 1.230;
also above, Ak. 378, and below. Ak. 409.}
16[See above. Ak. 213 hr. n. 25.}

401

284

402

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

must be given [to us]. But without concepts of the understanding, to
which objective reality must be given, reason cannot make objective
(synthetic) judgments at all. As theoretical reason it has absolutely no
constitutive principles of its own, but merely regulative ones. Two
points emerge from this. First, if reason advances to where understanding cannot follow, it becomes transcendent, displaying itself not
in objectively valid concepts, but instead in ideas, though these do
have a basis (as regulative principles). But, second, since the understanding cannot keep pace with reason, while yet it would be needed
to make [ideas] valid for objects, it restricts the validity of those ideas
of reason to just the subject, yet in a universal way, i.e., [as a validity]
for all subjects of our species. In other words, understanding restricts
the validity of these ideas to this condition: that, given the nature of
our (human) cognitive ability, or even given any concept we can form
of the ability of a finite rational being as such, all thinking must be
like this and cannot be otherwise-though we are not asserting that
such a judgment has its basis in the object. Let me [illustrate my point
by] some examples. I am not urging the reader to accept these
examples immediately as proved propositions; they are both too
important and too difficult for that. But they may still provide him
with food for meditation, and serve to elucidate what is our proper
task here.
It is indispensable [and) necessary for human understanding to
distinguish between the possibility and the actuality of things, and
this fact has its basis in the subject and in the nature of his cognitive
powers,l7 For if the exercise of these powers did not require two
quite heterogeneous components, understanding to provide concepts,
and sensible intuition to provide objects corresponding to these, then
there would be no such distinction (between the possible and the
actual). If our understanding were intuitive Irather than discursive,
i.e., conceptual] it would have no objects except actual [onesl. 18
[For] we would then be without concepts (and these deal with the
mere possibility of an object) and also be without sensible intuitions
(which do give us something [actual), yet without allowing us to

17[See also the Critique of Pure Reason, A 218-26 .. B 265-74.)

18[This is discussed more fully in the next section, § 77, Ak. 405-10.[

§ 76.

COMMENT

285

cognize it as an object).1 9 But our entire distinction between the
merely possible and the actual rests on this: in saying that a thing is
possible we are positing only the presentation of it with respect to our
concept and to our thinking ability in general; but in saying that a
thing is actual we are positing the thing itself [an sich selbstJ20 (apart
from that concept). Hence the distinction between possible and actual
things holds merely subjectively, for human understanding. For even
if something does not exist, we can still have it in our thoughts; or we
can present something as given, even though we have as yet no
concept of it. Hence the two propositions, that things can be possible
without being actual, and that consequently one cannot at all infer
actuality from mere possibility, do indeed hold for human reason.
And yet this does not prove that the distinction lies in things themselves [selbstl; there clearly is no such implication. It is true that
those two propositions also hold for objects insofar as our cognitive
power, which is conditioned by the sensible, deals also with objects of
sense; but they do not hold for things in general [i.e., even for things
in themselvesJ. That this is so is evident from the fact that reason
forever demands that we assume something or other (the original
basis) as existing with unconditioned necessity, something in which
there is no longer to be any distinction between possibility and
actuality; and for this idea our understanding has absolutely no
concept, Le., it cannot find a way to present such a thing and its way
of existing. For if the understanding thinks it (no matter how), then
we are merely presenting the thing as possible. If the understanding is
conscious of it as given in intuition, then it is actual, and no thought
of possibility comes in. Hence the concept of an absolutely necessary
being, though an indispensable idea of reason, is for human understanding an unattainable problematic concept. This concept does
hold for the use we [humansJ make of our cognitive powers in
accordance with their peculiar character; but by the same token it
does not hold for the object, and hence for every cognizing being. For
I cannot presuppose that thought and intuition are two distinct conditions for the exercise of the cognitive powers of every such cognizing
19150 while neither concepts nor sensible iotuitions (alone) can give us actual objects,
an intuitive understanding would do only that.1

20IThing in itself. literally. yet no noumenlJll seems to be intended here, as the next
two sentences indicate.J

286
403

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

being, and hence for the possibility and actuality of things. An understanding to which this distinction did not apply would mean: AU
objects cognized by me are (exist);21 such a being could have no
presentation whatever of the possibility that some objects might not
exist after all, i.e., of the contingency of those that do exist, nor,
consequently, of the necessity to be distinguished from that contingency.
What makes it so difficult for our understanding with its concepts to
match reason here is merely this: that there is something which for it.
as human understanding. is transcendent (Le., impossible in view of
the subjective conditions of its cognition). but which reason nevertheless treats as belonging to the object and turns into a principle. Now
in this [kind of case] the following maxim always holds: where cognizing
[certain] objects is beyond the ability of our understanding, we must
think them in accordance with the subjective conditions for exercising [our] powers, conditions that attach necessarily to our (i.e., human)
nature. And if the judgments we make in this way cannot be constitutive principles that determine the character of the object (as is indeed
inevitable where the concepts are transcendent), they can still be
regulative principles, safe and immanent in their employment and
commensurate with the human point of view.
[We said that] reason, when it considers nature theoretically, has to
assume the idea that the original basis of nature has unconditioned
necessity. But when it considers nature practically. it similarly presupposes its own causality as unconditioned (as far as nature is concerned),
i.e., its own freedom. since it is conscious of its [ownl moral command.
Here. however, the objective necessity of the action, in other words,
duty. is being opposed to the necessity that the action would have if it
were a [mere] event with its basis in nature rather than in freedom
(i.e., the causality of reason); and the action that morally is absolutely
necessary is regarded as quite contingent physically (i.e .• [we see] that
what ought necessarily to happen still fails to happen on occasion. It
is clear, therefore, that only because of the subjective character of
our practical ability do we have to present moral laws as commands
(and the actions conforming to them as duties) and does reason
211ef. the Critique of Pure Reason. B 139 (and cf. B 135), where Kant describes an
intuitive understanding as "an understanding through whose Ispontaneous \ presentation the objects of this presentation would at the same time exist...... For a fuller
discussion of an intuitive understanding, see the next section, § 77, Ak. 405-10.\

§ 76. COMMENT

287

express this necessity not by is (i.e., happens) but by ought to be. 22
This would not be the case if we considered reason, regarding its
causality, as being without sensibility (the subjective condition for
applying reason to objects of nature), and hence as being a cause in
an intelligible world that harmonized throughout with the moral law.
For in such a world there would be no difference between obligation
and action, between a practical law that says what is possible through
our doing, and the theoretical Jaw that says what is actual through our
doing. It is true that an intelligible world in which everything would
be actual just because it is (both good and) possible-and, along with
this world, even freedom, its formal condition - is for us a transcendent concept that is inadequate for a constitutive principle for determining an object and its objective reality. Yet [the concept of] freedom
serves us as a universal regulative principle because of the (in part
sensible) character of our nature and ability, and the same applies to
all rational beings connected with the world of sense, insofar as our
reason is capable of forming a presentation of them. That principle
does not objectively determine the character of freedom as a form of
causality; rather, and with no less validity than if it did do that, it
makes the rule [that we ought I to act according to that idea a
command for everyone.
Similarly, regarding the case before us, we may grant that, unless
we had the kind of understanding that has to proceed from the
universal to the particular, we would find no distinction between
natural mechanism and the technic of nature, i.e., connection in it in
terms of purposes. For the fact that our understanding has to proceed
from the universal to the particular has the following consequence: In
terms of the universal [supplied by the understanding] the particular,
as such, contains something contingent. And yet reason requires that
even the particular laws of nature be combined in a unified and hence
lawful way. (This lawfulness of the contingent is called purposiveness.)
Therefore, unless the power of judgment has [its own] universal law
under which it can subsume that particular, it cannot recognize any
purposiveness in it and hence cannot make any determinative judgment about it. [Differently put: I It is impossible to derive the particular laws, as regards what is contingent in them, a priori from the
universal ones [supplied by the understanding], [i.e.,1 by determining
22IEmphasis added.]

404

288

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGlCAL JUDGMENT

the concept of the object. Hence the concept of the purposiveness
that nature displays in its products must be one that, while not
pertaining to the determination of objects themselves, is nevertheless
a subjective principle that reason has for our judgment, since this
principle is necessary for human judgment in dealing with nature.
The principle is regulative (not constitutive), but it holds just as
necessarily for our human judgment as it would if it were an objective
principle.

§77

40S

On the Peculiarity of
the Human Understanding
That Makes the Concept of
a Natural Purpose
Possible for Us
In the preceding Comment2J we mentioned peculiarities of our cognitive power (even of the higher one), and how we are easily misled into
transferring these peculiarities to things themselves as [if they were I
objective predicates. But in fact these peculiarities concern ideas, to
which no commensurate object can be given in experience, so that
they can serve us only as regulative principles in the pursuit of
experience.24 Now the same applies to the concept of a natural
purpose as regards the cause that makes it possible! to apply I such a
predicate: that cause [wei can [find] only in [ourl idea [of itl. And yet
here the result which conforms to that idea (i.e., the product itself) is
given in nature. [Hence I the concept of a causality of nature which
implies that nature is a being acting according to purposes seems to turn
the idea of a natural purpose into a principle that is constitutive of the
natural purpose. In this respect this idea is distinguished from all others.
231§76,

Ak. 401-04.1

241 See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 642-68

=

B 670-96.1

§ 77.

PECULIARITY OF THE HUMAN UNDERSTANDING. . .

289

But lin fact] the distinguishing feature consists Imerely) in this:
the idea in question is a principle of reason for the power of
judgment, not for the understanding. Hence it is a principle [that
helps us) merely to apply understanding generally to possible objects of experience, namely, in those cases where we cannot judge
determinatively but can judge merely reflectively. Therefore, even
though in those cases the object can be given in experience, yet
we cannot even determinately judge it in conformity with the idea
(let alone do so with complete adequacy) but can only reflect
on it.
Hence this distinguishing feature of the idea of a natural purpose
concerns a peculiarity of our (human) understanding in relation to
the power of judgment and its reflection on things of nature. But if
that is so, then we must here be presupposing the idea of some
possible understanding different from the human one (just as, in the
Critique of Pure Reason, we had to have in mind a possible different
intuition if we wanted to consider ours as a special kind, namely, as an
intuition for which objects count only as appearances).25 Only by
presupposing this idea can we say that because of the special character of our understanding must we consider certain natural products,
as to Ihow] they are possible, as having been produced intentionaUy
and as purposes. lAnd we do say this,] though without implying that
there must actually be a special cause that determines Iobjects] on
25[The "different understanding" and the "different intuition" turn out to be (almost)
the same thing: an intuitive understanding (or "intuitive intellect") is a power of
intellectual intuition. Its intuitions would (like understanding itself) be spo,,14nflow,

whereas our intuitions consist of two forms (space, time) and (if empirical) sensations
that we receive. In the Critique of Pure Reason (8 72), Kant says that our intuition
"is called sensible because it is not original, i.e., not one through [the spontaneous
presentations off which the very existence of the intuition's object is given [as noumenon,
thing in itself: see 8 307-09] (an intuition that, as far as we can see, only the original
being can have); rather, our intuition is dependent on the existence of the object [in
itself, as noumenal ground of our sensation], and hence is possible only inasmuch as
the subject's capacity to present is affected by that object.... [Our intuition[ is derivative (intuitus derivativus), not original (intllitus origjnarius), hence not an intellectual
intuition." (Cf. also B 68, B 135, and esp. B 139.) So while, as Kant says here, for our
intuition (as connected with our understanding) objects "count only III appearances,"
for an intellectual intuition an object would count as a thing in itself (Critique of Pure
Reason, B 307-(9), which would then be the thing we "regard ... as based on a
corresponding intellectual intuition ...... (See below, Alt. 409. 0. also the Translator's
Introduction, xci-xcii.]

290
406

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

the basis of the presentation of a purpose, i.e., without implying that
the basis that makes such products of nature possible could not be
found, even by an understanding different from (higher than) the
human one, in the very mechanism of nature, i.e., in a causal connection that does not necessarily [ausschliejJungsweise I presuppose an
understanding as cause.
So what matters here is how our understanding relates to judgment:
we must find in this relation a certain contingency in the character of
our understanding, so that we can take note of this peculiarity as what
distinguishes our understanding from other possible ones.
We find this contingency quite naturally in the particular that
judgment has to bring under the universal supplied by the concepts of
the understanding. For the universal supplied by our (human) understanding does not determine the particular; therefore even if different
things agree in a common characteristic, the variety of ways in which
they may come before our perception is contingent. For our understanding is a power of concepts, i.e., a discursive understanding, so
that it must indeed be contingent for it as to what the character and
all the variety of the particular may be that can be given to it in nature
and that can be brought under its concepts. Now [all I cognition
requires [not only understanding] but also intuition; and a power of
complete spontaneity (as opposed to receptivity] of intuition would
be a cognitive power different from, and wholly independent of,
sensibility: thus a power of complete spontaneity of intuition would
be an understanding in the most general sense of the term. Hence we
can conceive of an intuitive understanding as well (negatively, merely
as one that is not discursive 26), which, [unlike ours. I does not (by
means of concepts) proceed from the universal to the particular and
thus to the individual. For such an understanding there would not be
that contingency in the way nature's products harmonize with the
26[We say uhow this [intellectual [ intuition of the object is not." (Critique of Pure
Reason, B 149.) We can similarly characterize the (noumenaI) object of this intuition
negatively: uSo if we suppose an object of nonsensible intuition as given, we can indeed
conceive of it by all those predicates that lie in the very presupposition. [namely.) that
it has nothing that belongs to sensible intuition. i.e., that it is not extended. i.e., not in
space. that its continuance is not [inj time, that no change occurs in it (no succession of
states in time), etc." (Ibid., B 149.) Cf. also ibid., B 3CYT, where a noumenon in the
negative sense is characterized as 8 thing insofar as it is not an object 0/ our sensible
intuition: but in the positive sense, as "an object of a nonsensible intuition, ... namely,
an intellectual intuition.... ")
00

§ 77. PECULIARITY OF THE HUMAN UNDERSTANDING.. .

291

understanding in terms of particular laws. It is this contingency that
makes it so difficult for our understanding to unify the manifold in
nature so as to [give rise to] cognition. This task, which an intuitive
understanding does not need to perform, can be accomplished by our
understanding only through a harmony between natural characteristics and our power of concepts; and this harmony is very contingent.
Therefore our understanding has this peculiarity as regards judgment:
when cognition occurs through our understanding, the particular is
not determined by the universal and therefore cannot be derived
from it alone. And yet this particular in nature's diversity must (through
concepts and laws) harmonize with the universal in order that the
particular can be subsumed under the universal. But, under these
circumstances, this harmony must be very contingent, and must lack
a determinate principle as far as the power of judgment is concerned.
How then can we at least conceive of the possibility of such a
harmony-one that is presented as contingent and hence as possible
only through a purpose that aims at it - between the things of nature
and our judgment? To do this, we must at the same time conceive of a
different understanding: without as yet attributing any [concept of al
purpose to this understanding. we can then present this harmony
between the [particular] natural laws and our judgment as necessary
relative to that understanding, [even thoughl our own understanding
can conceive of this harmony only as mediated by purposes.
The point is this: Our understanding has the peculiarity that when
it cognizes, e.g., the cause of a product, it must proceed from the
analytically universal to the particular (i.e., from concepts to the
empirical intuition that is given); consequently, in this process our
understanding determines nothing regarding the diversity of the
particular. Instead (under the supposition that the object is a natural
product) our understanding must wait until the subsumption of the
empirical intuition under the concept provides this determination for
the power of judgment. But we can also conceive of an understanding
that, unlike ours, is not discursive but intuitive, and hence proceeds
from the synthetically universal (the intuition of a whole as a whole)
to the particular, i.e., from the whole to the parts. Hence such an
understanding as well as its presentation of the whole has no contingency in the combination of the parts in order to make a determinate form of the whole possible. Our understanding, on the other
hand, requires this contingency, because it must start from the parts

407

292

408

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

taken as bases-which are thought of as universal-for different
possible forms that are to be subsumed under these bases as conse~
quences.[We.1 given the character of our understanding, can regard a
real whole of nature only as the joint effect of the motive forces of the
parts. Let us suppose, then, that we try to present, not the possibility
of the whole as dependent on the parts (which would conform to our
discursive understanding), but the possibility of the parts, in their
character and combination, as dependent on the whole, so that we
would be following the standard set by intuitive (archetypal) under~
standing. If we try to do this, then, in view of that same peculiarity of
our understanding, we cannot do it by having the whole contain the
basis that makes the connection of the parts possible (since in the
discursive kind of cognition this would be a contradiction). The only
way that we can present the possibility of the parts as dependent on
the whole is by having the presentation of [the I whole contain the
basis that makes possible the form of that whole as well as the
connection of the parts required to [make] this [form possibleJ. Hence
such a whole would be an effect, a product, the presentation of which
is regarded as the cause that makes the product possible. But the
product of a cause that determines its effect merely on the basis of the
presentation of that effect is called a purpose. It follows from this that
the fact that we present [certainl products of nature as possible only
in terms of a kind of causality that differs from the causality of the
natural laws pertaining to matter, namely, the causality of purposes
and final causes, is merely a consequence of the special character of
our understanding. Therefore, this principle [of the causality in terms
of final causes] does not pertain to [how] such things themselves are
possible through this kind of production (not even if we consider
them as phenomena), but pertains only to the way our understanding
is able to judge them. This clarifies at the same time why we are far
from satisfied in natural science if we can explain the products of
nature through a causality in terms of purposes: the reason for this is
that all we demand in such an explanation is that natural production
be judged in a way commensurate with our ability for judging such
production, i.e., in a way commensurate with reflective judgment,
rather than with the things themselves and for the sake of determina~
tive judgment. And Ito make these points J we do not have to prove
that such an intellectus archetypus is possible. Rather, we must prove
only that the contrast Ibetween such an intellect and lour discursive

§ 77. PECULIARITY OF THE HUMAN UNDERSTANDING. . .

293

understanding-an understanding which requires images (it is an
intellectus ectypus )27 -and the contingency of its having this character lead us to that idea (of an intellectus archetypus), and we must
prove that this idea does not involve a contradiction.
When we consider a material whole as being, in terms of its form, a
product of its parts and of their forces and powers for combining on
their own (to which we must add other matter that the parts supply
to one another), then our presentation is of a whole produced
mechanically. But we get no concept of a whole as a purpose in this
way; the inner possibility of a whole as a purpose always presupposes
that there is an idea of this whole and presupposes that what these
parts are like and how they operate depend on that idea, which is just
how we have to present an organized body. But, as I have shown, it
does not follow from this that it is impossible for such a body to be
produced mechanically. For that would be tantamount to saying that
it is impossible (contradictory) for any understanding to present such
a unity in the combination of [a thing's J manifold without also Ithinking
of] the idea of that unity as causing it, in other words, without
[thinking of] the production as intentional. But this consequence
[that an organized body cannot be produced mechanically I would in
fact follow if we were entitled to regard material beings as things in
themselves. For then the unity that is the basis on which natural
formations are possible would be only the unity of space, and yet
space is not a basis [responsible I for the reality of products but is only
their formal condition; space merely resembles the basis we are
seeking inasmuch as no part in space can be determined except in
relation to the whole (so that [in its case too I the possibility of the
parts is based on the presentation of the whole). But in fact it is at
least possible to consider the material world as mere appearance, and
to think something as [its] substrate, as thing in itself (which is not
appearance), and to regard this thing in itself as based on a corresponding intellectual intuition (even though not ours). In that way
there would be for nature, which includes us as well, a supersenbible
basis of its reality, though we could not cognize this basis. Hence we
would consider in terms of mechanical laws whatever is necessary in
27[The "archetypal" understanding would present originals (things in themselves); our
"ectypal" understanding, with the help of "images" (perceptions) gained from our
intuition, presents derivatives (things as appearances) of those originals.)

409

294

410

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

nature as an object of sense; but the harmony and unity of the
particular laws of nature and of the forms based on them are contingent in terms of mechanical laws, and [so] this harmony and unity, as
objects of reason, we would at the same time consider in terms of
teleological laws (as, indeed, we would consider the whole of nature
as a system). So we would judge nature in terms of two kinds of
principles, and the mechanical kind of explanation would not be
excluded by the teleological as if they contradicted each other.
This also allows us to see what we could otherwise have suspected,
but could hardly have asserted with certainty and have proved: that
although the principle of a mechanical derivation of purposive natural products is compatible with the teleological principle, the mechanical one could certainly not make the teleological one dispensable. In
other words, when we deal with a thing that we must judge to be a
natural purpose (i.e., when we deal with an organized being), though
we can try on it all the laws of mechanical production that we know
or may yet discover, and though we may indeed hope to make good
progress with such mechanical laws, yet we can never [account] for
the possibility of such a product without appealing to a basis for its
production that is wholly distinct from the mechanical one, namely. a
causality through purposes. Indeed, absolutely no human reason (nor
any finite reason similar to ours in quality, no matter how much it may
surpass ours in degree) can hope to understand, in terms of nothing
but mechanical causes, how so much as a mere blade of grass is
produced. For it seems that [wenn) judgment is quite unable to study,
even if it restricts itself to experience as its guide, [how) such objects
are possible, without Iusing] the teleological connection of causes
and effects. IYetl it also seems that for external objects as appearances we cannot possibly find an adequate basis that refers to purposes,
but it seems instead that, even though this basis also lies in nature, we
must still search for it only in nature's supersensible substrate, even
though all possible insight into that substrate is cut off from us: hence
it seems [(German) so) that there is absolutely no possibility for us to
obtain, from nature itself, bases with which to explain combinations
in terms of purposes; rather, the character of the human cognitive
power forces us to seek the supreme basis for such combinations in an
original understanding, as cause of the world.

§ 78

How the Principle of the
Universal Mechanism
of Matter and the
Teleological Principle
Can Be Reconciled in the
Technic of Nature
Reason is tremendously concerned not to abandon the mechanism
nature [employs) in its products, and not to pass over it in explaining
them, since without mechanism we cannot gain insight into the nature
of things. Even if it were granted that a supreme architect directly
created the forms of nature as they have always been, or that he
predetermined the ones that in the course of nature keep developing
according to the same model, still none of this advances our cognition of nature in the least; for we do not know at all how that being
acts, and what its ideas are that are supposed to contain the principles
by which natural beings are possible, and [so I we cannot explain
nature by starting from that being, i.e., by descending (in other words,
a priori) [from that being to nature]. Or suppose we try to explain by
ascending (in other words, a posteriori), i.e., we start from the forms
of objects of experience because we think they display purposiveness,
and then, to explain this purposiveness, we appeal to a cause that acts
according to purposes: in that case our explanation would be quite
tautologous and we would deceive reason with [mere I words-not
to mention that with this kind of explanation we stray into the
transcendent, where our cognition of nature cannot follow us and
where reason is seduced to poetic raving, even though reason's foremost vocation is to prevent precisely that.
On the other hand, it is just as necessary a maxim of reason that it
not pass over the principle of purposes in [dealing withl the products
of nature. For though this principle does indeed not help us grasp how
these products originate, yet it is a heuristic principle for investigating
the particular laws of nature. It would serve for this even if we did not

295

411

296

412

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

try, by searching beyond nature for the basis on which these products
are possible. to use it to explain nature itself, but continued in the
meantime to can these products natural purposes only, even though
they plainly display the intentional unity [that characterizes] a purpose.
But since the question of how these products are possible must be
raised in the end, it is just as necessary for reason to think a special
kind of causality that cannot be found in nature, as it is necessary for
the mechanism of natural causes to have its own causality. For if we
are to indicate a basis that makes those forms possible, then we need
more than this mechanism, since matter can receive more and other
forms than it can get through mechanism: we need in addition a cause
that has spontaneity (which, as such, cannot be matter). Of course,
before reason takes this step, it must proceed cautiously; it must not
try to explain as teleological every technic of nature, i.e .• every power
of nature to produce [things) with a shape that manifests purposiveness
for our mere apprehension (as in the case of bodies [of) regular
[shape J), but reason must continue meanwhile to regard such technic
as possible by mere mechanism. But reason must not carry this
attempt to ex.plain things in mechanical terms to the point of excluding the teleological principle, i.e., to the point of insisting on following mere mechanism even in cases where natural forms are purposive
[or specially suitable I for rational investigation into how their causes
make them possible and where this purposiveness manifests itself
quite undeniably as a reference to a different kind of causality. For
[going to the extreme of explaining everything only mechanically]
must make reason fantasize and wander among chimeras of natural
powers that are quite inconceivable, just as much as a merely teleological kind of explanation that takes no account whatever of the
mechanism of nature made reason rave.
As applied to one and the same natural thing, we cannot link or
reconcile the mechanical and the teleological principle [if we regard
theml as principles for explaining (deducing) one thing from another,
i.e., [regard them I as dogmatic and constitutive principles [of] determinative judgment for [gaining] insight into nature. For example, if I
assume that a maggot should be regarded as a product of the mere
mechanism of matter (i.e., of the restructuring that matter does on its
own, once its elements are set free by putrefaction), I cannot then go
on to derive the same product from the same matter [now regarded]
as a causality that acts in terms of purposes. Conversely, if I assume

§ 78.

PRINCIPLE OF THE UNIVERSAL MECHANISM. . .

297

that the maggot is a natural purpose, then I cannot count on there
being a mechanical way of producing it and cannot assume this as a
constitutive principle for judging how the maggot is possible. We
cannot reconcile the two principles in this way. For the two kinds of
explanation exclude each other, even on the supposition that objectively both these bases for the possibility of such a product rested [in
turn] on a single one, though one that we left out of account. [Rather,!
if we are to have a principle that makes it possible to reconcile the
mechanical and the teleological principles by which we judge nature,
then we must posit this further principle in something that lies beyond
both (and hence also beyond any possible empirical presentation of
nature), but that nonetheless contains the basis of nature, namely, we
must posit it in the supersensible, to which we must refer both kinds
of explanation. On the other hand, we can have no concept of the
supersensible except the indeterminate concept of a basis that makes
it possible for us to judge nature in terms of empirical laws; but we
cannot determine this basis any further by any predicate. It follows
from this that we cannot reconcile the two principles on a basis that
would allow explanation (explication), on the part of determinative
judgment, of how a product is possible in terms of given laws, but
only on a basis that allows examination [Erorterongj (exposition) of
this possibility, on the part of reflective judgment. For to explain
[something) means to derive [it] from a principle, and hence we must
be able to cognize and state this principle distinctly. Now it is true
that the principle of the mechanism of nature and the principle of
nature's causality in terms of purposes, as both are applied to one and
the same natural product, must be linked in a single higher principle
and flow from it together [gemeinschaftlich]. since otherwise we
could not consistently use both in considering nature. And the fact
that the two principles [or maxims Jhave this higher one objectively in
common [gemeinschaftlich J also establishes the fact that the maxim[ sI
of natural investigation that depend on it [belong] together. But if this
principle is of such a kind that we can only point to it, but can never
cognize it determinately and state it distinctly so as to apply it to the
cases that occur. then we cannot use it to explain. i.e., derive distinctly and determinately, how there can be a natural product that is
possible in terms of both of those hetergeneous principles. Now the
principle that mechanical and teleological derivation have in common is the supersensible, which we must regard as the basis of nature

298

413

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

as phenomenon. But of the supersensible we cannot, from a theoretical point of view, form the slightest determinate and positive concept.
Hence there is no way we can explain how, under the supersensible as
principle, nature (in terms of its particular laws) constitutes for us a
system that can be cognized as possible in terms of two principles:
that of production from physical and that of [production fromJ final
causes. All we can do is this: if we happen to find natural objects
whose possibility is inconceivable to us in terms merely of the principle of mechanism (which in the case of a natural being always has a
claim Ito being applied 1) so that we must rely also on teleological
principles, then we can presume that we may confidently investigate
natural laws in accordance with both principles (once our understanding is able to cognize [howl the natural product is possible on the
basis of one or the other principle), without our being troubled by the
seeming conflict that arises between the two principles for judging
that product. For we are assured that it is at least possible that
objectively, too, both these principles might be reconcilable in one
principle (since they concern appearances, which presuppose a supersensible basis).
Hence it may be that. regarding one and the same product and its
possibility, both the mechanism and the teleological (intentional)
technic of nature are subject to a common higher principle of nature
in its particular laws. But even if they are subject to such a higher
principle, inasmuch as this principle is transcendent and our understanding is so limited, we still cannot reconcile the two principles in
an explanation of the same natural product, even where (as in the
casc of organized kinds of matter) the inner possibility of the product
is understandable only through a causality in terms of purposes.
Hence we must keep to the above principle of teleology-viz., the
principle that, in view of the character of human understanding, the
only cause that can be assumed Iin order to account I for the possibility of organic beings in nature is a cause that acts intentionally, and
that the mere mechanism of nature cannot at all suffice to explain
these products of nature. But we are not trying to use this principle to
decide anything about how such things themselves are possible.
Consequently, this principle is only a maxim of reflective rather
than of determinative judgment; and hence it holds only subjectively,
i.e., for us, rather than objectively, i.e., for the possibility of this kind
of things themselves (where the two types of production might well be

§ 78.

PRINCIPLE OF THE UNIVERSAL MECHANISM. . .

299

linked in one and the same basis). Moreover, if we did not supplement
the production that we think of as teleological with any concept of a
mechanism of nature as also involved [anzutreffen] in that production,
then we could not judge such a product to be a product of nature at
all. Hence the above maxim also carries with it the necessity of
reconciling the two principles when we judge things as natural purposes,
but not with the aim of putting one type of production, wholly or in
part, in the place of the other. For we cannot assume mechanism in
the place of something that is thought of (at least by us) as possible
only according to an intention; furthermore, in the place of something that is cognized as necessary in terms of mechanism we cannot
assume a contingency that would require a purpose as the basis
determining [the thing]. All we can do is subordinate the one type of
production (mechanism) to the other (an intentional technic); the
transcendental principle of the purposiveness of nature certainly
permits that.
For where we think purposes as bases that make certain things
possible, we must also assume means whose causal law does not itself
require anything that presupposes a purpose, so that this law can be
mechanical and yet also a subordinate cause of intentional effects.
Hence even if we consider no more than the organic products of
nature- but above all if their endless multitude prompts us to go on
and adopt (at least as a permissible hypothesis) the intentional [element]
that natural causal connection has in terms of particular laws as a
universal principle of reflective judgment for the whole of nature
(Le., the world)-then we can easily conceive of a common [groPeI or
even universal connection between mechanical and teleological laws
in the products of nature. Moreover, we can do this without confusing
the t\\lO principles for judging these products and putting one in the
place of the other. For even where we teleologically judge that the
form which the matter assumes is possible only through an intention,
the matter may still also be subordinated, according to mechanical
laws as its own nature requires [nach), as a means to that conceived
purpose. On the other hand, since the basis for this reconcilability lies
in what is neither the one nor the other (neither mechanism nor
connection in terms of purposes), but is nature's supersensible substrate that we cannot cognize at all, [it follows that I our (human)
reason cannot fuse these two ways of conceiving how such objects are
possible. We can only judge them as based, in terms of the connection

414

300

415

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

of final causes, on a supreme understanding, so that nothing is taken
away from the teleological kind of explanation.
It is however quite undetermined, and for our reason forever
undeterminable, how much the mechanism of nature does as a means
toward each final intention in nature. Moreover, because of the
above-mentioned intelligible principle for the possibility of a nature
as such, we may even assume that nature is possible throughout in
terms of both kinds of law (physical laws and laws [in terms) of final
causes) [operating) in universal harmony, even though we have no
insight whatever into how this happens. Hence we also do not know
how far we may get with the mechanical kind of explanation that is
possible for us. Only this much is certain: no matter how far it will
take us, yet it must always be inadequate for things that we have once
recognized as natural purposes, so that the character of our understanding forces us to subordinate all those mechanical bases to a
teleological principle.
Because of this we are authorized to adopt the following procedure,
and [indeed), since the study of nature in terms of the principle of
mechanism is so very important for the theoretical use of our reason,
we are also called upon to adopt this procedure: we are to explain all
products and events of nature, even the most purposive ones, in
mechanical terms as far as we possibly can (we cannot tell what are
the limits of our ability for this way of investigating); yet, in doing so,
we are never to lose sight of the fact that, as regards those natural
products that we cannot even begin to investigate except under the
concept of a purpose of reason, the essential character of our reason
will still force us to subordinate such products ultimately, regardless
of those mechanical causes, to the causality in terms of purposes.

ApPENDIX
METHODOLOGY OF
TELEOLOGICAL
JUDGMENT
§79

Whether Teleology
Must Be Given Treatment
as a Part of Natural Science
Every science must have its definite position in the encyclopaedia of
all the sciences. If the science is philosophical, we must assign it
either to the theoretical or to the practical part of that encyclopaedia.
If its place is in the theoretical part, we must assign it either to natural
science, namely, to the extent that it examines whatever can be an
object of experience (and so we must assign it either to the science of
bodies, or to psychology, or to universal cosmology), or else to
theology (which deals with the original basis of the world as the sum
total of all objects of experience).
So the question arises: What is the proper position for teleology?
Does it belong to natural science (in the proper sense of the term), or
to theology? It has to belong to one or the other, since no science can
belong to the transition between the two, because a transition only
articulates or organizes the system and [does] not [have] a place
within it.
Now although teleology is useful to theology in very important

301

416

302

417

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

ways, it quite obviously does not belong to theology as a part of it. For
it deals with natural products and their cause; and though it points to
this cause as a basis that lies beyond and above nature (namely, a
divine author), it does this not for determinative judgment, but
merely for reflective judgment in its contemplation of nature (so that
the idea of this divine author may serve us as a regulative principle
that will guide us in judging the things in the world in a way appropriate to our human understanding).
But teleology also does not seem to belong to natural science. For
natural science requires determinative and not merely reflective principles in order to indicate objective bases for natural effects. Indeed,
since the theory of nature explains natural phenomena in mechanical
terms, through their efficient causes, there would be no advantage for
it if we considered them according to their relations [in terms) of
purposes. Actually, positing purposes of nature in natural products
insofar as these form a system in terms of teleological concepts is only
part of describing nature, namely, by using a special guide. It is true
that in such descriptions reason performs a splendid and instructive
task that is purposive for a variety of aims, but it gives us no information whatever about the origin and inner possibility of these forms,
while that is exactly what theoretical natural science is concerned
with.
So teleology as a science does not belong to any doctrine, but belongs
only to critique: the critique of a special cognitive power, namely,
judgment. But teleology does contain a priori principles, and to that
extent it can and must indicate by what method we must judge nature in
terms of the principle of final causes. Hence the methodology [the study
of the method 1of teleology has at least a negative influence on how we
must proceed in theoretical natural science, and also on how this
science can, in metaphysics, serve as a propaedeutic in relation to
theology.

§80

On the Necessary
Subordination of the Principle
of Mechanism to the
Teleological Principle in
E~laining a ThIng
[Considered] as a
Natural Purpose
Our authority to try to explain aU natural products in merely mechanical terms is intrinsically quite unlimited. But, in view of the character
of our understanding, our ability to make do with such an explanation
alone, when dealing with things [considered] as natural purposes, is
not only very limited, but has distinct bounds. [These consist in the
fact that] there is a principle of judgment according to which we
cannot accomplish anything by way of explaining such things if we
proceed in mechanical terms alone, and hence our judging of such
products must always be subordinated to a teleological principle as
well.
Therefore, it is reasonable, even praiseworthy, to try to explain
natural products in terms of natural mechanism as long as there is
some probability of success. Indeed, if we give up this attempt, we
must do so not on the ground that it is intrinsically impossible to find
the purposiveness of nature by following this route, but only on the
ground that it is impossible for us as human beings: for, [it might be
argued, in order to find nature's purposiveness by this route, I we
would have to have an intuition other than our sensible one, and
Ithrough W] a determinate cognition of the intelligible substrate of
nature which would enable us to indicate a basis even for the mechanism of appearances as governed by particular laws, and that quite
surpasses all our ability.
So if in investigating nature we are to avoid working for nothing at
lief. Ak. 405 hr. n. 25.1

303

418

304

419

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

all, then, in judging things whose concept as natural purposes does
undoubtedly have a basis (i.e., in judging organized beings), we
must always presuppose some original organization that itself uses
mechanism, either to produce other organized forms or to develop
the thing's own organized form into new shapes (though these shapes
too always result from the purpose and conform to it).
It is commendable to do comparative anatomy and go through the
vast creation of organized beings in nature, in order to see if we
cannot discover in it something like a system, namely, as regards the
principle of their production. We do not have to settle for the mere
principle for judging them (it tells us nothing that would give us
insight into how they are produced), and do not have to abandon all
hope for a claim to insight into nature in this area. For there are
[some facts in this areal that offer the mind a ray of hope, however
faint, that in their case at least we may be able to accomplish something with the principle of natural mechanism, without which there
can be no natural science at all: So many genera of animals share a
certain common schema on which not only their bone structure but
also the arrangement of their other parts seems to be based; the basic
outline is admirably simple but yet was able to produce this great
diversity of species, by shortening some parts and lengthening others,
by the involution of some and the evolution of others. Despite all the
variety among these forms. they seem to have been produced according to a common archetype, and this analogy among them reinforces
our suspicion that they are actually akin, produced by a common
original mother. For the different animal genera approach one another
gradually: from the genus where the principle of purposes seems to
be borne out most, namely, man, all the way to the polyp, and from it
even to mosses and lichens and finally to the lowest stage of nature
discernible to us, crude matter. From this matter, and its forces
governed by mechanical ~aws (like those it follows in crystal formations2 ), seems to stem all the technic that nature displays in organized beings and that we find so far beyond our grasp that we believe
that we have to think a different principle [to account I for it.
When the archaeologist3 of nature considers these points, he is
free to have that large family of creatures (for that is how we must
2[Cf. Ak. 348-49.J

§ SO.

ON THE NECESSARY SUBORDINATION. . .

305

conceive of them if that thoroughly coherent kinship among them is
to have a basis) arise from the traces that remain of nature's most
ancient revolutions, and to have it do so according to all the natural
mechanism he knows or suspects. He can make mother earth (like a
large animal, as it were) emerge from her state of chaos, and make her
lap promptly give birth initially to creatures of a less purposive form,
with these then giving birth to others that became better adapted to
their place of origin and to their relations to one another, until in the
end this womb itself rigidified, ossified, and confined itself to bearing
definite species that would no longer degenerate, so that the diversity
remained as it had turned out when that fertile formative force ceased
to operate. 4 And yet, in giving this account, the archaeologist of
nature will have to attribute to this universal mother an organization
that purposively aimed at all these creatures, since otherwise it is
quite inconceivable [how] the purposive form is possible that we find
in the products of the animal and plant kingdoms.s But if he
attributes such an organization to her, then he has only put off the
basis for his explanation and cannot pretend to have made the production of those two kingdoms independent of the condition of [requiring]
final causes.
Even [some of] the changes that certain individuals of the organized genera undergo accidentally [have to be judged in this way.] If
41]n the Anthropology (Ale VII, the n. on 327-28), Kant wonders whether, in one of
nature's later epochs, the organs that an orangutan or a chimpanzee uses to walk. feel
objects, or talk might have developed into human structures. the inmost of which
contained an organ that understanding could use and that gradually developed through
social culture.]
5A hypothesis like this may be called a daring adventure of reason. and one that has

probably entered. on occasion, even the minds of virtually all the most acute natural
scientists. For at least this Ikind of generation] is not absurd. as is a generatio aequivoca.
which is the production of an organized being by the mechanics of crude, unorganized
matter. Rather, this generation would still be a generatio univoca in the most general
sense of the word, because anything organic would be produced only from something
else that is also organic, even though different in kind from it among beings of that
type, as when, e.g., certain aquatic animals developed gradually into marsh animals
and from these, after several generations, into land animals. This is not inconsistent a
priori, in the judgment of mere reason. Experience however does not show an example
of it. The only generation we know from experience is a generatio that is not only
univoca-as opposed to aequivoca, from unorganized material-but also homonyma.
where the product shares even the organization of what produced it. As far as our
empirical knowledge of nature goes, we do not find anywhere a generatjo heteronyma.

420

306

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

we find that the altered character of these individuals becomes hereditary and is taken up into their generative force, then the only proper
way to judge it is as the development, on [a given) occasion, of a
purposive predisposition that was originally present in the species and
that serves the preservation of the kind. For in an organized being,
with its thorough intrinsic purposiveness that makes it a system of
purposes, the fact that it generates others of the same kind is closely
connected with the condition that nothing is to be taken up into the
generative force that does not already belong to one of the being's
undeveloped original predispositions. 6 For if we depart from this
principle, then we cannot [even) be certain as to whether some of the
other features we now find in a species did not have an equally
accidental and purposeless origin. And so we could no longer with
any reliability apply the principle of teleology: the principle of judg·
ing nothing in an organized being as unpurposive if it is preserved in
the being's propagation. The principle's validity would then be restricted
to the original stock (back to which, however, our knowledge does
not reach).
Burne raises an objection against those who find it necessary to
assume a teleological principle for judging all such natural purposes,
i.e., an architectonic understanding. It would be equally legitimate.
he says, to ask how such an understanding is possible, i.e., how the
various powers and properties that are needed to make possible an
understanding that also has executive might. could have met so
purposively in one being.1 This objection, however, is idle. For the
whole difficulty about how a thing that has purposes within itself and
can be grasped only through them was first produced, rests on this
question: What is the unity of the basis [that accounts) for the
combination, in this product, of the manifold [elements) extrinsic
to one another? But this question, as far as it is teleological, is
61Cf. On the Various Races of Human Beings, Ak. II, 435.J
71 Actually. Hume's concern (in the passage to which Kant seems to be alluding) is
with a causal explanation of the existence, not just the possibility, of such a postulated
intelligent being. In the Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (Pt. IV, pars. 6-9),
Philo says: "We are still obliged to mount higher in order to find the cause of this
cause .... IAJ mental world or universe of ideas requires a cause as much as does a
material world .... Have we not the same reason to trace that ideal world into another
ideal world or new intelligent principle? ... If the material world rests upon a similar
ideal world. this ideal world must rest upon some other, and so on without end." I

§ SO. ON THE NECESSARY SUBORDINATION. . .

307

answered sufficiently if we posit that basis in the understanding of a
producing cause that is a simple substance. If, on the other hand, we
seek the cause merely in matter, as an aggregate of many substances
extrinsic to one another, then we have no principle whatever Ito
account J for the unity in the intrinsically purposive form of its
structure. And to speak of autocracy of matter in products that our
understanding can grasp only as purposes is to use a word without
meaning.
That is why those who seek a supreme basis [to account J for the
possibility of objectively purposive forms of matter, yet without granting
it an understanding, do make a point of satisfying this condition of all
purposiveness: that there be unity in its basis. And so they like to
make the world whole a single aU-encompassing substance (this is
pantheism), or the sum total of many attributes inhering in a single
simple substance (this is Spinozism, which is only a more determinate
version of pantheism). In making this move, these people do in fact
satisfy one condition of the problem: that in such forms there be
unity in their reference to a purpose; they satisfy this condition by
means of the merely ontological concept of a simple substance. But
they offer nothing to satisfy the other condition: that the consequence of this substance be related to it as its purpose,' and yet it is
this relation that is to make that ontological basis more determinate
so that we can answer the question [how objects with intrinsically
purposive form are possible]. So these people do not by any means
answer the whole question. And the question remains absolutely
unanswerable (for our reason) unless we treat it as follows: we must
think uf that original basis of things as a simple substance; the quality
that enables this substance to give rise to the specific character of the
natural forms based on it. namely, their unity of a purpose. we must
think of as its intelligence; and the relation of this substance to those
natural forms we must think of as a causality (because of the contingency we find in everything that we think possible only as a purpose).

421

§81

On Conjoining Mechanism
to the Teleological
Principle in Explaining
Natural Purposes
[Considered 1 as

Natural Products
422

We saw in the preceding section that the mechanism of nature alone
is insufficient to allow us to conceive of how organized beings are
possible, but that (at least in view of the character of our cognitive
power) we must regard mechanism as originally subordinated to a
cause that acts intentionally. But if we are to consider and judge such
beings as also products of nature, then appealing on their behalf to a
teleological basis alone is equally insufficient, but we must conjoin to
this teleological basis the mechanism of nature-as the instrument, as
it were, of a cause that acts intentionally- but with nature and its
mechanical laws subordinated to the purpose pursued by that cause.
It is beyond our reason's grasp how this reconciliation of two wholly
different kinds of causality is possible: the causality of nature in its
universal lawfulness, with [the causality of] an idea that confines
nature to a particular form for which nature itself contains no basis
whatsoever. The possibility of this reconciliation lies in the supersensible substrate of nature, about which we cannot determine anything
affirmatively, except that it is the being in itself of which we know
merely the appearance. But the fact [that it is beyond our reason's
grasp how this reconciliation of the two kinds of causality is possible I
does not diminish the force of this principle: that everything we
assume to belong to this nature (as phenomenon) and assume to be its
product must also be thought of as connected with it in terms of
mechanical laws; for without this kind of causality, organized beings,
while purposes of nature, would not be natural products.
Now if we assume (as we inevitably must) the teleological principle
for the production of these beings, we may attribute their intrinsically

308

§ 81. ON CONJOINING MECHANISM. . .

309

purposive form to their cause either in terms of occasionalism or in
terms of the theory of preestablished harmony. According to occasionalism the supreme cause of the world would, in conformity with
its idea and on the occasion of every copulation, directly give the
mingling matter its organic structure. According to the theory of
preestablished harmony, the supreme cause would have imparted to
the initial products of its wisdom only the predisposition by means of
which an organic being produces another of its kind and the species
perpetuates itself; and while nature works toward the destruction of
individuals, it also continually compensates for their disappearance.
If we assume occasionalism for the production of organized beings,
then all nature in this production is lost entirely,8 and along with it
all [our ability J to judge by reason how such products are possible.
Hence we may assume that anyone who is at all concerned to do
philosophy will not adopt this system.
The theory of preestablished harmony can in turn proceed in two
ways: any organic being generated by another of its kind is considered
by this theory to be either the educt or the product9 of that other
being. The system that considers the generated beings as mere educts
is called the system of individual preformation, or the theory of
evolution. The system that considers them as products is called the
system of epigenesis. We may also call it the system of generic
preformation, since the productive power of the generating beings,
and therefore the form of the species, was still preformed virtualiter lO
in the intrinsic purposive predispositions imparted to the stock. Accordingly it might also be better if we called the opposing theory of
individual preformation the theory of involution [rather than of evolution] (or of encapsulation). 11
Therefore, even though the advocates of the theory of evolution
8[This view is already discernible in Kant's earliest published work (written when he
was still a student), Thoughts on the Troe Estimation of Living Forces (l 747) , At. I,

23-25.)
9[For this distinction, see Ak. 371 hr. n. 31.)
IO[As a power (virtus).)
II[Le., if we characterize these theories by reference to (the kind of) preformation.
the first theory is better characterized in terms of the initial "enfolding" (involution) of
the preformed individuals than in terms of the later "unfolding" (evolution). (The
theory is of course utterly different from Darwin's.»)

423

310

424

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLDGICAL JUDGMENT

denied the formative force of nature to all individuals, so as to have
them come directly from the hand of the creator, they still were
reluctant to allow this to happen in terms of the hypothesis of
occasionalism; on that hypothesis copulation would be a mere formality,
and in each case of copulation a supreme [and] intelligent cause of
the world would have resolved to form a fruit [i.e., offspring] directly,
leaving to the mother only Ithe task ofl developing12 and nourishing
it. Instead the advocates of the theory of evolution opted for preformation, as if it made a difference whether they had these forms of
supernatural origin come about at the beginning of the world or in
the course of it. 13 In fact, creation on [individual] occasions would
eliminate the need for very many supernatural arrangements that
preformation would require in order that an embryo formed at the
beginning of the world might be kept uninjured and safe from the
destructive forces of nature during the long interval between its
creation and its development. Similarly, whereas preformation would
require a vastly greater number of such preformed beings than of
beings ever to be developed, occasionalism would make that greater
number, and along with it as many acts of creation, unnecessary and
purposeless. And yet the evolutionists did want to avoid lapsing into
an utter hyperphysics that can dispense with all natural explanation,
and so they did leave something in this process to nature: On the one
hand, they continued to adhere to hyperphysics, even to the point of
holding that freak births (which cannot possibly be considered purposes of nature) manifested an admirable Ihyperphysical, i.e., supernatural] purposiveness, even if one whose only aim was that one day
an anatomist might be bothered by its being a purposeless purposiveness
and feel an admiration mixed with dejection. On the other hand,
there was one thing they simply could not fit into their system of
preformation: the production of hybrids. In cases where the whole
product is produced by two creatures of the same species, they had
granted neither of these two a formative force, granting the seed of
male creatures nothing but the mechanical qualification to serve as
the embryo's first food. In the case of hybrids, however, they had to
grant the male seed a purposively formative force as well.
Consider, on the other hand, epigenesis. Even if we were unaware
12["Unfolding," in effect. Cf. the etymology of 'develop' and 'evolve.']
13[ Cf.

The Only Possible Basis of Proof, Ak. II, 115.1

§ 81. ON CONJOINING MECHANISM. ..

311

how much easier it is to defend this theory, rather than the theory of
evolution, as far as proving it from empirical bases is concerned, still
reason would from the start be greatly in favor of the kind of explana·
tion [it offers). For in considering those things whose origin can be
conceived only in terms of a causality of purposes, this theory, at least
as far as propagation is concerned, regards nature as itself producing
Lhem rather than as merely developing them; and so it minimizes
appeal to the supernatural, land) after the first beginning leaves
everything to nature. (But it does not determine anything about this
first beginning, on which physics founders in general, even if it tries to
use a chain of causes, of whatever kind).
No one has done more by way of proving this theory of epigenesis
than Privy Councilor Blumenbach. 14 and by way of establishing
correct lecht) principles for applying it, which he did in part by
avoiding too rash a use of it. Whenever he explains any of these
structures physically he starts from organized matter. For he rightly
declares it contrary to reason that crude matter on its own should
have structured itself originally in terms of mechanical laws, that life
could have sprung from the nature of what is lifeless, and that matter
could have molded itself on it~ own into the form of a self·preserving
purposiveness. Yet by appealing to this principle of an original
organization, a principle that is inscrutable to US,IS he leaves an
indeterminable and yet unmistakable share to natural mechanism.
The ability of the matter in an organized body to Itake on I this
organization he calls a/ormative impulse. (It is distinguished from the
merely mechanical formative force that all matter has, Ibutl stands
under the higher guidance and direction, as it were, of that fonnative
force.)

14/Johann Friedrich Blumenbach (1752-1848), German anatomist, physiologist, anthropologist, and zoologist at Gottingen. He is the author of several works, in particular
Uber den Bildungstrieb (On the Formative Impulse. 1781), from which Kant is aboutto
draw. See also Kant's On Using Teleological Principles in Philosophy. Ak. VIII, 180.
first n./
IS[ef. Ak. 374-75.\

425

§82

On the Teleological System
in the Extrinsic
Relations among
Organized Beings
By extrinsic purposiveness I mean a purposiveness where one thing of
nature serves another as a means to a purpose. Now things that have
no intrinsic purposiveness and whose possibility does not presuppose
one-e.g., earth, air, water, etc.-may still be very purposive extrinsically, i.e., in relation to other beings. But these latter beings must
always be organized ones, Le., natural purposes, since otherwise we
could not judge the former to be means [to them). Thus we cannot
regard water, air, and earth as means for the accretion of mountains,
because there is in fact nothing whatever in mountains that would
require that their possibility have a basis in terms of purposes, and
hence we never have any purposes here to which we could refer in
order to present the cause of the mountains under the predicate of a
means (useful for making the mountains possible).
The concept of extrinsic purposiveness is quite different from that
of intrinsic purposiveness. Intrinsic purposiveness has to do with the
possibility of an object regardless of whether or not the object's
actuality is itself a purpose. About an organized being we can Ialways I
go on to ask: What is it there for? But we cannot readily ask that
question about things in which we recognize nothing but the effect of
the mechanism of nature. For in presenting organized beings we are
already presenting, [to account] for their inner possibility, a causality
in terms of purposes, a creative understanding, an active power, and
are relating it to the basis that determines it, its intention. There is
only one [case where I extrinsic purposiveness is connected with the
intrinsic purposiveness of organization. This [case I is the organization
of the two sexes as related to each other to propagate their species.
Here, although we must not ask what is the end for which the being
had to exist [asl so organized, [that being] still serves as a means
extrinsically related to a purpose. For here, just as in the case of an

312

§ 82. ON THE TELEOWGICAL SYSTEM. . .

313

individual, we can always go on to ask: Why did such a pair have to
exist? The answer is: This pair is what first amounts to an organizing
whole, even if not to an organized whole in a single body.
Now if someone asks what a thing is there for, then there are two
possible answers. One is that the thing's production and existence do
not refer at all to a cause that acts in terms of intentions, and in that
case we always mean that the production and existence of the thing
are due to the mechanism of nature. The other possible answer is that
(the thing is a contingent natural being and so) its existence has some
intentional basis. It is hard to separate this [latterl thought from the
concept of an organized thing. For, in view of the fact that we have to
regard the inner possibility of an organized thing as based on a
causality in terms of final causes and on the idea underlying that
causality, the only way we can conceive of the existence of this
product is as a purpose; for a presented effect is called a purpose if
the presentation of it is also the basis that determines the intelligent
efficient cause to produce this effect. Therefore, if we say that the
existence of the thing has some intentional basis, we can proceed in
two ways again: We can say that the purpose of the existence of such
a natural being is in that thing itself, i.e., the thing is not merely a
purpose but also a/inal purpose. Or we can say that the final purpose
is outside the thing and in other natural beings, i.e., that although the
thing exists purposively it is not a final purpose: rather, it is necessarily a means as well.
But even if we go through all of nature, we still do not find in it, as
nature, any being that could claim the distinction of being the final
purpose of creation. We can even prove a priori that what might
perhaps be an ultimate purpose for nature can still, insofar as it is a
natural thing, never be a/inal purpose, even if we endowed it with all
conceivable [natural I attributes and properties.
If we look at the vegetable kingdom and the immense fertility with
which it spreads over almost any soil, we might initially be led to
think of it as merely the product of the [same I mechanism that nature
displays in the formations of the mineral kingdom. 16 But a closer
acquaintance with the indescribably wise organization in the vegetable kingdom prompts us to abandon that thought and ask instead:
What are these creatures there for? We might answer: For the animal
16[See Ak. 348-49.\

426

314

427

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

kingdom, in order to supply it with food, so that it could spread- over
the earth in the diversity of species it displays. But here the same
question arises again: What then are these herbivores there for? The
answer might be: For the predators, who can feed only on what has
life.17 Finally the question is: What are the predators good for, along
with the other natural kingdoms? For man, for the diverse uses to
which his understanding teaches him to put all those creatures; man
is the ultimate purpose of creation here on earth, because he is the
only being on earth who can form a concept of purposes and use his
reason to turn an aggregate of purposively structured things into a
system of purposes.
We could, alternatively, join Chevalier Linne l8 in taking the seemingly reverse route, and say: The herbivores are there to moderate the
opulent growth in the plant kingdom, which would otherwise choke
many species of plants; the predators are there to limit the voracity of
the herbivores; finally, man is there to hunt the predators in order to
diminish their numbers and so establish a certain eqUilibrium between
the productive and the destructive forces of nature. On this alternative,
though man might in a certain respect have the dignity of being a
purpose, in a different respect he would hold only the rank of a
means.
Once we adopt the principle that there is an objective purposiveness in the diverse species of creatures on earth and in their
extrinsic relation[ s 1 to one another as purposively structured beings,
it is reasonable to think of the[ se 1 relation! s] as having a certain
organization in turn, and as [forming] a system, of all the natural
kingdoms, in terms of final causes. And yet it seems that experience
flatly contradicts such a maxim of reason, especially [the implication J
that there is an ultimate purpose of nature. An ultimate purpose of
nature is certainly required for such a system to be possible, and
we cannot posit it anywhere but in man: But man too is one of the
many animal species, and nature has in no way exempted him from
its destructive forces any more than from its productive forces,19
17[For Kant's narrow definition of life, see Ak. 394 br. n. 7.J
18[Carl von Linne, Latinized Lirmaeus, (1707-78), Swedish botanist and explorer and
author of a large number of works_ He is best known for his systematic classification of
the three kingdoms of nature./
f9[ Cf.

the Umversal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens, Ak_ 1,318_ [

§ 82. ON THE TELEOWGICAL SYSTEM. . .

315

but has subjected everything to a natural mechanism without a
purpose.
If the natural beings on earth formed a purposively ordered whole,
the first intentional arrangement would presumably have to be their
habitat, the ground or Iother) element on lorl in which they were to
thrive. [since I that is the foundation of all organic production. But as
we become better acquainted with what that foundation is like, we
find that it points to no causes other than those that act wholly
unintentionally, causes that are more likely to be devastating than to
foster production, order, and purposes. Land and sea contain memorials of mighty devastations that long ago befell them and all creatures
living on or in them. Indeed, their entire structure. the strata of the
land and the boundaries of the sea. look quite like the product of
savage. all-powerful forces of a nature working in a state of chaos.
The shape of the land, its structure and its slope. may now seem very
purposively arranged: to receive water from the air. to feed the water
veins between diverse kinds of layers of soil (each [suitable) for all
sorts of products), and to direct the rivers. But a closer investigation
of them proves that they are in fact merely the result of eruptions,
either of fire or of water. or of upheavals of the ocean. This is how
this shape was first produced, but especially also how it was later
restructured. a restructuring that brought along with it the destruction of the first organic products on the earth.20 So the habitat of all
these creatures, the native soil (of the land) and the lap (of the sea),
provides no indication of having been produced by any but a wholly
unintentional mechanism. But. if that is so. how can we, and what
right do we have, to demand and assert that those creatures have a
20We have come to apply the name natural history to the description of nature21 las it
is at presentl. If we want to keep using it in that sense, then the [subject] to which Ithe
term I natural history refers literally, namely, an exposition of the earth's former,
ancient state, could be called instead the archaeology of nature, as distinguished from
[the archaeology of] art. We do in fact have good grounds for venturing conjectures
about that ancient state, though we must not hope for certainty. Such an archaeology
of nature would cover, for example. petrlfactions,just as cut stones, etc. are covered by
Ithe archaeology of] art. We are in fact constantly working-even if slowly, as is
proper-in this archaeology (which we call the()ry of the earth). and so we would
be giving the name archaeology of nature not to a merely imaginary investigation of
nature, but to one that nature itself invites and summons us to.

211Cf. On Using Teleological Principles in Philosophy, Ak. VIII, 161-62, and On the
Various Races of Human Bemgs, Ak. II. 434n.]

428

316

429

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

different origin? [And that holds even for man. For] although a
meticulous examination of the traces of those natural devastations
seems to prove (in Camper's22 judgment) that man was not included
in those revolutions, yet he is so dependent on the other creatures on
earth that, once we grant that a natural mechanism holds sway over
the others universally, man too must be considered subject to it, even
though his understanding was able to rescue him (for the most part, at
least) from those devastations.
This argument, however, seems to prove more than it was intended
to prove: not merely that man cannot be an ultimate purpose of
nature, and that by the same token the aggregate of organized natural
things on earth cannot be a system of purposes, but even that the
natural products we earlier considered natural purposes originate
from nothing but the mechanism of nature.
But [we must not forget] the above solution of the antinomy
between the principles of the mechanical and the teleological kind of
production of organic natural beings. There we saw that, as far as
nature's construction in terms of particular laws is concerned (for
whose systematic coherence we do not have the key), those principles
pertain merely to reflective judgment: they do not determine the
actual [an sich) origin of these beings, but only say that the character
of our understanding and of our reason is such that the only way we
can conceive of the origin of such beings is in terms of final causes.
And hence we are certainly permitted to strive as hard and even as
boldly as possible to explain such beings mechanically. Indeed, reason calls on us to make this attempt, even though we know that there
are subjective grounds why we can never make do with a mechanical
explanation, grounds that have to do with the particular kind and limitation of our understanding (and not with any intrinsic contradiction
between a mechanical production and an origin in terms of purposes).
Finally we saw, in the solution of the antinomy, that the possibility of
reconciling the two ways of presenting [how) nature is possible may very
well lie in the supersensible principle of nature (nature outside as well
as within us). For presentation in terms of final causes is only a subjective
condition of the use of our reason, [which applies] when reason
wants us to judge certain objects not merely as appearances but insists
on referring these appearances themselves, along with their principles,
221 See Ak. 304 br. n. 34.1

§ 82.

ON THE TELEOLOGICAL SYSTEM...

317

to the supersensible substrate. Reason insists on making that reference
so that it can consider as possible that there be certain laws unifying
those appearances, laws that reason can conceive of only as arising
from purposes (since [our] reason too has supersensible purposes).

§83
On the Ultimate Purpose
That Nature Has
as a Teleological System
We have shown in the preceding section that [certain] principles of
reason give us sufficient grounds for judging man-though reflectively
rather than determinatively-to be not merely a natural purpose,
which we may judge all organized beings to be, but also to be the
ultimate purpose of nature here on earth, the purpose by reference to
which all other natural things constitute a system of purposes. Therefore OUf next question must be: what is it, within man himself, that is
a purpose and that he is to further through his connection with
nature? This purpose must either be such as can be fulfilled by nature
itself in its beneficence, or else imust] be man's aptitude and skill for
[pursuing] various purposes for which he can use nature (outside or
within him). On the first alternative the purpose of nature would be
man's happiness, on the second his culture.
The concept of happiness is not one that man abstracts (say) from his
instincts and hence gets from himself as animal. Rather, it is a mere
idea: the idea of a state of his, an idea to which he tries to make that
state adequate under merely empirical conditions (which is impossible).
Man himself formulates this idea; and since his understanding is tied
to imagination and the senses, he formulates the idea so diversely and
even changes the concept so often that nature, even if it were subjected
completely to man's choice, still could not possibly adopt a definite
and fixed universal law that would [keep) it in harmony with that
wavering concept and so with the purpose that each person chooses

430

318

431

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

to set himself.23 Even if we restricted the concept of happiness to the
true natural needs shared by our entire species, or if instead we
maximized man's skill for accomplishing the purposes he imagines, he
would still never reach what he means by happiness, and reach what
is in fact his own ultimate natural purpose (as distinguished from
[nicht) the purpose of freedom): for it is not his nature to stop
possessing and enjoying at some point and be satisfied. Nature, on the
other hand, is very far from having adopted him as its special darling
and benefited him in preference to the other animals, but has in fact
spared him no more than any other animal from its destructive
workings: plague, famine, flood, frost, or attacks from other animals
large or small, and so on. What is more, man's own absurd natural
predispositions24 land him in further troubles that he thinks up himself,
and [make himl put others of his own species in great misery through
oppressive domination, barbaric wars, etc., and [sol man himself does
all he can to work for the destruction of his own species. Hence even if
nature outside us were utterly beneficent, its purpose would not be
achieved in a system of nature on earth if that purpose aimed at the
happiness of our species, because nature within us is not receptive to
it. Therefore, in the chain of natural purposes man is never more than a
link: There are indeed many purposes for which he seems to have been
determined by nature's predisposition, and with regard to these man is
a principle by making himself that; but he is also a means for preserving the purposiveness in the mechanism of the other links. Man is indeed
the only being on earth that has understanding and hence an ability to
set himself purposes of his own choice, and in this respect he holds
the title of lord of nature; and if we regard nature as a teleological
system, then it is man's vocation to be the ultimate purpose of nature,
but always subject to a condition: he must have the understanding
and the will to give both nature and himself reference to a purpose
that can be independent of nature, self-sufficient, and a final purpose.
The final purpose, however, we must not seek within nature at all.
But where in man must we posit at least that ultimate purpose of nature? To discover this, we must find out what nature can accomplish in
order to prepare man for what he himself must do in order to be a final
231Cf. the Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, Ak. IV. 39>-96, but esp. 418-19.
Cf. also the Critique of Practical Reason. Ak. 25-26 and 36.1
24(To certain affects and inclinations, especially passions. a. the Anthropology. Ak. VII.
251-82, esp. 265-75. See also Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone, Ak. VI, 19-53.1

§83. ON THE ULTIMATE PURPOSE...

319

purpose, and [then) separate that from all those purposes whose achievability rests on conditions that we can expect nature to fulfill alone.
[Now the ] latter kind of purpose is man's happiness on earth, by which
I mean [the achievement of] the sum total of all those of his purposes
that can [be achieved I through nature outside and within him; this is the
matter of all his purposes on earth, and if he makes it his whole purpose
it makes him unable to set a final purpose for his own existence and to
harmonize with this final purpose. Hence among all of his purposes in
nature there remains only this [one], as that which nature can accomplish with a view to the final purpose outside of nature, and this lone]
may therefore be regarded as nature's ultimate purpose: It is a formal
and subjective condition, namely, man's aptitude in general for setting
himself purposes, and for using nature (independently of [the element
of] nature in man's determination of purposes) as a means [for achieving
them] in conformity with the maxims of his free purposes generally.
Producing in a rational being an aptitude for purposes generally (hence
[in a way that leaves] that being free) is culture. Hence only culture
can be the ultimate purpose that we have cause to attribute to nature
with respect to the human species. (It cannot be man's own happiness on
earth, let alone Ithe goal of making] him merely the foremost instrument
for establishing order and accord in nonrational nature outside him).
But not just any culture is adequate for this ultimate purpose of
nature. The culture of skill is indeed the foremost subjective condition for an aptitude to promote Ibefordern] purposes generally; but it
is not adequate to assist Ibejordern) the will in the determination and
selection of its purposes, while yet the will's determination and selection of its purposes is surely an essential part of our entire aptitude for
purposes[, and is the other condition, besides skill, of this aptitUde].
This other condition could be called the culture of discipline [Zucht
(Disziplin)). It is negative and consists in the liberation of the will
from the despotism of desires, a despotism that rivets us to certain
natural things and renders us unable to do our own selecting; we allow
ourselves to be fettered by the impulses that nature gave us only as
guides so that we would not neglect or even injure our animal characteristics, whereas in fact we are free enough to tighten or to slacken,
to lengthen or to shorten them, as the purposes of reason require.
[As for the culture of skill:) It is hard to develop skill in the human
species except by means of inequality among people. The majority
take care, mechanically as it were and without particularly needing
art for this, of the necessities of life for others, who thus have the ease

432

320

433

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

and leisure to work in science and art, the less necessary ingredients
in culture. These others keep the majority in a state of oppression,
hard labor, and little enjoyment, even though some of the culture of
the higher class does gradually spread to the lower also. But on both
sides trouble increases with equal vigor as culture progresses. (The
height of this progress, when people's propensity to [strive for I what is
dispensable begins to interfere with what is indispensable, is called
lUXUry.) For the lower class the trouble results from violence from
without, for the higher from insatiability within. And yet this shining
misery has to do with the development of man's natural predispositions,
and [so] nature stili achieves its own purpose, even if that purpose is
not ours. The formal condition under which nature can alone achieve
this final aim is that constitution of human relations where the
impairment to freedom which results from the mutually conflicting
freedom [of the individuals I is countered by lawful authority within a
whole called civil society. For only in this constitution of human
relations can our natural predispositions develop maximally. But this
constitution requires something further,25 even if human beings
were intelligent enough to discover it and wise enough to submit
voluntarily to its constraint: a cosmopolitan whole, a system of all
states that are in danger of affecting one another detrimentally. Without such a whole-and given how the very possibility of such a
scheme is hindered by people's ambition, lust for power, and greed,26
especially on the part of those in authority-there will inevitably be
war (in which some states dissolve and split up into smaller ones,
while other states unite with smaller ones and try to form a larger
whole). Though war is an unintentional human endeavor (incited by
our unbridled passions), yet it is also a deeply hidden and perhaps
intentional endeavor of the supreme wisdom, if not to establish, then at
least to prepare the way for lawfulness along with the freedom of states,
and thereby for a unified system of them with a moral basis. Despite the
terrible tribulations that war inflicts on the human race, and the perhaps
even greater tribulations that oppress us in time of peace because [then]
we are constantly preparing for war, still war is one more incentive for
us to develop to the utmost all the talents that serve culture (while the
25[For a more elaborate discussion of the difficulties involved in achieving a civil
society, in particular the dependence of civil society on a cosmopolitan whole. see the
Idea/ora Universal History from a Cosmopolitan Point o/View (1784),Ak. VIlI.15-31.]

26[For this triad, cf. the Anthropology. Ak. VII. 271-74.1

§ 83. ON THE ULTIMATE PURPOSE. . .

321

hope for a permanent happiness of the people continues to recede),27
As for the discipline of our inclinations: Though our natural predisposition is quite purposive! Iy adapted) to [the satisfaction of) our
inclinations pertaining to our animal characteristics, the inclinations
interfere very much with the development of our humanity, and [so)
their discipline is the second requirement for our culture. But in this
regard too we find nature acting purposively, for it strives to give us
an education that makes us receptive to purposes higher than those
that nature itself can provide. Now I cannot dispute the preponderance of evils that the refinement of our taste to the point of its
idealization, and even the luxury of [treating] sciences as food for our
vanity, shower on us by producing in us so many insatiable inclinations.
But we also cannot fail to notice that nature [within us) pursues the
purpose of making room for the development of our humanity, namely,
by making ever more headway against the crudeness and vehemence
of those inclinations that belong to us primarily as animals and that
interfere most with our education for our higher vocation (namely,
the inclinations [to] enjoyment). [For we have] the fine art[s) and the
sciences, which involve a universally communicable pleasure as well
as elegance and refinement, and through these they make man, not
indeed morally [sittlich] better for [life in) society, but still civilized
[gesittet) for it: 28 they make great headway against the tyranny of
man's propensity to the senses, and so prepare him for a sovereignty in
which reason alone is to dominate; and the evils that either nature or our
quarrelsomeness and selfishness visit on us do also summon, increase,
and steel the soul's forces to keep them from succumbing to those evils.
and so let us feel a hidden aptitude within us for higher purposes. 29
27[On this whole topic. cr. the Idea/ora Universal History, Ak. VIII,lS-31, as well as
Perpetual Peace (1795), Ak. VIII, 341-86, and Religion within the Bounds of Reason
Alone, Ak. VI, 19-53.J
28[On this contrast, cf. the Anthropology. Ak. VlI, 244.1

291f the value that life has for us is assessed merely in tenns of what we enjoy (i.e.,
happiness. the natural purpose of the sum of aU our inclinations), then the answer is easy:
that value falls below zero. For who indeed would want to start life over under the same
conditions, or even under a plan that he had devised himself (though in conformity with
the course of nature) but that also aimed merely at enjoyment? We have shown above
what value life has on account of its content if we lead it according to the purpose that
nature pursues with us; that content consists in what we do (not just enjoy). though we
are in this never more than a means to an undetennined final purpose. So presumably
the only value that remains is the value that we ourselves give our lives through what
we not only do, but do purposively and do so independently of nature that even the
existence of nature can be a purpose only under this condition lof our acting this way).

434

§84

On the Final Purpose
of the Existence
of a World, i.e.,
of Creation Itself

435

A final purpose is a purpose that requires no other purpose as a
condition of its possibility.
If we assume the mere mechanism of nature as our basis for
explaining nature's purposiveness, then we cannot ask: What are
things in the world there for? For in such an idealistic system the only
issue is the physical possibility of things (and if we thought of things as
purposes we would merely be reasoning without any object). Whether
we interpreted the purposive form of things as an accident or as blind
necessity, in either case the question, What are those things there for,
would be pointless. On the other hand, if we assume that the connection in terms of purposes in the world is real, and we assume a special
kind of causality for it, namely, that of a cause that acts intentionally,
then we cannot stop at the question: For what [endl do things in the
world (organized beings) have the form they have, for what [end] has
nature put them into just these relations toward one another? Rather,
once we think an understanding that we must regard as the cause that
makes such forms possible, forms that we actually find in things, we
must also ask what objective basis within this productive understanding could have determined it to [produce] an effect of this kind; and
that basis will be the final purpose for which such things are there.
I said above that the final purpose is unconditioned, and that
nature would therefore be incapable of achieving it and producing it
in accordance with the idea of this purpose. For nothing in nature
(considered as a being of sense) has, within nature itself, a basis
determining it that is not always conditioned in turn. This holds not
merely for nature outside us (material nature) but also for nature
within us (thinking nature), though it must be understood here that I
am considering within me only what is nature. But a thing that, on
account of its objective character, is to exist necessarily as the final

322

§ 84.

ON THE FINAL PURPOSE. . .

323

purpose of an intelligent cause must be of such a kind that in the
order of purposes it depends on no condition other than just the idea
of it.
Now in this world of ours there is only one kind of beings with a
causality that is teleological, i.e., directed to purposes, but also so
constituted that the law in terms of which these beings must determine
their purposes is presented by these very beings as unconditioned and
independent of conditions in nature, and yet necessary in itself. That
being is man, but man considered as noumenon. Man is the only
natural being in whom we can nonetheless cognize, as pan of his own
constitution, a supersensible ability (freedom). and even cognize
the law and the object of this causality, the object that this being can
set before itself as its highest purpose (the highest good in the world).
Now about man, as a moral being, (and so about any other rational
being in the world), we cannot go on to ask: For what [endl (quem in
finem) does he exist? His existence itself has the highest purpose
within it; and to this purpose he can subject all of nature as far as he is
able, or at least he must not consider himself subjected to any
influence of nature in opposition to that purpose. Now if things in the
world. which are dependent beings with regard to their existence,
require a supreme cause that acts in terms of purposes, then man is
the final purpose of creation. For without man the chain of mutually
subordinated purposes would not have a complete basis. Only in man,
and even in him only as moral subject, do we find unconditioned
legislation regarding purposes. It is this legislation, therefore, which
alone enables man to be a final purpose to which all of nature is
teleologically subordinated. 30
JOlt would be possible for the happiness of rational beings in the world to be a purpose
of nature, and in that case it would also be its ultimate purpose. At least we cannot see
a priori why nature could not be so arranged, since this effect, at least as far as we can
see, could certainly be brought about by nature's mechanism. But morality and a
causality in terms of purposes that is subordinated to it is absolutely impossible through
natural causes. For the moral principle that determines us to action is supersensible.
Hence it is the only possible Ithing I in the order of purposes that is absolutely
unconditioned as concerns nature, and hence alone qualifies man, the subject of
morality, to be the final purpose of creation to which all of nature is subordinated.
Happiness, on the other hand, as the preceding section showed by the testimony of
experience, is not even a purpose of nature directed to human beings in preference to
other creatures, much less alinal purpose of creation. Let human beings forever make
it their ultimate subjective purpose; but if I inquire after the final purpose of creation:

436

§85

On Physicotheology31
is reason's attempt to infer the supreme cause of
nature, and the properties of this cause, from the purposes of nature
(which we can cognize only empirically). A MORAL THEOWGY (ethicotheology) would be the attempt to infer that cause and its properties
from the moral purpose of rational beings in nature (a purpose that
we can cognize a priori).
It is natural for physicotheology to come before moral theology.
For if we want to infer a world cause teleologically from the
things in the world, then we must first be given purposes of nature,
for which we must then try to find a final purpose, and then for
this final purpose the principle of the causality of that supreme
cause.
We certainly can, and must, follow the teleological principle in
many of our investigations of nature, without needing to inquire into
the basis for the possibility of purposive causation, a possibility we
find [actualized) in various products of nature. But if we do want to
have a concept of that basis, then [we find that I we have absolutely no
insight into it beyond the mere maxim of reflective judgment: that
our cognitive power is of such a character that, if but a single organic
product of nature were to be given us, the only basis we can conceive
it to have is one that is a cause of nature itself (whether of all of
PHYSICOTHEOWGY

437

For what [end] did human beings have to exist? then [ am talking about a supreme
objective purpose, such as the highest reason would require for its creation. Now if
someone replies: So that beings may exist to whom that supreme cause can be
beneficent. then he is contradicting the condition to which man's reason subjects even
his most heartfelt wish for happiness (namely, harmony with his own inner moral
legislation). This proves that happiness can be only a conditioned purpose, so that it is
only as a moral being that man can be the final purpose of creation, with man's state of
happiness connected with that Ifinal! purpose only as its consequence, and as dependent on the degree to which man is in harmony with that purpose. the purpose of his
existence.
311For other places where Kant gives extended and similar discussions of physicotheology,
see The Only Possible Basis of Proof (1763), Ak. II, esp. 116-37, and the Critique of
Pure Reason. esp. A 620-30 = B 648-58.]

324

§ 85. ON PHYSICOTHEOLOGY

325

nature or of just this component of it) and is able to cause that
product by virtue of [itsl understanding. Although this maxim is
[only J a principle for judging [things I and in no way helps us to
explain natural things and their origin, it does allow us to look beyond
nature with some prospect that perhaps we can determine the concept of an original being more closely, a concept that is so unfruitful
otherwise.
Now I say that, no matter how far we take physico theology, it still
cannot reveal to us anything about a final purpose of creation, for
it does not even reach the question about such a purpose. It can
indeed justify the concept of an intelligent cause of the world, [by
showing that it isj for us the only suitable concept-Le., suitable for
the character of our cognitive power-of the possibility of those
things that we can understand Ionly] in terms of purposes. But
physicotheology cannot determine this concept any further, whether
from a theoretical or a practical point of view, and [sol it fails to
accomplish what it intends: to provide a basis for theology. It remains
forever only a physical teleology: for it always considers, and must
consider, any reference to purposes as having its conditions within
nature, so that it cannot even inquire into the purpose for which
nature itself exists ([ since) the basis for the existence of nature must
be sought outside nature); and yet it is on the determinate idea of this
purpose that the determinate concept of that supreme intelligent
cause of the world depends, and hence also the possibility of a
theology.
A teleological consideration of the world does quite splendidly in
certain areas: Of what use are the things in the world to one another?
What good is the manifold in a thing to that thing itself? Indeed, we
even seem to have grounds for assuming that nothing in the world is
gratuitous, but that-on condition that certain things were [meant] to
exist (as purposes)-everything is good for something or other in
nature, so that here the only principle our reason can offer judgment,
[to account I for the possibility of the object that it cannot avoid
judging teleologically, is to subordinate the mechanism of nature to
the architectonic of an intelligent author of the world. It is extremely
admirable how well a teleological consideration of the world does in
all of this. But since the data, and hence the principles, [that it uses J
to determine the concept of an intelligent world cause (as supreme
artist) are merely empirical, they do not allow us to infer any other

438

326

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

properties ~ of this cause 1 than those that experience manifests to us
in the effects of that cause;32 and since experience can never encompass aU of nature as a system, it must often encounter bases of
proof that (seem to) conflict with the concept of that cause and with
one another. But even if we could have an empirical overview of
the whole system, insofar as it involves mere nature. still experience could never raise us above nature, to the purpose of nature's
own existence. and so to the determinate concept of that supreme
intelligence.
There is a way to make it seem easy to solve the problem that a
physicotheology tries to solve: we can make the problem small. We
might squander the concept of a deity on every-and there could be
one or more of these-intelligent being that we think of as having
both many and very great properties. and yet not quite [uberhaupt]
all the properties needed to found a nature that harmonizes with the
greatest possible purpose. Again, we might regard it as a trifle to
supplement arbitrarily a theory for a deficiency in its bases for proving [the existence of a deity]. e.g., if we felt entitled to assume all
possible perfection where we have only a basis for assuming much
perfection.33 (And what is much for us?) [If] physical teleology [takes
32(On this and the next paragraph. cf. Hume: "When we infer any particular cause
from an effect, we must proportion the one to the other, and can never be allowed to
ascribe to the cause any qualities, but what are exactly sufficient to produce the
effect .... (l]f we ascribe to it further qualities, or affirm it capable of producing other
effects, we can only indulge the license of conjecture, and arbitrarily suppose the
existence of qualities and energies, without reason or authority." (Enquiry, XI, par.
12.)]

331Cf. Hume again: ''The Deity is known to us only by his productions.... As the
universe shews wisdom and goodness. we infer wisdom and goodness. As it shews a
particular degree of these perfections, we infer a particular degree of them. precisely
adapted to the effect which we examine. But further attributes or further degrees of the
same attributes. we can never infer or suppose, by any rules of just reasoning ... (Enquiry.
XI. 5th par. from the end.) And in the Dialogues. Philo says to Cleantbes: "First. by
this method of reasoning. you renounce all claim to infinity in any of the attributes of
the Deity. For. as the cause ought only to be proportioned to the effect. and the effect,
so far as it falls under our cognizance, is not infinite, what pretensions have we, upon
your suppositions, to ascribe that attribute to the Divine Being? ... Secondly. you have
no reason, on your theory, for ascribing perfection to the Deity, even in his finite
capacity, or for supposmg him free of error, mistake, or incoherence, in his undertakings."
(Pt. V, pars. 5-6.) Cf. also below, Ak. 455 inc!. br. n. 49.]

§ 85. ON PHYSICOTHEOLOGY

327

such liberties,] then lit] makes weighty claims to the distinction of
providing the basis for a theology. But what if we are told to indicate
what impels and even justifies us in making those supplementations?
In vain would we try to base our justification on the principles of the
theoretical use of reason, since that use always requires us to attribute
to [the) object of experience that we are trying to explain only
properties for which we have empirical data as to their possibility. On
closer examination we would see that in fact we have within us a
priori an underlying idea of a supreme being, an idea which rests on
an entirely different (namely, the practical) use of reason, and that
this idea impels us to supplement the deficient presentation (as provided by physical teleology)34 of the original basis of the purposes in
nature until it becomes the concept of a deity. And, [in view of this,]
we would not falsely imagine that we had brought about this idea, and
with it a theology, by applying reason theoretically to our physical
knowledge of the world, much less that we had proved the reality of
this idea.
One cannot blame the ancients so very much for thinking of all
their gods, including even the chief god, as still limited in the way
human beings are, despite the considerable diversity in the powers or
intentions and preferences they attributed to them. For, on the one
hand, when the ancients considered the order and course of things in
nature, they found sufficient grounds for assuming that these things
were caused by something that was more than mechanical, and for
suspecting behind the machinery of this world the intentions of
certain higher causes that they could conceive of only as superhuman.
But, on the other hand, they also found that~at least as far as we can
see-in this world good and bad, purposive and contrapurposive are
thoroughly mixed; and they could not take the liberty of nonetheless
secretly assuming underlying wise and beneficent purposes, of which
after all they saw no proof, for the sake of [supporting] the arbitrary
idea of a supremely perfect author [of the world J. Hence the ancients'
judgment about the supreme cause of the world could hardly have
turned out other than it did, since in terms of maxims of the merely
theoretical use of reason they proceeded quite consistently. Others.
who were physicists but wanted also to be theologians, tried to satisfy
34[Parentheses added.]

439

328

440

PART

n.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

reason's demand for absolute unity in the principle of natural things
by getting this unity from the idea of a being in which, as the sole
substance, all those natural things would only inhere as [its) attributes.
Though this substance would not be the cause of the world through
[its) understanding, it would still be the subject containing all the
understanding that the beings of the world have. Hence, though this
being would not produce anything in accordance with purposes, yet
all things, because of the unity of the subject whose mere attributes
they are, must still of necessity relate purposively to one another,
even without there being a purpose [or) intention. And so these
people introduced [an] idealism concerning final causes: for instead
of [making} the unity-which it is so difficult to obtain-of a multitude of purposively connected substances a unity of causal dependence on one substance, they turned it into a unity of inherence in
one substance. This system, considered from the side of the inhering
world beings, then became pantheism; and considered from the side
of the sole subsisting subject, the original being, it (later) became
Spinozism. 35 Rather than solving the problem concerning the first
basis of the purposiveness of nature, this system instead denied it; for
the concept of that first basis, deprived of all its reality, had been
turned into a mere misinterpretation of [the) universal ontological
concept of a thing as such.
Hence, if the concept of a deity is to be adequate for our teleological judging of nature, we can never obtain it by following principles of
the merely theoretical use of our reason ([and yet) physicotheology is
based on these principles alone). For [we are then left with these two
alternatives:J On the one alternative, we assert that all teleology is
mere deception of the power of judgment as it judges the causal
connection among things; we say that the unity of the substance,
whose mere manifold of attributes [Bestimmungen) nature is, merely
makes it seem to us as if there were a universal reference to purposes
in nature. and hence we seek refuge with mere mechanism as the sole
principle of nature, thereby adopting an idealism concerning final
causes. On the other alternative, we may wish to hold on to the
realistic principle concerning this special kind of causality, and then
regard natural purposes as based either on many intelligent original
beings or on only a single one. But once we have nothing left as a
35(Cf. Ak. 421 and 393-94.1

§ 85.

ON PHYSICOTHEOLOGY

329

basis for the concept of this original being except empirical principles,
taken from what actual connections in terms of purposes [are found)
in the worldl. we face two consequences): first, we are at a loss about
the discordance. as far as the unity of a purpose is concerned,
displayed by nature in many examples; second, the concept of a
single intelligent cause, as this concept is if justified by mere experience,
will never be determinate [bestimmt) enough for any theology that is
to be of any (theoretical or practical) use whatsoever.
Physical teleology does induce us to look for a theology; but it
cannot produce one, no matter how far we take our empirical investigation of nature and use ideas of reason to help Ius with) whatever
connections in terms of purposes we discover there. (For physical
problems, these ideas must be theoretical.) There is no point, we may
rightly complain, in basing all these arrangements [in nature) on [the
theoretical idea of) a great and to us unfathomable understanding,
and in having that understanding order this world according to
intentions. For that still leaves us without the final intention, about
which nature does not tell us anything, nor ever will, while yet, apart
from this final intention, we can form no common reference point for
all these natural purposes, no adequate teleological principle: no
principle that would allow us to cognize all the purposes las united) in
a system, and also to form a concept of the supreme understanding,
as cause of such a [systematic) nature, that our power of judgment
could use as a standard for its teleological reflection on that nature.
Therefore, we would still not have [arrived at] a wisdom to [provide]
a final purpose, but only [at) an artistic understanding to [provide)
sporadic purposes, even though the basis determining that understanding must actually be in that final purpose. Only pure reason can
provide a priori a final purpose (because all the purposes in the world
are empirically conditioned and [hence) cannot contain what is good
absolutely, but only what is good for this or that, i.e., for some
contingent aim). And only a final purpose would instruct me hdw I
must conceive of the supreme cause of nature in order to judge
nature as a teleological system: [i.e.,1 what properties this supreme
cause must have, in what degree it must have them, and what its
relation must be [to nature). Without a final purpose, the only concept I have of that original understanding is the very limited one that
I am able to derive from my scant knowledge of the world: the
concept of that original being's might to actualize its ideas, of its will

441

330

442

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

to do so, and so on. What then would give me the ability and the right
to expand this concept arbitrarily and supplement it until it becomes
the idea of an aU-wise [and) infinite being? In order to do this
theoretically, I myself would have to be omniscient, so that I could
have insight into the purposes of nature in their overall coherence,
and could be able moreover to conceive of all possible alternative
designs, so that by a comparison with these I could have grounds for
judging the present one to be best. For without such perfect knowledge of the effect I cannot infer a determinate concept of the supreme
cause-which has to be the concept of a deity, i.e., an intelligence
that is infinite in all respects-and [so) produce a foundation for
theology.
Hence, even if we expand physical teleology as far as possible, we
must surely keep to the principle we stated above: that, in view of the
character and principles of our cognitive power, the only way we can
conceive nature as regards what purposive arrangements we have
come to know in it is by conceiving nature as the product of an
understanding to which it is subjected. But as to whether this understanding might also have pursued a final intention with the whole of
nature and the production of that whole (in which case this intention
would not lie in nature as the world of sense): this [is something that)
a theoretical investigation of nature can never reveal to us. Rather, no
amount of knowledge of nature [will) allow us to decide whether it is
indeed [through J a final purpose that the supreme cause is nature's
original basis, rather than [merely) through an understanding whose
very nature necessarily determines it to produce certain forms (by
analogy with what we call artistic instinct in animals), in which case
there would be no need for us to attribute even wisdom to it, let alone
supreme wisdom combined with all the other properties that are
required to make its product perfect.
Hence physicotheology is physical teleology misunderstood. It is of
no use to theology except as a preliminary (a propaedeutic). But
[even] for that aim it is adequate not by itself, as its name tries to
suggest, but only if we supplement it by a further principle for its
support.

§86
On Ethicotheology36
There is a judgment that even the commonest understanding cannot
escape when it meditates about the existence of the things in the
world and of the world itself. It is the judgment that all these diverse
creatures would exist for nothing if they did not include human
beings (or some kind of [iiberhaupt] rational beings), no matter how
artfully devised these creatures may be, and how diversely, coherently.
and purposively interrelated, and the judgment that even the whole of
all the systems of these. which we incorrectly call worlds. would then
exist for nothing. In other words. it is the judgment that without man
all of creation would be a mere wasteland, gratuitous and without a
final purpose. On the other hand, it is not by reference to man's
cognitive power (theoretical reason) that the existence of everything
else in the world first gets its value, i.e., it is not [because] (say) there
is someone to contemplate the world. For if all this contemplation
offered to man's presentation nothing but things without a final purpose,
then the fact that the world is cognized cannot make its existence
valuable; only if we presupposed that the world has a final purpose,
could its contemplation itself have a value by reference to that purpose.
Nor do we think of creation as [having been) given a final purpose
with reference to the feeling of pleasure, and to the sum of that
pleasure; in other words, we do not assess the absolute value of the
existence of the world by reference to Iman's) well-being, or enjoyment (whether bodily or intellectual)-in a word, happiness. For the
fact that man, once he exists, makes happiness his own final intention
gives us no concept [that tells us] for what [end] he exists at all, and
what his own value is, on account of which his existence should be
made agreeable to him. Therefore, we must already presuppose that
man is the final purpose of creation, if we are to have a rational basis
as to why nature, considered as an absolute whole in terms of prin36[For other places where Kant gives extended and similar discussions of moral
theology, see the Critique of Pure Reason. A 632-42 = B 66(}-70 and A 804-19 = B
832-47; the Critique of Practical Reason. Ak. V, 124-48; and Religion within the
Bounds of Reason Alone. Ak. VI, 137-47.1

331

443

332

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOlOGICAL JUDGMENT

ciples of purposes, should have to harmonize with [the goal of achieving] his happiness. Hence the only [thing] which can give man's
existence an absolute value, and by reference to which the existence
of the world can have a final purpose, is the power of desire. But I do
not mean here that power of desire which makes man dependent on
nature (through impulses of sense), i.e., not the one according to
which the value of man's existence depends on what he receives and
enjoys. I mean the value that he can only give himself, and that
consists in what he does, how and on what principles he acts, not as a
link in nature, but in the freedom of his power of desire; in other
words. I mean a good will.
In fact, even the commonest judgment of sound human reason, once
it has been led to address the question and been prompted to try a
judgment on it, agrees completely with this view, that it is only as a
moral being that man can be a final purpose of creation. People will
say: If this person does not possess a good will, what point is there in
his having all this talent, assuming even that he applies it very much in
action and thereby exerts a useful influence on his community, so that
he is very valuable in relation both to his own state of happiness and
to the benefit of others? If we consider what this person is like
inwardly, then he is an object worthy of contempt; and if creation is
indeed to have a final purpose, then the only way for this person's
existence to be consistent with that final purpose is on this condition:
while as a human being he is [of course I a member of creation, as an
evil human being in a world subject to moral laws he still must, in
accordance with these laws. forfeit his subjective purpose (i.e.,
happiness).
Therefore, if we find in the world arrangements in terms of purposes. and we follow reason's inevitable demand to subordinate these
merely conditioned purposes to a supreme unconditioned one, i.e.,
a final purpose, then, to begin with, we are obviously not concerned with a purpose of (i.e., within) nature, so far as nature
[already I exists, but with the purpose of the [very I existence of nature
and all its arrangements. In other words, we are then concerned
with the ultimate purpose of creation, and actually, within that
purpose, with the supreme condition under which alone there can
be a final purpose (where this final purpose is the basis that determines a supreme understanding to produce the beings of the
world),

§ 86. ON ETHICOTHEOLOGY

333

Therefore, it is only as a moral being that we acknowledge man to be
the purpose of creation. Thus we now have, in the first place, a basis,
or at least the primary condition, for regarding the world as a whole
that coheres in terms of purposes, and as a system of final causes. But
above all, in referring natural purposes to an intelligent world cause,
as the character of our reason forces us to do, we now have a
principle that allows us to conceive of the nature and properties of
this first cause, i.e., the supreme basis of the kingdom of purposes,
and hence allows us to give determination to the concept of this
cause. Physical teleology was unable to do this; all it could do was to
give rise to concepts of this supreme basis that were indeterminate
and on that very account were inadequate for both theoretical and
practical use.
Determining the principle of the causality of the original being in this
way has the following consequences: We shall have to think of this
being not merely as an intelligence and as legislating to nature, but
also as the legislating sovereign in a moral kingdom of purposes. In
reference to the highest good -possible solely under the reign of this
being-namely, the existence of rational beings under moral laws, we
shall think of this original being as omniscient, so that even our inmost
attitudes (in which the proper moral value of the acts of rational
world beings consists) will not be hidden from it. We shall think of it
as omnipotent, so that it can make all of nature accord with that
highest purpose. We shall think of it as omnibenevolent as well asjust.
because these two properties (which together constitute wisdom)
are the conditions under which a supreme cause of the world can be
the cause of the world [taken] as the highest good under moral
laws. And we shall similarly have to think of this being as having all
the remaining transcendental properties (for goodness and justice
are moral properties), such as eternity. omnipresence. etc., which
[achieving) such a final purpose presupposes. In this way moral
teleology compensates for the deficiency of physical teleology and
for the first time supplies a basis for a theology. For physical teleology
on its own, if it proceeded consistently instead of borrowing. unnoticed,
from moral teleology, could not provide a basis for anything but a
demonology, which is incapable of [providing] a determinate concept
[of the deity I.
But the principle that [allows us to 1refer the world to a supreme
cause, as deity, because some of the beings in it are morally destined

444

334

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEQLDGICAL JUDGMENT

for a purpose, does not do this by merely supplementing the physicoteleological basis for proving [the existence of this deity], in which
case it would necessarily presuppose that basis. Rather, it is sufficient
even by itself to provide this reference (and it [even assists physical
teleology by] directing our attention to the purposes of nature and by
[inviting us] to investigate the unfathomably great art that lies hidden
behind nature's forms, so that the ideas that pure practical reason
supplies may find incidental confirmation in natural purposes))? For
the concept of world beings under moral laws is an a priori principle,
by which man must necessarily judge himself. Moreover, there is
another principle that reason regards a priori as necessary[.] for
judging the existence of things teleologically: the principle that. if
there is indeed a world cause that acts intentionally and aims at a
purpose, then the possibility of a creation requires [Bedingungj the
mentioned moral relation (of the world to a supreme cause as deity]
just as necessarily as it requires the relation [to a supreme cause I in
terms of physiCal laws. (The moral relation is required if that intelligent cause pursues (not just a purpose but] a final purpose as well.)
What matters, then, is whether we do have a basis, sufficient for
reason (whether speculative or practical), for attributing a final purpose to the supreme cause acting in terms of purposes. For [even] a
priori we may then consider as certain, given the subjective character
of our reason, or given even that of the reason of other beings no
matter how such reason might be conceived. that this final purpose
can only be man under moral laws. On the other hand. we are quite
unable to cognize a priori the purposes of nature in the physical
order; above aU we have no insight of any kind [that tells us j that a
nature could not exist without such purposes.

Comment
Consider a human being at those moments when his mind is attuned
to moral feeling: If, surrounded by a beautiful nature, he finds himself
calmly and serenely enjoying his existence. he will feel within him a
371Parentheses added.)

§ 86. ON ETHICOTHEOLOGY

335

need to be grateful for this to someone. Or suppose that, at another
time [but] in the same frame of mind, he finds himself under the
pressure of many duties that he is willing to perform and can perform
only through voluntary sacrifice: he will feel within him a need that in
performing them he will also have carried out something commanded,
and have obeyed some sovereign. Again, suppose that perhaps he has
unthinkingly violated his duty, yet without having made himself answerable to [other] people: still, within him he will sternly reprimand
himself in words that sound as if they were spoken by a judge to
whom he had to account for his action. In a word: he has a need for a
moral intelligence, because he exists for a purpose and needs a being
that caused both him and the world in conformity with that purpose.
There would be no point in artful attempts to find incentives behind
these feelings, for they are linked directly to the purest moral attitude:
gratitude, obedience, and humiliation (submission to deserved punishment) are special attunements of the mind to duty. Rather. in such
cases the mind has the inclination to expand its moral attitude, and
voluntarily thinks an object that is not in the world, so that it may
possibly do its duty to that I being I as well. Therefore, it is at least
possible-and the moral way of thinking even contains a basis for
it-to form a presentation of a pure moral need for the existence of a
being under which our morality gains either in fortitude or (at least
according to our presentation) in range, namely, by gaining a new
object to which we can apply it. In other words. it is at least possible
to assume a being [that exists] apart from the world, and that legislates morally, and to make this assumption without any concern about
theoretical proof, let alone selfish interest, but on a basis that (while
indeed only subjective) is purely moral and free from all foreign
influence: on the mere recommendation of a practical reason that
legislates only to itself. Suppose even that such an attunement of the
mind occurred rarely, or that it did not persist but passed swiftly and
without lasting effect. or without inducing us to meditate a little
about the object presented in such a shadowy image and to attempt to
bring it under distinct concepts: yet the basis for this mental attunement
is unmistakable, i.e., its basis is the moral predisposition within us, as
the subjective principle not to settle for considering the world in
terms of the purposiveness it has through natural causes, but to
regard the world [itself] as based on a supreme cause that rules nature
in terms of moral principles. Add to this the fact that we feel urged by

446

336

447

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

the moral law to strive toward a universal highest purpose, while yet
we feel that we and all of nature are incapable of achieving it. Add
also the fact that it is only insofar as we strive toward that purpose,
that we may judge ourselves as conforming to the final purpose of an
intelligent world cause (if there be such a cause). And so practical
reason gives us a pure moral basis for assuming this cause (since we
can do so without contradiction), even if only for the sake of avoiding
the risk of [having to I regard that striving as wholly futile in its effects
and of therefore allowing it to flag.
By all of this I wish to convey only the following: First, while fear
was first able to give rise to gods (i.e., demons), it is reason that, by
means of its moral principles, was first able to give rise to the concept
of God (and it did so despite the fact that people were usuaUy very
ignorant in the teleology of nature, or had serious doubts about it
because it is so difficult to [findl a sufficiently established principle
that will reconcile those appearances [of nature I that contradict one
another in teleological terms). Second, the inner moral destination of
man's existence for a purpose has compensated for the deficiency in
our knowledge of nature, by directing us to add something to the final
purpose of the existence of all things, a purpose whose principle
satisfies reason only ethically: to add, [namely,1 the thought of the
supreme cause (as a deity, i.e.,) as having properties that enable it to
subject all of nature to that single intention (with nature merely as the
instrument for achieving this intention).

§87

On the Moral Proof of the
Existence of God
There is a physical teleology; it provides us with a basis that gives us
sufficient proof, for theoretically reflective judgment, for assuming
the existence of an intelligent cause of the world. But we also find in
ourselves, and even more so in the general concept of a rational being
endowed with freedom (of its causality), a moral teleology. But our

§ frl. ON THE MORAL PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD

337

reference to a purpose, and with it the law that governs it, can be
determined a priori within ourselves, and hence can be cognized as
necessary; hence for this 38 Ireference to a purpose] moral teleology
does not require an intelligent cause outside us {to account1 for that
inner lawfulness, just as the purposive[ness] we find in the geometric
properties of figures (namely, for various possible uses of them by art)
does not entitle us to look beyond them to a supreme understanding
that imparts it to them. On the other hand, this moral teleology does
deal with us as beings of the world and hence as beings connected
with other things in the world; and those same moral laws enjoin us to
direct our judging to those other things Iregarded] either as purposes
or as objects for which we ourselves are the final purpose. This moral
teleology, then, deals with the reference IBeziehung] of our own
causality to purposes, and even to a final purpose at which we must
aim in the world, and also with the reciprocal relation IBeziehung]
the world has with that moral purpose and with how we can, as far as
external [nature] is concerned, carry it out (for which a physical
teleology cannot give us any guidance). Now this moral teleology
[doesl raise this necessary question: Does this moral teleology compel Ius in] our rational judging to go beyond the world and seek an
intelligent supreme principle Iso as to account] for that relation of
nature to what is moral in us, in order that we may form a presentation of nature as purposive also in relation to our inner morallegislation and to how we can carry it out'! Hence there is indeed a moral
teleology. It is connected with the nomothetic of freedom on the one
hand and with that of nature on the other, [and it is so connected Jiust
as necessarily as civil legislation is connected with the question of
where we must seek executive authority, and as there is connection in
everything generally where reason has to state a principle Ito account]
for the actuality of a certain lawful order of things that is possible
only in terms of ideas. Let me begin by stating how from that moral
teleology and its relation to physical teleology reason advances to
theology. After that I shall make some observations about the possibility and cogency of this kind of inference.
If we assume that the existence of certain things (or even only of
certain forms of things) is contingent and hence possible only through
something else as its cause, then we can seek the supreme basis of this
381Emphasis added.]

448

338

449

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGlCAL JUDGMENT

causality, and hence the unconditioned basis for what is conditioned,
either in the physical or in the teleological order (i.e., in terms of the
nexus effectivus or the nexus finalis). In other words, we may ask
either: What is the supreme producing cause? or: What is the supreme
(i.e., absolutely unconditioned) purpose that this cause pursues, i.e.,
the final purpose for which it produces these or all of its products? In
the second question we are of course presupposing that this cause is
capable of forming a presentation of purposes, and hence that it is an
intelligent being, or at least that we must conceive of it as acting
according to the laws of such a being.
Now, supposing we follow the teleological order, there is a principle
to which even the commonest human reason is obliged to give immediate assent: that if there is indeed to be a final purpose that reason has
to indicate a priori, then it can only be man (or any rational being in
the world) under moral iaws. J9 For (so we all judge) if the world
consisted only of lifeless beings, or if it included living beings that
391 say deliberately: under moral laws. The final purpose of creation is not man
[actingl.'n accordance with moral laws, i.e., a man whose behavior conforms to them.
For the[ se I latter expression! s I would say more than we know, namely, that an author of
the world has the power to ensure that man will at all times behave in accordance with
the moral laws. To [knowJ that, we would need a concept of freedom and of nature
(only for nature is an external author conceivable) that implied that we had insight
both into the supersensible substrate of nature and into the identity of this substrate
with what the causality Ithat actsl through freedom makes possible in the world; but
such insight far surpasses that of our reason. Only of man under moral laws can we say,
without overstepping the limits of our insight, that his existence is the final purpose of
the World. And this Iview I agrees perfectly with the judgment that human reason makes
when it reflects morally on the course of the world. Even in evil [deeds I we believe we
perceive the traces of a wise reference to a purpose, provided we see that the wanton
villain does not die until he has suffered the punishment he deserves for his misdeeds.
According to our concepts of free causality, whether our conduct is good or evil
depends on ourselves; but the highest wisdom in the government of the world we posit
in this [arrangementl: that the opportunity for good conduct, but the consequence of
both good and bad conduct, is ordained according to moral laws. In the latter [part of
the arrangement I consists, properly speaking, the glory of God, and hence it is not
unfitting if theologians call it the ultimate purpose of creation. 1 should add that in
speaking of creation I mean no more than I have said here, namely, the cause of the
existence of a world, or of the thiDgs in it (the substances); that is in fact what the
proper concept of the word conveys (actuatio substantiae est creatio 40 ), so that this
Idefinition] does not already presuppose a freely acting and hence intelligent cause
(whose existence we first of all want to prove).

40ICreation is the actualization of a substance, I

§ 87. ON THE MORAL PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD

339

were, however, nonrational. the existence of such a world would have
no value whatever, because there would exist in it no being that had
the slightest concept of a value. But suppose even there were rational
beings [in the world]. but that their reason were able only to posit the
value of the existence of things in nature's relation to these beings
(their well-being). but not able to procure that value originally {and]
on its own (in its freedom): then there would indeed be purposes in
the world (relative ones), but no final (i.e., absolute) purpose, because
the existence of such rational beings would still always be purposeless.
Moral laws, on the other hand, have this peculiar characteristic: they
prescribe something to reason and they prescribe it as a purpose not
subject to a condition, and hence just as the concept of a final
purpose requires; therefore, this kind of reason is one that in {its]
relation to purpose[s] can be its own supreme law. Hence the only
conceivable final purpose of the existence of a world is the existence
of this kind of reason, in other words, the existence of rational beings
under moral laws. But if this is not SO,41 then the existence of the
world is either based on no purpose at all in the cause, or only on
purposes without a final purpose.
The moral law is reason's formal condition for the use of our
freedom and hence obligates us all by itself, independently of any
purpose whatever as material condition. But it also determines for us,
and a priori, a final purpose, and makes it obligatory for us to strive
toward [achieving] it; and that purpose is the highest good in the
world that we can achieve through freedom.
The subjective condition under which man (and, as far as we can
conceive, any [other) rational [and] finite being as well) can set
himself a final purpose under the above law, is happiness. Hence the
highest physical good we can [achieve] in the world is happiness, and
this is what we are to further as the final purpose as far as we can,
[though] subject to the objective condition that man be in harmony
with the law of morality. 42 Isince lour worthiness to be happy consists in that harmony.
Hence there are two requirements [we must fulfill in order to
41[l.e., if the existence of rational beings under moral laws is not the final purpose,
while yet no other final purpose is conceivable.]
42[Cf.. above all, the Critique of Pure Reason, A 804-19 = B 832-47, and the Critique
of Practical Reason, Ak. V, 107-13, but also the Anthropology, Ak. VII. 277.]

450

340

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

achieve] the final purpose that the moral law enJoins on us. 43
Yet all our rational powers still do not enable us to form a presentation of these two requirements ~ considered fulfilled I as connected through mere natural causes and (yetI as commensurate
with the idea of that final purpose. Hence the concept of the practical necessity of Iachieving] such a purpose by applying our forces
does not harmonize with the theoretical concept of the physical
possibility of its being achieved, if the causality of nature is the only
causality (of a means ~for achieving it]) that we connect with our
freedom.
Hence in order to set ourselves a final purpose in conformity with
the moral law, we must assume a moral cause of the world (an author
of the world); and to the extent that setting ourselves a final purpose
is necessary, to that extent (i.e., to the same degree and on the same
ground) it is also necessary that we assume ~that there is] a moral
cause of the world: in other words, that there is a God.44

451

This proof, to which we could easily give the form of logical precision, is not trying to say that it is as necessary to assume that
God exists as it is to acknowledge that the moral law is valid,45 so
that anyone who cannot convince himself that God exists may judge
himself released from the obligations that the moral law imposes. No!
All we would have to give up [if we could not convince ourselves that
God exists] is our aiming at that final purpose that we are to achieve
in the world by complying with the moral law (in other words, our
aiming at the highest good in the world: a happiness of rational beings
that harmoniously accompanies their compliance with moral laws);
every rational being would still have to cognize himself as strictly
1Man's happiness, but as conditional on his hannony with the moral law. I

43

44This moral argument is not meant to provide an objectively valid proof of the
existence of God. It is not meant to prove to the skeptic that there is a God, but that he
must adopt the assumption of this proposition as one of the maxims of his practical
reason if he wants to think consistently in morality. Nor is the argument meant to say
that it is necessary for morality [Sitt/ichlreitl that we assume that the happiness of all
rational beings in the world is [to be] proportionate 1gemiiftl to their morality IMoralitatL
but rather that morality malres it necessary for us to make this assumption. Hence this
argument is sufficient subjectively, for moral beings.
45\Cf. the Critique of Practical Reason, Ak. V, 125-26. and Religion within the Bounds
of Reason Alone, Ak. VI, 3-4.]

§ 87. ON THE MORAL PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD

341

bound by what morality prescribes, because the moral laws are
fonnal and command unconditionally, without regard to purposes
(which are the matter of volition). On the other hand, one of the
requirements of the final purpose, as practical reason prescribes
it to the beings of the world, is a purpose that is irresistible and is
put into these beings by their nature (as finite beings); [butl all
that reason insists upon concerning this purpose [happiness] is that
[our achieving] it be subject to the moral law as its inviolable condition, or that itt s attainment) be made universal only in accordance with that law, so that what reason makes the final purpose is
the furtherance of happiness in harmony with morality. Now the
moral law commands us to further that final purpose (with regard
to the beings of the world) as far as we can, whatever may be the
result of our endeavor. Fulfillment of duty consists in the form of
the earnest will, not in the intermediate causes [responsible) for
success.
Suppose, then, that a person, partly because all the highly praised
speculative arguments [for the existence of God J are so weak, and
partly because he finds many irregularities both in nature and in the
world of morals. became persuaded of the proposition: There is no
God. 46 Still, if because of this he regarded the laws of duty as merely
imaginary, invalid, nonobligatory, and decided to violate them boldly,
he would in his own eyes be a worthless human being. Indeed, even if
such a person could later overcome his initial doubts and convince
himself that there is a God after all, still with his way of thinking he
would forever remain a worthless human being. For while he might
fulfill his duty ever so punctiliously as far as effects are concerned. he
would be doing so from fear, or for reward, rather than with an
attitude of reverence for duty. Conversely, if he believed [in the
existence of God J and complied with his duty sincerely and unselfishly according to his conscience, and yet immediately considered
himself free from all moral obligation every time he experimentally
posited that he might some day become convinced that there is
no God, his inner moral attitude would indeed have to be in bad
shape.
Therefore, let us consider the case of a righteous man (Spinoza, for
46\Cf. On the Failure of All Philosophical Endeavors in Theodicy (1791), Ak. VIIl,

253-71.1

452

342

453

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

example) who actively reveres the moral law [but] who remains firmly
persuaded that there is no God and (since, as far as [achieving] the
object of morality is concerned, the consequence is the same) that
there is also no future life: How will he judge his own inner destination to a purpose, [imposed] by the moral law? He does not require
that complying with that law should bring him an advantage, either in
this world or in another; rather, he is unselfish and wants only to
bring about the good to which that sacred law directs all his forces.
Yet his effort [encounters I limits: For while he can expect that nature
will now and then cooperate contingently with the purpose of his that
he feels so obligated and impelled to achieve, he can never expect
nature to harmonize with it in a way governed by laws and permanent
rules (such as his inner maxims are and must be). Deceit, violence,
and envy will always be rife around him, even though he himself is
honest, peaceable, and benevolent. Moreover, as concerns the other
righteous people he meets: no matter how worthy of happiness they
may be, nature, which pays no attention to that, will still subject them
to all the evils of deprivation, disease, and untimely death, just like all
the other animals on the earth. And they will stay subjected to these
evils always, until one vast tomb engulfs them one and all (honest or
not, that makes no difference here) and hurls them, who managed to
believe they were the final purpose of creation, back into the abyss of
the purposeless chaos of matter from which they were taken. And so
this well-meaning person would indeed have to give up as impossible
the purpose that the moral laws obligated him to have before his eyes,
and that in compliance with them he did have before his eyes.
Alternatively, suppose that, regarding this [purpose I too, he wants to
continue to adhere to the call of his inner moral vocation, and that he
does not want his respect for the moral law, by which this law directly
inspires him to obey it, to be weakened, as would result from the
nullity of the one ideal final purpose that is adequate to this respect's
high demand (such weakening of his respect would inevitably impair
his moral attitude): In that case he must-from a practical point of
view, i.e., so that he can at least form a concept of the possibility of
[achieving] the final purpose that is morally prescribed to him-assume
the existence of a moral author of the world, Le., the existence of a
God; and he can indeed make this assumption, since it is at least not
intrinsically contradictory.

§88

Restriction of the Validity
of the Moral Proof
Pure reason is [not only a theoretical but also I a practical power: our
power to determine the free use of our causality by means of ideas
(pure rational concepts). It contains a principle that regulates our
acts, namely, the moral law, and through this [law I it provides us in
addition with a principle that is subjectively constitutive: the concept
of an object that only reason can think [the final purpose I and that we
are to actualize in the world through our acts. Hence the idea of a
final purpose [that we are to pursue I in using our freedom according
to moral laws has subjective practical reality: reason determines us a
priori to strive to the utmost to further the highest good in the
world. This highest good in the world consists in the combination
of universal happiness, i.e., the greatest welfare of the rational beings
in the world, with the supreme condition of their being good, namely,
that they be moral in maximal conformity with the [moral) law.
Therefore, the final purpose has two components: our happiness
and our morality. Now as regards our morality, we are free from
the effects that nature contributes, and [hence) it is established a
priori and dogmatically that our morality is possible. But the possibility of the other component of the final purpose, our happiness,
has an empirical condition, for it depends on how nature is constituted (i.e., on whether or not nature harmonizes with that final
purpose), and [hence] it is problematic from a theoretical point of
view. Therefore, in order for the concept of the final purpose of
rational beings in the world to have objective theoretical reality, not
only must a [moral) final purpose be set before us a priori, but
creation, Le., the world itself, must also have a final purpose for its
existence; for if indeed creation has a final purpose, then we have to
conceive of it as harmonizing with the moral final purpose ([since)
only the moral final purpose makes the concept of a[ ny I purpose [of
creation) possible). If we could prove a priori that the existence of the
world has a final purpose, then the final purpose [of rational beings in
the world] would have not only subjective but also objective reality.

343

344
454

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

(But can we?) It is true that we find purposes in the world, and
physical teleology exhibits them on such a scale that, if we judge
by reason, we are ultimately justified in assuming, as a principle
for investigating nature, that nothing whatever in nature is without a purpose. Yet if we seek the final purpose of nature, we seek
it in vain if we look for it within nature itself. Hence, just as the
idea of that final purpose resides only in reason, so we can and
must seek that purpose itself only in rational beings: [only therel
is this purpose objectively possible. But the practical reason of
these beings does more than indicate that final purpose: it also
determines this concept by [stating] what conditions [must be met]
if [achieving) a final purpose of creation is to be conceivable for
us.
Here a question arises: can we not establish the objective reality of
the concept of a final purpose of creation in a way that would satisfy
pure reason's theoretical demands? Even if we could not do this
apodeictically, for determinative judgment, could we not do it in a
way that would be adequate for the maxims that judgment uses in
reflecting theoretically? [Surely] this much at least we may require of
speculative47 philosophy, which undertakes to connect the moral
purpose with the natural purposes by means of the idea of a single
purpose. Yet even this, little though it is, is far more than speculative
philosophy can ever accomplish.
If we followed the principle of theoretically reflective judgment,
what we would say is: If [in order to account) for the purposive
products of nature we have a basis for assuming a supreme cause of
nature, whose causality in actualizing (creating) nature we must think
of as different in kind from the one that nature's mechanism requires,
namely, as the causality of an understanding, then presumably we
also have a sufficient basis for thinking of this original being as
pursuing not merely purposes [manifested] everywhere in nature, but
as pursuing also a final purpose. And though this [reasoning] would
not establish the existence of such a being, it would at least suffice
(as we saw in physical teleology) to convince us that, if we are to
grasp the possibility of such a world, we cannot do this in terms of
47(For Kant's distinction between 'speculative' and 'theoretical,' see below, Ak. 456 br.

n.51.1

§ 88. RESTRICTION OF THE VALIDITY...

345

mere purposes, but must base its existence on a final purpose as
well.
And yet [the concept of a I final purpose is merely a concept of our
practical reason; we cannot infer it from any data of experience, so as
to judge nature theoretically [in terms of it), nor can we apply it to
cognition of nature. There is no other possible use for this concept
except for [our employment of) practical reason according to moral
laws; and the final purpose of creation is [nothing other than) that
constitution of the world which harmonizes with the only Ithing that,
by way of a final purpose,) we can indicate determinately according
to laws: the final purpose that our pure practical reason has, namely,
insofar as it is to be practical. Now since the final purpose of pure
practical reason is enjoined on us by the moral law, this law provides
us-from a practical point of view, namely, so that we shall apply our
forces toward achieving that final purpose-with a basis for assuming
that this final purpose is possible, that it can be achieved,48 and
hence also that the nature of things is such that it harmonizes
with that [aim) (since we could not achieve the final purpose if
nature did not help us by fulfilling a condition of that possibility
that is not within our power). Hence we have a moral basis for
thinking that, since there is a world, there also is a final purpose of
creation.
This is not yet the inference from moral teleology to a theology,
i.e., to the existence of a moral author of the world, but only to a final
purpose of creation that we make determinate in this way. It is a
second inference [if we concludeJ that this creation, i.e., the existence of things in conformity with a final purpose, requires us to
make two assumptions: first, that there is, as author of the world, an
intelligent being (this was required in order for those things of nature
to be possible that we had to judge to be purposes); but. second, that
[this) being is not merely intelligent but also moral, and hence a
48iCf. Perpetual Peace. Ak. VIII, 370: "Morality, as such, is practical [Praxis]
in an objective sense of this term, for it is the sum tota! of laws that command
unconditionally how we ought to act; and it is obviously absurd to grant the authority of this concept of duty and then go on to claim that yet we cannot [do
our dUly]. since in that case this concept would automatically drop out of morality
([since] ultra posse nemo obligatur Ino one has an obligation to do more than he
canlJ···· "I

455

346

456

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

God. 49 We can see from the character of this second inference that
we make it only for [the use ofl judgment in accordance with can·
cepts of practical reason, and hence for reflective rather than determi·
native judgment. For though in us [human beings] morally practical
reason differs essentially in its principles from technically practical
reason,50 we cannot claim to see that the same must hold for the
supreme cause of the world once we assume it as an intelligence;
[i.e .• ] we cannot claim to see that the final purpose requires that
this cause has a special kind of causality that differs from the one it
must have to [produce] mere purposes of nature; and hence we
cannot claim that our final purpose provides us not merely with a
moral basis for assuming a final purpose of creation ([with creation]
as [its] effect), but also with a moral being as the original basis of
creation. What we can say. however, is this: that the character of our
power of reason is such that we cannot at all grasp how such a
purposiveness as there is in this final purpose is possible, namely. a
purposiveness that has reference to the moral law and its object,
unless we assume an author and ruler of the world who is also a moral
legislator.
Hence it is merely for the practical use of our reason that we have
established sufficiently the actuality of a supreme author who legis·
lates morally, and we have not determined anything theoretically
regarding the existence of this author. For even without this [theoretical
determination], reason's own legislation enjoins on us a purpose, and
the possibility of [achieving I this purpose requires that reason has an
idea that removes (sufficiently for reflective judgment) the obstacle
49[ Cf. Hume. who. in the Dialogues (Pt. V. next to last paragraph), has Philo say: "In a
word, Cleanthes. a man who follows your hypothesis [that a God is needed to account
for the order in the world] is able, perhaps, to assert or conjecture that the universe
sometime arose from something like design; but beyond that position he cannot
ascertain one single circumstance, and is Jeft afterwards to fix every point of his
theology [including the moral properties of the deityl by the utmost license of fancy
and hypothesis." Even later on (Pt. XII), after Philo seems to have reversed himself on
his assessment of the argument from design (the standard view is to discount this
"reversal," as well as a similar position in the Natural History of Religion. on various
evidence. both internal and external), he accepts the argument (Pt. XII, par. 8) only for
the natural attributes of the deity, not for the moral attributes, adding merely (and
independently from the argument) that "the Supreme Being is allowed to be absolutely
and entirely perfect." (Emphasis added.)]

SO]For this distinction. cf. above, Ak. 171-73.1

§ 88. RESTRICTION OF THE VALIDITY. . .

347

that arises from our inability to comply with that legislation if we
adhere merely to the natural concept of the world. And from this
[Le .• from the fact that achievability of that final purpose requires
that reason has such an idea] that idea gets practical reality. even
though [we] have no means whatever of providing it with reality from
a theoretical point of view, i.e., for explaining nature and determining
the supreme cause, and [hence] for speculative cognition. Sl For
theoretically reflective judgment, physical teleology sufficiently proved ,
from the purposes of nature, [the existence of] an intelligent cause.
Moral teleology proves this [existence] for practical [reflective I
judgment, namely, through the concept of a final purpose that moral
teleology is compelled to attribute to creation from a practical point
of view. Now the objective reality of the idea of God, as moral author
of the world, cannot be established by [appeal to] physical purposes
alone. Yet if we combine our cognition of physical purposes with that
of the moral purpose, then, because of pure reason's maxim to strive
to unify principles as much as we can, physical purposes are very
important, since they support the practical reality of the idea of God
by the reality that from a theoretical point of view it already has for
judgment.
Two crucial comments are needed here, in order to prevent a
misunderstanding that might easily arise. First, we can think these
properties of the supreme being only by an analogy.52 For how could
we investigate its nature, in view of the fact that experience can show
us nothing similar? Second, this analogy allows us only to think the
supreme being, not to cognize it [theoretically53] and perhaps attribute
these properties to it theoretically; for that we would do for determinative judgment, from a speculative point of view of our reason,
namely, to have insight into what the supreme cause of the world is in
itself. Here our only concern is this: Since even without presupposing
the existence of such a being, pure practical reason enjoins us a priori
SI[ln the Critique of Pure Reason (A 634-35 = B 662--63), Kant distinguishes specul4tive
cognition from theoretical cognition (generally) 11$ follows: "Theoretical cognition is
speculative jf it concerns [such] an object, or such concepts of an object, as we cannot
reach in any experience. It is contrasted with cognition of natUTe, which concerns only
those objects or predicates of objects which can be given in a possible experience."1
521By analogy with ourselves (cf. above, Ak. 455). we think of God as having not only
technically practical but also morally practical reason.]
S3[We do cognize it practically by this analogy: see below. Ak. 484-85.1

348

457

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

to strive to the utmost to achieve a [final I purpose: what concept
must we form of this supreme cause in view of the character of our
cognitive powers, and must we assume the existence of this cause, in
order to provide that purpose with a reality that is also only [nur}
practical, i.e., in order that we can at least [nurJ think that [the I
effect we intend is possible? The concept of that supreme cause may
indeed be transcendent for speculative reason; and the properties we
attribute to the being that we think through that concept may indeed
involve a concealed anthropomorphism if we use them objectively.54
But we do not in fact intend to use them in an attempt to determine
that being's nature, which is inaccessible to us, but to determine
ourselves and our will. When we name a cause after the concept we
have of its effect (though only with regard to the relation it has to this
effect), we are not trying to determine intrinsically the inner character of this cause, by the properties that we can know solely from such
causes and that experience must give us. 55 For example, one of the
forces we attribute to the soul is a vis locomotiva, because bodily
movements do actually arise whose cause lies in the soul's presentations;
but we do this without trying to attribute to the soul the one manner
in which we know motive forces (namely, through attraction, pressure,
impact, and hence motion, all of which always presuppose an extended
being). Now in the same way we shall have to assume something that
contains the basis for the possibility and practical reality. i.e .• achievability. of a necessary moral final purpose. But, in view of the character of the effect we expect from this something, we can think of it as a
wise being ruling the world according to moral laws; and, according
to the character of our cognitive powers, we must think of it as a
cause of things that is distinct from nature. We must think of it in this
way only in order to express the relation that this being, which
54(Cf. Ak. 353 and 459. Anthropomorphism, Kant says elsewhere, is the "source of
superstition" (Critique of Practical Reason, Ak. V, 135, and cf. 137-38, as well as
Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone, Ak. VI, 65n). On the other hand, in the
Prolegomena (Ak. IV, 357), he rejects dogmatic anthropomorphism, which attributes
human properties to God as he is in bimself, but permits symbolic anthropomorphism,
which "concerns only our language, not the object itself." This is the "subtler" anthropomorphism which is also permitted in the Critique of Pure Reason (A 700 = B 728),
and which "merely assists a certain regulative principle" (A 697 = B 725).J

551Cf. "symbolic hypotyposis," i.e., ellhibition by analogy: Ak. 351-54 incl. br. n. 31; see
also below, Ak. 482-85.1

§ 88.

RESTRICTION OF THE VALIDITY. . .

349

surpasses all our cognitive powers, has to the object of our practical
reason. And we are not thereby trying to attribute to it theoretically
the only causality of this kind familiar to us: an understanding and a
will. We are not even trying to make an objective distinction, within
this being itself, between the causality we conceive it to have with
regard to what is for us [a I final purpose, and the causality with
regard to nature (and aU the attributes nature has in terms of purposes).
We can assume this distinction only as subjectively necessary for the
character of our cognitive power, and as valid for reflective but not
for determinative judgment. And yet, when we are concerned with
the practical sphere, such a regulative principle (of prudence or
wisdom)-namely, to act in conformity with something, as a purpose,
that in view of the character of our cognitive powers we can conceive of as possible only in a certain manner-is also constitutive,
i.e., determinative practically. But the same principle, [construed]
as a principle for judging the objective possibility of things (namely,
that the object too is restricted to the one kind of possibility to
which our ability to think is restricted), is in no way theoretically
determinative but is merely a regulative principle for reflective
judgment.

Comment
This moral proof by no means Ioffers I a newly discovered basis for
proving [the existence of God]. but at most a new elucidation of that
basis. For it resided in man's power of reason even before that power
first began to germinate; after that it only developed more and more
as the culture of reason progressed. Once people began to reflect on
right and wrong-at a time when they were still indifferent to and
ignored the purposiveness of nature, taking advantage of it without
seeing in it more than the familiar course of nature-they inevitably
had to arrive at this judgment: that in the end it must make a
difference whether a person has acted honestly or deceitfully, fairly
or violently, even if to the end of his life he has received no good
fortune for his virtues and no punishment for his crimes, at least none
that we could see. It is as if they heard an inner voice that said:

458

350

459

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

This56 is not how it should be. Hence they must also have had a
lurking conception, even if an obscure one, of something toward
which they felt obligated to strive and with which such a result cannot
be made to agree, or with which they could not reconcile that inner
destination of their minds to a purpose once they regarded the course
of the world as the only order of things. Now they might form all sorts
of conceptions, however crude, as to how an irregularity of this sort
[i.e., in the moral sphere] could be straightened out (a sort of irregularity that must be far more upsetting to the human mind than blind
chance, which some have even sought to use as a principle by which
to judge nature); but the only principle they were ever able to devise
in order to be able to reconcile nature with the moral law within them
was a supreme cause that rules the world according to moral laws:
because there [would] be a contradiction between an inner final
purpose that is set them as a duty, and an external nature in which
that final purpose is to be actualized but which itself has no final
purpose whatever. It is true that they hatched a lot of nonsense about
the intrinsic constitution of that cause of the world, but that moral
relation in its government of the world always remained the same; it is
a relation that everyone can grasp, even the most uncultivated reason,
provided it considers itself as practical reason, with which speculative
reason cannot even remotely keep pace. Indeed, it was in all probability through this moral interest that people first became attentive to
the beauty and the purposes of nature. And this attentiveness was in
turn superbly suited to reinforce that idea [of a moral cause and ruler
of the world I, even though it could not provide a basis for it, let alone
make the moral interest dispensable: for only by reference to the final
purpose does even our investigation of the purposes of nature acquire
that immediate interest that manifests itself to so great an extent
when we admire nature without any concern about an expected
advantage.

56(Le., receiving no good fortune for one's virtues and no punishment for one's

crimes.]

§89

On the Benefit of the
Moral Argument
Restricting reason, as regards all our ideas of the supersensible, to the
conditions of its practical employment, has an unmistakable benefit
concerning the idea of God. For it keeps theology from soaring to the
heights of a THEOSOPHY (in which transcendent concepts confuse
reason), and from sinking to the depths of a DEMONOLOGY (which is
an anthropomorphic way of conceiving the supreme being); and it
keeps religion from lapsing either into theurgy (a fanatical delusion
that we can receive a feeling from, and in tum influence, other
supersensible beings) or into idolatry [ldolatrie I (a superstitious delusion that we can make ourselves pleasing to the supreme being by
means other than a moral attitude).57
For once we allow that reasoning, whether from vanity or impudence,
about what lies beyond the world of sense is able to determine
anything whatsoever theoretically (and in a way that expands cognition),
lor 1if we permit [people 1to boast of having insight into the existence
and constitution of divine nature, his understanding and will, the laws
of these and the properties to which they give rise in the world: then I
would surely like to know where and at what point they are going to
restrict the pretensions of reason. After all, whatever the source of
these insights, we might expect it to yield still more (if only, so these
people suppose, we meditate hard enough). Now in restricting such
claims we must surely follow some principle: we must not do it (say)
merely because we have found that so far all tests of these claims have
failed, since that in no way proves that a better result is impossible.
But the only possible principle [for restricting those claims 1 is one of
51Any religion still remains idolatry [Abgottereil. in a practical sense of the term, if it

conceives of the supreme being as having properties that allow something else besides
morality to be, of itself. a sufficient condition for man's conforming, in what he is
capable of doing, to that being's will. For no matter how pure and free from images of
sense such a concept of the supreme being may be from a theoretical point of view,
practically the being is still conceived of as an idol, i.e., it is conceived of anthropomorphically in what its will is like.

351

460

352

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

these two assumptions: either that (except in only a negative way) we
can determine absolutely nothing theoretically about the supersensible,
or that our reason holds a trove, still unused, [of] expansive58
knowledge that is of unknown magnitude and is stored there for us
and our descendants. But as far as religion is concerned, i.e .• morality
in relation to God as legislator. [the benefit of restricting reason's
theoretical claims is this I: if we had to cognize God before [having
morality], then morality would have to be governed by theology: not
only would we have to replace an inner Iand] necessary legislation of
reason by an introduced external and arbitrary legislation of a supreme
being, but all the deficiencies in our insight into the nature of this
being would have to affect the ethical precept[s] in this legislation and
so pervert religion and make it immoral.
As far as our hope for a future life is concerned, we have a guide
for reason's judgment about our vocation: the final purpose that the
moral law enjoins us to achieve ourselves (so that we regard this
judgment as necessary or worthy of acceptance in a practical respect
only). If we replace this guide and consult instead our theoretical
cognitive power, [we find that] psychology offers us on the present
question. just as theology did on the one above,59 only a negative
concept of our[selves as] thinking being[s];60 this concept tells us no
more than that none of the acts and none of the appearances of the
inner sense of these beings can be explained in materialistic terms, so
that our entire theoretical cognitive power cannot possibly make a
determinative [and I expansive judgment, from speculative bases, concerning the separate nature of these [beings] and the continuance or
discontinuance of their personality after death. Hence this entire
[question] is left to the teleological judgment we make about our
existence from a necessary [but] practical point of view, and to our
assumption of our continued [life after death] as the condition that
must be met [in order] for [us to achieve] the final purpose that
reason enjoins on us absolutely. [Restricting the question to the
salOr ampliative (erweiternd). I prefer 'expansive' because the corresponding verb,
erweitern. is rendered less misleadingly by 'expand' than by 'amplify' (which might. to
some contemporary readers. suggest increase in force). I
591Concerning

the supersensible in the case of divine nature. 1

60[On the remainder of this section, cf. the Critique of Pure Reason. On the Parala·
gisms of Pure Reason, A 341-405 = B 399-432.1

§ 89.

ON THE BENEFIT OF THE MORAL ARGUMENT

353

practical sphere] shows us a benefit at once (though at first glance it
seems a loss): For we see that, just as theology can never become
theosophy for us, so rational psychology can never become pneumat%gy, which would be a science that expands iour knowledge): nor,
on the other hand, does rational psychology run the risk of lapsing
into a materialism. Rather, we see that it is merely an anthropology of
the inner sense, i.e., knowledge of our thinking self [as it is) in life;
and since it is theoretical cognition, it also remains merely empirical.
On the other hand, as far as the question of our eternal existence is
concerned, rational psychology is not a theoretical science at all, but
rests on a single inference of moral teleology; and indeed it is necessary for us to use it merely because of moral teleology, ii.e., because
of] our practical vocation.

§90

On What Kind of
Assent There Is in
a Teleological Proof of the
Existence of God
We can prove by exhibiting directly and empirically what is to be
proved (e.g., if we prove something by observing the object, or by
experimenting), or we can prove a priori from principles [and) by
reason. But all proofs must, in the first place, not [merely) persuade
but convince,61 or at least tend to convince. In other words, the basis
of the proof, or the inference, must not be a basis, determining us to
approve, that is merely subjective (aesthetic, [and so) a mere seeming
[Schein)), but it must be objectively valid and a logical basis of
cognition; for otherwise the understanding is beguiled, but not won
over. An example of such an illusory (Schein-) proof is the one that
people offer in natural theology; their intention may be good, but
61[Cf. the Logic, Ak. IX, 73,J

461

354

462

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

they do deliberately conceal the weakness of the proof. For when
they point to the large amount of evidence [which suggests} that
natural things originated in terms of the principle of purposes, they
take advantage of [a] merely subjective basis in human reason, a
propensity peculiar to it: Human reason thinks a single principle,
rather than several, wherever it can do so without contradiction; and
if it finds that the principle contains just some [of the features I that
are needed to determine a concept, or perhaps many [but not all], it
adds the remaining ones in thought so as to perfect the concept of the
thing by choosing to supplement it. Indeed: If we find so many
properties in nature that seem to us to point to an intelligent cause,
why should we not think a single such cause rather than many? And
why should we not think of it as having, (say), not merely great
understanding and might, etc., but instead omniscience and omnipotence, in a word: why should we not think of it as a cause that
contains [a) basis, for such properties [as we find in those products],
that would suffice for [producing) all possible things? And why should
we not also attribute to this single all-powerful original being, not
merely understanding, [which it must have) for the natural laws and
products, but also the supreme ethical and practical reason [it needs I
as a moral cause of the world? For perfecting the concept in this way
gives us a principle that is sufficient both for insight into nature and
for moral wisdom, and no objection that has any basis at all can be
brought against the possibility of such an idea. Now if in addition the
moral springs of the mind are set in motion, and this motion is
supplemented by a lively interest through the use of oratorical force
(of which these moral springs are indeed worthy), then the result is a
persuasion that the proof is adequate objectively, and an illusion (a
wholesome one in most cases where this proof is used) [in] which [the
person who offers the proof] exempts [him]self completely from any
examination of its logical rigor, and even has a loathing for and
aversion from such examination, as if it were based on sacrilegious
doubt. Now I suppose there is nothing to be said against [any ofl this
if our express concern is with how useful the proof is to the public.
And yet this cannot and must not keep us from distinguishing in it the
two heterogeneous components contained in the argument, one of
which belongs to physical and the other to moral teleology. For if we
fuse the two, we can no longer tell where the actual nerve of the proof
lies, and how and on what part we would have to work on [the proof]

§ 90.

ASSENT ... IN A TELEOLOGICAL PROOF

355

so that we could guarantee it to be valid under the most rigorous
examination (even if concerning some part we had to acknowledge
the weakness of our reason's insight). Hence a philosopher has the
duty (assuming he leaves out of account [the risk in followingJ the
demand to be sincere) to expose the illusion, no matter how wholesome it is, that such mingling can produce. He must separate what
pertains merely to persuasion from what leads to conviction (two
forms of approval that differ not merely in degree but also in kind), so
that he can exhibit openly and very clearly what frame of mind
this proof involves, and subject the proof candidly to the strictest
examination.
Now proofs that try to convince are, in tum, of two kinds. Such a
proof may be intended to decide what the object is in itself, or what it
is for us (human beings as such) according to the principles of reason
that we must follow in judging it. (In other words, the proof may be
KaT' a:>o..1j(lElaV or KaT' av{jpWTroV,62 with the last word taken in a
universal sense, for human beings as such). A proof of the first kind is
based on principles sufficient for determinative judgment, a proof of
the second kind on principles sufficient merely for reflective judgment.
If a proof of the second kind rests on merely theoretical principles,
then it cannot ever tend to convince. But if it is based on a practical
principle of reason (which therefore holds universally and necessarily),
then it may indeed claim to convince sufficiently from a pure practical point of view, that is, morally. But a proof tends to convince, rather
than already convinces, if [its only deficiency is thatJ it is [stillJ on the
way toward conviction, i.e.: it does contain objective bases for
conviction, and, though they are not yet sufficient to [produce 1
certainty, they are still of a kind that are not merely subjective bases
of the judgment, which would accordingly serve merely to persuade.
All theoretical bases of proof are sufficient either (1) for proof by
logically rigorous syllogistic inferences; or, if not that, (2) for inference
by analogy,· or, if that too does not apply, then at any rate (3) for
probable opinion; or, finally, which is least, (4) for a hypothesis, i.e.,
for assuming a merely possible basis for an explanation. Now I say
that none of the bases of proof that tend toward theoretical conviction can produce an assent of this kind, from the highest degree to the
lowest, if what is to be proved is the proposition about the existence
621Kat' al~theian or kat' anthropon: according to the truth or according to man.j

463

356

464

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

of an original being who is a God in the full sense of that concept,
namely, a moral author of the world, so that the concept also indicates the final purpose of creation.
(1) As far as the logically correct proof is concerned, which proceeds from the universal to the particular, it was dealt with in the
Critique [of Pure Reason I, 63 which sufficiently established the following: Since it is impossible for us to have an intuition that would
correspond to the concept of a being that we must seek beyond
nature, the very concept of this being, as far as we try to determine it
theoretically by synthetic predicates, always remains problematic for
us. Hence we have absolutely no cognition of this being (that would in
the least expand the range of our theoretical knowledge), and cannot
at all subsume the particular concept of a supersensible being under
the universal principles of the nature of things, so as to infer this
being from them; for these principles hold solely for nature as an
object of sense.
(2) [As for an inference by analogy: I It is true that even if two
things are heterogeneous, we can still conceive of the one by an
analogy64 with the other. and on the very point of their heterogeneity.
63[See A 631-42

=

B 659-70.[

64Analogy (in a qualitative sense b5 ) is the identity of the relation between bases and
consequences (causes and effects) insofar as it is present despite what difference in
kind [spezifischJ there is between the things themselves (i.e., considered apart from
that relation), or between those properties themselves that contain the basis of similar
consequences. Thus when we compare the artful acts of animals with those of man, we
do not know what basis in these animals gives rise to such effects, but we do know what
basis gives rise to similar effects in the case of man (namely, reason); and hence we
conceive of the basis for such acts in animals by means of the basis of such acts in man:
i.e., we conceive of the former basis as an analogue of reason. In doing so we wish to
indicate at the same time that the basis of the artistic power in animals, called instinct,
while indeed different in kind from reason, still has a similar relation to its effect (for
example, if we compare the constructionlsJ of beavers with th[osel of human beings).
But that does not entitle me to infer that because man needs reason in order to
construct [things I, beavers too must have it, and to call this an inference by analogy.66
What we can quite correctly infer by analogy, from the similarity between animal
behavior [W,'rkungl (whose basis we cannot perceive directly) and man's behavior (of
whose basis we are conscious directly), is that animals too act according to presentations
(rather than being machines, as Descartes would have it), and that regardless of the
65[Philosophical, rather than mathematical, analogy; cf. the Critique of Pure Reason,
= B 222-24. See also above. Ak. 351 br. n. 31, and below, Ak. 483-85.,

A 179-81

66[ Cf. Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone, Ak. VI, the n. on 64-65.\

§ 90. ASSENT ... IN A TELEOLOGICAL PROOF

357

But from that in which they are heterogeneous we cannot by analogy
draw an inference from the one to the other, i.e., transfer that mark
of the difference in kind between them from one to the other. Thus,
by analogy with the law that action and reaction are equal when
bodies attract or repel one another, I can also conceive of the
community between the members of a commonwealth that is governed
by rules of law. But I cannot transfer those specific characteristics
(the material attraction or repulsion) to this community, and attribute
them to the citizens so that these will form a system called a state.
Similarly, we may indeed conceive of the original being's causality,
concerning the things [regarded J as natural purposes [we find J in the
world, by analogy with an understanding, i.e., with the basis [that
accounts I for the forms of certain products that we call works of art
(for we do this only in order to assist our cognitive power in dealing
with natural things in the world, because we need that concept [of the
original being's causality] when we apply our cognitive power to these
things, theoretically and practically, according to a certain [viz.,
teleological] principle). But from the fact that in the case of beings of
the world we must attribute understanding to the cause of an effect
that we judge to be artificial, we can in no way infer by analogy that
the same causality that we perceive in man can also be ascribed to the
being that is wholly distinct from nature, with nature itself as [its
effect]. For that concerns precisely the point of heterogeneity that, in
contrasting the supersensible original being with a cause who[se
difference in specific kind Ispezi/ischl between them and man, they are still of the
same general kind 1Gattungl (namely. as living beings). The principle that authorizes
us to make this inference is this: with respect to the characteristic in question, the basis
on which we here include animals in the same general kind as human beings is the same
as the basis on which we include Idifferent] human beings in the same general kind
when we compare them with one another outwardly, by their acts. In other words, in
this case we do have par ralio [the same groundsj.67 Similarly, though I can conceive of
the causality of the supreme world cause when I compare its purposive products in the
world with the works of art of man, by analogy with an understanding. I cannot by
analogy infer that it has these Isame] properties: for in this case the principle that
authorizes such an inference is just what is lacking, i.e., we do not have paritas ralionis
[sameness of grounds] for including the supreme being in one and the same general
kind as man (as regards their respective causalities). The causality of world beings
(which includes the causality through understanding) is always conditioned by the
sensible. land sol cannot be transferred to a being that has no generic IGattungs·1
concept in common with them except that of a thing as such.
671Cf. the Logic, Ak. IX. 132-33.1

465

358

466

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

production ofl its effects has [a] condition in the sensible, we think in
the very concept of that being and hence cannot transfer to that
concept. The very fact that I am to think of divine causality only by
analogy with an understanding (a power we do not know in any being
other than man,68 who has [a] condition in the sensible) forbids me
to attribute to this being an understanding in the proper sense of the
term. 69
(3) As far as opinion is concerned, it has no place whatever in a
priori judgments: through them either we cognize something as
completely certain, or else we cognize nothing at all. But even if in
our proof we start from bases [or grounds] that are given us empirically
(as, in the present case, the purposes in the world), they still do not
allow us to form an opinion about anything beyond the world of sense
and to grant such hazardous judgments the slightest claim to probability.
For probability70 is part of a certainty that is achievable [moglich] in
a series of grounds (in this series the grounds for probability compare
to the sufficient ground as parts to a whole), [so that] it must be
possible to supplement that insufficient ground until [the series of)
these grounds [is] complete. But since they are grounds that determine the certainty of one and the same judgment, they must be of the
same kind, since otherwise they would not jointly form a magnitude
(and certainty is a magnitude), and so it cannot be that some of them
lie within the bounds of possible experience and others beyond all
possible experience. Hence, since merely empirical bases [or grounds]
cannot lead our proof to anything supersensible, and since there is
nothing with which we could supplement them to make up for the
deficiency in their series, the attempt to get from them to the supersensible and to a cognition of it does not result in even the slightest
approximation; and so a judgment we make about the supersensible
will also have no probability if we base it on arguments that rely on
experience.
68[Cf. the Critique

0/ Pure Reason.

A 626

s

B 654.1

69This does not result in the slightest loss to our presentation of that being's relation to
the world, neither in the theoretical nor in the practical consequences of that concept.
To try to investigate what that being is in itself shows an inquisitiveness that is as
purposeless as it is doomed.
70[On probability, cf. the Logic. Ak. IX, 81-82.1

§ 90. ASSENT ... IN A TELEOLOGICAL PROOF

359

(4) If something is to serve as a hypothes;s71 to explain how a
given phenomenon is possible, then at least the possibility of this
something must be completely certain. All I have to waive if I make a
hypothesis is Jthe claim that I amI cognizing actuality. (In an opinion
that we offer as probable this claim is still made.) More than that I
cannot give up: at least the possibility of what serves as the basis for
my explanation must not be open to any doubt, since otherwise there
would be no end to empty chimeras. But we would be making a
completely baseless presupposition if we assumed that a supersensible being, as determined in terms of certain concepts. is possible.
For in the case of this assumption. none of the conditions are given
that a cognition requires insofar as it rests partly on intuition. and
hence the only criterion we have left for this being's possibility is the
mere principle of contradiction (which however can prove only the
possibility of conceiving the object, not the possibility of the conceived object itsel(72).
The result of this is as follows: For human reason it is absolutely
impossible, from a theoretical point of view, to prove the existence of
the original being as a deity, or of the soul as an immortal spirit. and
to produce even the slightest degree of assent. And we can readily
grasp why this is so: we have no material whatever for determining
the ideas of the supersensible, since we would have to get this material from things in the world of sense, and yet such material is
absolutely inadequate for that [supersensible I object. Hence. since
we cannot at all determine these ideas, we are left with nothing more
than the concept of a nonsensible something that contains the ultimate basis of the world of sense, and that concept does not yet
amount to cognition (which [in this case would] be73 an expansion of
the concept) of that thing's intrinsic constitution.

71[On hypothesis, cf. the Logic. Ak. IX, 84-86, and the Critique of Pure Reason, A
769-82 = B 797-810.1
niLe., it can prove only the thing's logical possibility, not its real possibility. I
7J[I.e., in the case of an indeterminate concept. Cf. the Translator's Introduction,
.tttiv-xxxv, xl. J

467

§ 91

On What Kind of
Assent Results
from a Practical Faith
If we look merely to the way in which (in view of the subjective
character of our presentational powers) something can be an object
of cognition (res cognoscibiJis) for us, then we are not comparing
concepts with objects but are comparing them merely with our cognitive
powers and with the (theoretical or practical) use that these can make of
the given presentation. [Hence] the question whether something is a
cognizable being or not is not a question concerning the possibility of
things themselves but concerning the possibility of our cognizing them.
There are three kinds of cognizable things: matters 74 of opinion
(opinabiJia), matters of fact (scibilia), and matters of faith (mere
credibilia ).75
(1) Objects of the mere ideas of reason cannot be exhibited at all in
any possible experience, so as to give rise to theoretical cognition [for
usl. and to that extent such objects are also not cognizable things at
all. Hence about them we cannot even have an opinion. Indeed, the
very expression, a priori opinion. is absurd and invites all sorts of
chimeras; and hence either our a priori proposition is certain, or
there is nothing whatever in it to assent to. Hence matters of opinion
are always objects of an empirical cognition that is at least intrinsically
74lSachen: the term does also mean 'things.' I
15[Respectively, things opinable. knowable, or merely believable. For extended discussions of opinion. knowledge, and (belief or) faith. see the Critique of Pure
Reason. A 820-31 = B 848-59 (cf. also B xxx), and the Logic. Ak. IX, 65-73.
Cf. also Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone. Ak. VI, the n. on 153-54;
What Does It Mean' to Orient Oneself in IOnesJ Thought. Ak. VUI, 140-47;
and On (the] Dignified Tone Recently Adopted in Philosophy. Ak. VIII, the n.
on 395-97. My main reason for rendering Kant's Glaube (usually) as 'faith' rather
than as 'belief is that 'faith' tends to suggest. rather more readily than does 'belief,' the mutual exclusiveness of Glaube (properly so called, i.e., practical Glaube)
and Wissen (knowledge) that Kant emphasizes so frequently: see, e.g., Ak. 471-72
(and cf. 470); the Critique of Pure Reason, B xxx; and the Logic. Ak. IX, 67-70,
esp.68-69.J

360

§ 91.

ASSENT ... FROM A PRACTICAL FAITH

361

possible (i.e., they are objects of the world of sense) even though that
cognition is impossible for us because our cognitive power is so weak.
For example, the aether that the more recent physicists have discussed,
an elastic fluid that permeates all other kinds of matter [Materie 1(it is
thoroughly mingled with them), is a mere matter [-sache] of opinion.
But it is still such that we could perceive it if our outer senses were
made maximally acute, even if in fact it can never be exhibited in
observation or [through] experiment. If we assume rational inhabitants on other planets,76 this is a matter of opinion. For if we could get
closer to these planets, which is intrinsically possible, then we could
decide by experience whether or not these beings exist. But we shall in
fact never get that close to them, and hence we cannot get beyond
opinion here. On the other hand, if we hold the opinion that there are
pure spirits in the material universe, spirits that think but have no
bodies,77 then we engage in fiction (provided we dismiss, as we
should, certain actual phenomena that have been passed off as spirits).
For this is not at all a matter of opinion, but is a mere idea that
remains if we take away from a thinking being everything material
and yet suppose that it retains thought: [forI we cannot tell whether
thought remains in that case (since we know it only in man, [where it
is] connected with a body). A thing like this spirit is a being oflourl
reasoning (ens rationis ratiocinantis), not a being of reason (ens
rationis ratiocinatae );78 for in the case of a being of reason we can
sufficiently establish that its concept has objective reality, at least
for the practical use of reason, since that use has its own and
apodeictically certain a priori principles and does in fact demand
(postulare [postuliert I) that concept.
(2) Objects of concepts whose objective reality can be proved are
matters of fact (res facti).79 (This may be done by pure reason or by
76/ln his Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens (1755), Kant speculated elaborately about such inhabitants of other planets (Ak. 1,349-68).1

7710n this topic, d. Dreams of a Spirit-Seer (1766), Ak. 11,315-83.1
78[See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 669 ~ B 697 and A 681 .. B 709. and cf. above.
Ak. 337 n. 1 and br. n. 2, and Ak. 396.1
79 1 here expand, rightly 1 think, the concept of a matter of fact beyond the ordinary

meaning of the word. For it is neither necessary nor even feasible. when we are
speaking of the relation of things to our cognitive powers. to confine this expression to
actual experience. because a merely possible experience is sufficient in order to speak
of these things merely as objects of a certain way of cognizing.

468

362

469

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOWGICAL JUDGMENT

experience, and in the former case either from theoretical or from practical data of reason; but in all cases it must be done by means of an intuition corresponding to these data.) Examples of matters of fact are the
mathematical properties of magnitudes (in geometry), since they admit
of a priori exhibition for the theoretical use of reason.so Matters of fact
also include things or characteristics of things that can be established by
experience (whether our own or that of other people, through their
testimony). It is very remarkable, however, that even a rational idea is to
be found among the matters of fact (even though it is intrinsically impossible to exhibit rational ideas in intuition, and hence also intrinsically
impossible to prove theoretically that they are possible): the idea of
freedom; the reality of this idea, as [the idea ofl a special kind of
causality (the concept of which would be transcendent if we considered
it theoretically), can be established through practical laws of pure
reason and, [if we act] in conformity with these, in actual acts, and hence
in experience. Among all the ideas of pure reason this is the only one
whose object is a matter of fact and must be included among the scibilia.
(3) As for objects that we have to think a priori (either as consequences or as grounds) in reference to our practical use of reason in
conformity with duty, but that are transcendent for the theoretical
use of reason: they are mere matters of faith. One such object is the
highest good in the world that we are to achieve through freedom. We
cannot prove the concept of this good, as to whether it has objective
reality, in any experience that is possible for us, and hence adequately
for the theoretical use of reason. But since practical pure reason
commands us to use this concept in order to achieve that purpose
[the highest good in the world] as best we can, we must assume it as
possible [to realize]. This commanded effect, together with the sole
conditions conceivable by us under which [achieving] that effect is
possible, namely, the existence of God and the immortality of the
soul, are matters of faith (res fidei), and they are moreover the only
objects whatsoever that can be called matters of faith.81 It is true
80ICE. Ak. 232 br. n. 51.)
something is a matter of faith, that does not yet make it an article ollai/h, if we
mean by this those matters of faith to which we can become obligated to confess 82
(inwardly or outwardly) and which therefore do not form part of natural theology. For
as matters of faith they cannot (as matters of fact can) be based on theoretical proofs.
Hence assent to them is free, and only as such is it compatible with the subject's being a
moral subject.

8lIf

821ef. Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone, Ak. VI, 165.)

§ 91.

ASSENT ... FROM A PRACTICAL FAITH

363

that something that we can learn only from the experience of others,
through their testimony. is something in which we must have faith,
but it is not yet on that account itself a matter of faith ([ but only a
case ofl historical faith), because for one of those witnesses it was
after all his own experience and a matter of fact. or [we I presuppose
that it was that. Moreover, by following the path of historical faith it
must [always] be possible to arrive at knowledge; and [hence] the
objects of history and geography, and everything whatever that in
view of the character of our cognitive powers it is at least possible for
us to know, are not matters of faith but matters of fact. Only objects
of pure reason can be matters of faith at all; but not if they are merely
objects of pure theoretical reason, for in that case it is not even
certain that we can number them among the matters, i.e., objects of
[al cognition that is possible for us. [Rather,] they are ideas, i.e.,
concepts of whose objective reality we cannot have theoretical
assurance. On the other hand, the highest final purpose which we are
to achieve, that which alone can make us worthy of being, ourselves.
the final purpose of creation, is an idea that has objective reality for
us in a practical respect. and hence is a matter [i.e., an object of a
cognition that is possible for US].8J But since we cannot provide this
concept with reality from a theoretical point of view, this final purpose is a mere matter of faith [fori pure reason; but along with it so
are God and immortality, which are the conditions under which
alone, given the character of our (human) reason, we can conceive of
the possibility of [achieving] the effect [the final purpose] of the
lawful use of our freedom. But assent in matters of faith is an assent
from a pure practical point of view, i.e., it is a moral faith that proves
nothing for theoretical pure rational cognition, but only for pure
practical cognition84 that aims at [our I complying with [our) duties;
it does not at all expand our speculation, nor our practical rules of
prudence governed by the principle of self-love. If the supreme principle of all moral laws is a postulate, then the possibility of [achieving)
their highest object [the final purpose I, and hence also the conditionls: God and immortality of the soul) under which [alone] we can
conceive of that possibility, Iare I postulated with it at the same
time.85 But that does not make our cognition of that possibility either
83[On practical cognition, cf. below, Ak. 475 incl. br. n. 96. J
84[Cf. Ak.. 467 br. n. 74.J
8s[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason. A 805-19

=

B 833-47.J

470

364

471

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

knowledge or opinion86 of the existence and character of these
conditions [God and immortality of the soulJ, which would be a
theoretical way of cognizing them; but it is merely an assumption that
we make and are commanded to make in a practical respect: for the
moral use of our reason.
If it seemed to us that the purposes of nature that physical teleology displays to us on such a lavish scale could after all be used to
support a determinate concept of an intelligent cause of the world,
that would still not make the existence of this being a matter of faith.
For I would be assuming the existence of this being only in order to
explain nature, rather than in order to perform my duty, and hence it
would merely be the opinion or hypothesis most commensurate with
my reason. But in fact physical teleology does not at all lead to a
determinate concept of God. Such a concept can be found only in the
concept of a moral author of the world; for this concept alone
indicates the final purpose, the purpose which includes us only insofar as our conduct conforms to what the moral law enjoins on us as
the final purpose and hence imposes on us as a duty. Hence the only
way in which the concept of God acquires the distinction of counting,
for our assent, as a matter of faith is through [its] reference to the
object of our duty [i.e" the final purpose I, as the condition under
which [alone I it is possible for us to attain the final purpose [enjoined on
us by the moral law ]. And yet this same concept cannot claim its object
as a matter of fact: for though the necessity of duty is indeed clear to
practical reason, our attainment of the final purpose it enjoins on us
is not wholly in our power and hence we merely assume it for the sake
of our practical reason, so that our attainment of that final purpose is
not practically necessary as duty itself is.87
86[On (some) practical cognition as involving faith but not knowledge, see below, Ak,
475 br. n. 96.)
87The final purpose that the moral law enjoins us to further is not the basis of duty.
For that basis lies in the moral law, which is a practical principle that is formal and
hence directs categorically, without regard to the objects of the power of desire (which
are the matter of volition) and hence without regard to any purpose [= the matter]
whatever. This formal character of my acts (their subordination under the principle of
universal validity), in which alone their intrinsic moral value consists, is wholly in my
power; and I certainly can abstract from whether the purposes that this law obligates
me to further are possible or unachievable. (because they constitute only the extrinsic
value of my acts,) since that is never completely in my power, in order to look only to
what I can do, And yet that law of duty does enjoin us 10 aim at furthering the final

§ 91.

ASSENT ... FROM A PRACTICAL FAITH

365

Faith (as habitus, not as actus 88 ) is reason's moral way of thinking
in assenting to [FurwahrhaLten 89 ] what is not accessible to theoretical cognition. It is the mind's steadfast principle to assume as true
[wahr] what we must necessarily presuppose as a condition for the
possibility of [achieving] the highest moral final purpose, and to
assume this because of our obligation to this final purpose,90 and
despite the fact that we have no insight into whether {achieving) this
purpose is possible, or for that matter whether this is impossible. To
have faith (simply so called) is to have confidence that we shall reach
an aim that we have a duty to further, without our having insight into
whether achieving it is possible (nor, consequently, into whether the
conditions are possible under which alone we can conceive of achieving that aim). Therefore, a wholly moral faith is one that refers to
special objects that are not objects of possible knowledge or opinion
(otherwise, above all in the case of history, it would have to be called
credulity [LeichtgLiiubigkeit ] rather than faith [Glaube J. Faith is free
assent, not to something for which we can find dogmatic proofs for
theoretically determinative judgment, nor to something to which we
consider ourselves obligated, but to something that we assume for
some aim and in accordance with laws of freedom. Yet faith is not
purpose of all rational beings (happiness insofar as it is possible in harmony with duty).
But speculative reason has no insight whatever into the possibility of achieving that aim
(neither as far as our own physical ability nor as far as the cooperation of nature it
concerned). Rather, as far as we can rationally judge, speculative reason must consider
it a baseless and idle-even if well-meant-expectation to assume that such merely
natural causes (within and outside us), without God and immortality [of the soull, will
make our good conduct have such a result. Indeed, if speculative reason could have
complete certainty on that assumption rUrteill. it would have to regard the moral law
itself as a mere deception of our reason in a practical respect. But since speculative
reason convinces itself completely that such deception can never occur, while those
ideas whose object lies beyond nature can be thought without contradiction, it will in a
moral respect, i.e., for its own practical law and the task this law enjoins on us, have to
acknowledge those ideas as real, so as not to fall into contradiction with itself.

88IAs an attitude, not as an act.]
B9t"Considering true," literally. I
'lOpaith is a confidence in the promise I Verheiflungl of the moral law; but the moral
law does not contain this promise: it is I who put it there, and on a morally sufficient
basis. For no law of reason can command [us to pursue I a final purpose unless reason
also promises t versprechen I. even if not with certainty, that this final purpose is
achievable, and hence also justifies us in assenting to the conditions under which alone
our reason can conceive of that achievability. In fact the word fides [faith) already

472

366

473

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

without an adequate basis, as, e.g., an opinion is, but has a basis in
reason that is adequate for the aim of reason (although that aim is
only practical): For without faith the moral way of thinking lacks firm
steadfastness whenever it fails to fulfill theoretical reason's demand
for proof (that the object of morality is possible), but vacillates
between practical commands and theoretical doubts. To be incredulous
[ungliiubisch] means to cling to the maxim not to believe in people's
testimony at all. But an unbelieving [ungliiubig] person is one who
denies all validity to those rational ideas [of God and immortality of the
soul] because there is no theoretical foundation for their reality.
Hence such a person judges dogmatically. A dogmatic unbelief in a
person is incompatible with his having a moral maxim prevail in his
way of thinking (since reason cannot command us to pursue a purpose that we cognize as being nothing but a chimera). Skepticism
[Zweifelglaube 92 ], on the other hand, is quite compatible with having
a moral maxim prevail in one's way of thinking, because for skepticism the lack of conviction from bases of speculative reason is only
an obstacle, and a critical insight into the limits of speCUlative reason
can keep our conduct from being influenced by this obstacle and
provide this skepticism with a stronger practical assent as a substitute.
If. in the place of certain unsuccessful attempts in philosophy,
we wish to introduce a different principle and make it influential, it is very helpful to see how and why those attempts had to
fail.
God, freedom, and immortality of the soul are the problems at

472

expresses this,91 and it must seem dubious how this term and this special idea have
made their way into moral philosopby: for they were first introduced with Christianity,
and it might seem as if their acceptance [by moral philosophyl is perhaps only a
fawning imitation of the language of Christianity. But this is not the only case where
this wondrous religion has in the greatest simplicity of its statement enriched philosophy with far more determinate and pure concepts of morality than philosophy had until
then been able to supply, but which, once they are there, reason sanctions freely
and accepts as concepts that it surely could and should itself have hit upon and
introduced.
911Cf. the Logic. Ak. IX, the n. on 67-69.1
92[The literal meaning of this term is roughly 'faith (or belief) mixed with doubt:t

§ 91.

ASSENT ... FROM A PRACTICAL FAITH

367

whose solution all the apparatus of metaphysics aims as its ultimate
and sole purpose.93 Now, people believed that the doctrine of freedom was needed for practical philosophy only as a negative condition,
whereas the doctrine of God and of the nature [BeschaffenheitJ of
the soul belong! ed J to theoretical philosophy and must be established
separately and on its own. [Only J then were the two [God and
immortality of the soul) to be linked with what the moral law (which
is possible only under the condition of freedom) commands, so as to
give rise to a religion. But we can readily see that these attempts had
to fail. For [if we form I a concept of an original being [and do this I
from mere ontological concepts of things as such, or from the existence of a necessary being, [then we) cannot possibly determine this
concept by predicates that can be given in experience and hence
could serve for cognition. On the other hand, the concept that people
based on experience of the physical purposiveness of nature was in its
turn unable to yield a proof adequate for morality and hence for
cognizing a God. In the same way, the knowledge we have of the soul
through experience (in which we engage only in this life) cannot
provide us with a concept of its spiritual and immortal nature [Naturl
and hence with a concept adequate for morality. Theology and
pneumatoiogy, [regarded) as problems for the sciences of a speculative reason, cannot be established by means of any empirical data and
predicates, because their concepts are transcendent for all our cognitive powers. The only way to determine these two concepts, of God
and the (immortal) soul, is through predicates that, though they
themselves are possible only on the' basis of [somethingJ supersensible,
must yet prove in experience that they have reality: for only in this
way can these concepts make cognition of wholly supersensible beings
possible. Now the only such concept to be found in human reason is
that of man's freedom under moral laws, together with the final
purpose that reason 94 prescribes through these laws. The moral laws
enable us to attribute to the author of nature, and the final purpose
~3ICf. the Critique of Pure Reason. B 7, B 395n, A 798 == B 826. In The Only Possible

Basis of Proof (Ak. n, 65), Kant says that our most important cognition is ''There is a
God." In another place, Kant suggests a kind of "syllogistic" relation between Ood,
freedom, and immortality oithe soul: Announcement That a Treatise on Perpetum Peace
in Philosophy Is Nearly Completed, Ak. Vrn,418.]

941Or

perhaps freedom. 1

474

368

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

enables us to attribute to man, the properties95 that [are) necessary
condition[sl for the possibility of [carrying outl both of them [the
moral laws and the final purpose I. Hence it is from this same idea of
freedom that we can infer the existence and the nature [Beschaffenheit)
of these beings [God and soul I that are otherwise wholly hidden
from us.
Therefore, the attempt to prove God and immortality by the
merely theoretical route had to fail because by this route (of concepts
of nature) no cognition whatever of the supersensible is possible.
That the attempt succeeds by the moral route (of the concept of
freedom) is due to this: not only does the supersensible that underlies
[the proof) in this case (namely, freedom) provide us, through a
determinate law of causality to which it gives rise, with material for
cognizing the other supersensible (the moral final purpose and the
conditions for its achievability); but it is also a matter of fact [and
hence I establishes its [own) reality in [our) acts. Precisely because of
that, however, the only basis it can provide for proving [God and
immortality of the soul) is one that is valid from a practical point
of view. (That, however, is the only point of view that religion
requires.)
What always remains very remarkable about this is that among the
three pure ideas of reason, God, freedom, and immortality, that of
freedom is the only concept of the supersensible which (by means of
the causality that we think in it) proves in nature that it has objective
reality, by the effects it can produce in it. It is this that makes it
possible to connect the other two ideas with nature, and to connect
all three with one another to form a religion. Therefore, we have in us
a principle that can determine the idea of the supersensible within us,
and through this also the idea of the supersensible outside us, so as to
give rise to cognition [of them), even though one that is possible
only from a practical point of view; and that is something of which
merely speCUlative philosophy (which could provide also merely a
negative concept of freedom) had to despair. Hence the concept of
freedom (the concept underlying all unconditioned practical laws)
can expand reason beyond those bounds within which any concept of
nature (i.e., theoretical concept) would have to remain hopelessly
confined.
951Morality in the case of God, immortality of the soul in the case of man. I

General Comment
on Teleology
The moral argument proves the existence of God only as a matter of
faith, for practical pure reason. If we ask how it ranks, in philosophy,
with the other arguments [the theoretical arguments for the existence
of God], we can easily assess all [those] that philosophy possesses. If
we do this, we find that there is nothing to select here. but that
theoretical philosophy is so [limited] in ability that it must on its own
give up all claims [to those theoretical arguments] if faced by an
impartial critique.
In the first place, all assent in philosophy must be based on [somel
matter of fact, if it is not to be completely baseless. Hence the only
difference that can arise between proofs is whether we can base on
this matter of fact an assent (to the conclusion drawn from it) that is
knowledge, for theoretical cognition. or merely faith, for practical
cognition. 96 All matters of fact pertain either to the [a priori] concept
of nature, which proves its reality in the objects of sense that are (or
can be) given prior to all [empirical] concepts of nature, or to the
concept of freedom, which sufficiently establishes its reality through
the causality that reason has by being able to [produce] certain effects
in the world of sense and that it irrefutably postulates in the moral
law. Now the concept of nature (which pertains merely to theoretical
cognition) is either metaphysical and completely a priori; or it is
physical. i.e., a posteriori and of necessity conceivable only [as arising] through determinate experience. The metaphysical concept of
nature (which does not presuppose any determinate experience) is
therefore ontological.
Now the ontological proof tries to prove the existence of God from
the concept of an original being. and has two variants. One of these
starts from ontological predicates that alone allow us to think this
being completely determinately. and from these infers its absolutely
9610n practical cognition. cf. the Critique o[ Pure Reason. A 633 .. B 661. the
Critique of Practical Reason, Ak. V, 137; the Logic, Ak. IX, 86-87; and above, Ak.
174-76. For the relation between practical cognition and knowledge, see the references
at Ak. 467 br. n. 75; the Prolegomena. Ak. IV, 278; and the Translator's Introduction.

xi-xiii. J

369

475

370

476

PART II.

CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

necessary existence. The other variant starts from the absolute necessity of the existence of some thing or other, no matter what, and from
that infers the predicates of the original being. For in order for the
original being not to be [a] derived [being], the concept of it must
include the unconditioned necessity of the being's existence, and (so
that we can conceive of that necessity) the being must be completely
determined by its [very I concept. Now it was believed that both
these requirements were fulfilled by this concept: the ontOlogical
idea of a supremely real being. And so two metaphysical proofs
arose.
The first of these proofs is based on a merely metaphysical concept
of nature (and is called ontological proper). It starts from the concept
of the supremely real being, and infers from this that being's absolutely
necessary existence; for (we are told) if it did not exist, then it would
lack one reality: existence. The other ontological proof (which is also
called the metaphysical-cosmological proof) starts from the necessity
of the existence of some thing or other (which must certainly be
granted, since an existence is given me in self-consciousness [but
could not be there unless some thing or other existed necessarily97 1l,
and infers from this the complete determination of it as the supremely
real being. For, [we are told,] though everything that exists must be
completely determined,98 what is absolutely necessary (i.e., what we
are to cognize as being so, and hence cognize a priori) must be
completely determined by its concept; but the only concept [adequate I
for this [i.e., completely determining something absolutely necessary I
is that of a supremely real thing. I do not need to expose here the
sophistry in both inferences, since I have already done so elsewhere.99
97[ Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 604 = B 632: "If anything exists. then an
absolutely necessary being must aiSG exist. Now at least I myself exist. Therefore an
absolutely necessary being exists." Cf. also The Only Possible Basis of Proof, Ak. n.

157-58.]
98(Cf. Thoughts on the True Estimation of Living rorces (1747), Ak. 1.27.1
99[Critique of Pure Reason. A 583-620 = B 611-48. See also The Only Possible Basis
of Proof, Ak. II. 155-63 and cf. 72-71. Kant himself had tried to infer the existence of
God from the real possibility (rather than the existence) of things. The real (as
distinguished from the merely logical) possibility of things, he had argued. must be
derived from, or be the consequence of, an existent being that has all realities (logically
independent affirmative attributes), See The Only Possible Basis of Proof, Ak. II.
70-92, and the Prine/porum primorum cognition is metaphysicae nova dilucidatio (New
Elucidation of the First Principles of Cognition in Metaphysics. 1755). Ak. I. 385-416.1

GENERAL COMMENT ON TELEOWGY

371

All I need to point out is that, even if such proofs could be defended
with a lot of dialectical subtlety. they still could never reach beyond
the school and have the slightest influence on mere sound understanding in the community.
The proof that is based on a concept of nature that can only be
empirical and yet is to lead us beyond the bounds of nature as the sum
total of objects of sense, can only be the proof Ithat starts] from the
purposes of nature. Although the concept of these purposes cannot
be given a priori but must be given through experience. it still promises
us, among all thinkable concepts of the original basis of nature, the only
one that is such as befits the supersensible: the concept of a highest
understanding [Verstand] as cause of the world. And this the proof
does accomplish perfectly. as concerns principles of reflective judgment,
i.e., the character of our (human) cognitive power. But the question
arises whether the concept that this proof is able to derive from these
data is not only that of a supreme being, i.e., an independent intelligent Iverstiindig] being. but also that of a God, i.e., author of a world
under moral laws, and hence a concept that is sufficiently determinate to Iinvolve] the idea of a final purpose of the existence of the
world. On this question everything hinges, whether we demand a
theoretically sufficient concept of the original being for the sake of
[completing] our entire knowledge of nature, or a practical concept
for religion.
This argument, taken from physical teleology, is a venerable one. It
is just as effective in convincing common understanding as in convincing the subtlest thinker; and a Reimams lOO has acquired immortal
merit through his still unsurpassed work, where, with the thoroughness
and clarity peculiar to him, he elaborately puts forth this basis for
proving [the existence of God]. And yet what is it that gives this proof
its powerful influence on the mind, inducing in it calm and utterly
yielding agreement, above all if we are judging by means of cool
IOOlHermann Samuel Reimarus (1694-1768). German philosopher (with views similar
to those of Christian Wolff (J679-17541l and man of letters.. He is the author of several
works and is particularly known through his Abhandlungen von den vornehmsten
Wahrheiten der natiirlichen Religionen (Treatises on the fOremost Truths 0/ Natural
Religions, 1754) and especially his Apologie oder Schutzschri/t /iir die vernun/tigen
Verehrer Gottes (De/ense or Vindication for Those Who Revere God Rationally). a
work cautiously held back during his lifetime and then published in excerpts by
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (1729-81).]

477

372

478

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

reason (since if the mind is moved and elevated by the wonders of
nature, this could be counted as persuasion)? It is not the fact that the
physical purposes aU point to an unfathomable understanding in the
world cause. They are not sufficient to give the proof this influence,
because they fail to satisfy the need[s] of inquiring reason: for, (reason
inquires,) what are all those artistic natural things for? What is man
himself for, with whom we have to stop because he is the ultimate
purpose of nature conceivable to us? What is all this nature there for,
and what is the final purpose of this great and varied art? It cannot
satisfy reason [to be told] that the ultimate final purpose for which the
world and man himself are there and were created is so that [man
can] enjoy [the world], or so that [he canl behold, contemplate, and
admire [itl (which, if that is all we do, is also nothing more than
enjoyment of a particular kind). For reason presupposes a personal
value, one that man can only give himself, as the condition under
which alone he and his existence can be [aJ final purpose. In the
absence of such a value (which alone admits of a determinate concept)
the purposes of nature fail to satisfy [man in] his inquiry, above all
because they cannot provide a determinate concept of the supreme
being as an all-sufficient (and precisely because of this single and in
the proper sense supreme) being and of the laws in terms of which its
understanding is cause of the world.
This shows that while the physicoteleological proof convinces, just
as if it were also a theological proof, it does not do so because it uses
the ideas of purposes of nature as so many empirical bases for proving
a supreme understanding. Rather, the moral basis for proving [the
existence of God], the basis which dwells in every human being and
moves him so very deeply, is inadvertently mingled with the inference.
It is on this basis that we attribute to that being, which manifests itself
with such unfathomable artistry in the purposes of nature, a final
purpose as well, and hence wisdom (even though our perception of
the purposes of nature does not justify this [addition)); and hence we
choose to supplement the physicoteleological argument to make up
for the defiCiency it still has. In fact, therefore, only the moral basis
for proving [the existence of Godl gives rise to our conviction, and
that only from a moral pOint of view, with which everyone feels deep
agreement. The only merit that the physicoteleological proof has is
that it leads the mind, in its contemplation of the world, onto the path
of purposes, and through this to an intelligent author of the world;

GENERAL COMMENT ON TELEOWGY

373

and at that point ~our] moral reference to purposes, and [our] idea of
a moral legislator and author of the world, an idea that is a theological concept, seems to develop on its own from the physicoteleological
basis for proving [the existence of God], even though it is nothing but
an addition.
There is also no need to change this situation as far as stating [the
proof] under ordinary circumstances is concerned i for when common
sound understanding mingles different and heterogeneous principles,
from only one of which it is in fact inferring, and moreover inferring
correctly; then it usually finds it difficult to separate them, if doing so
requires much meditation. Actually the moral basis for proving the
existence of God does not merely supplement the physicoteleological
one and make it a complete proof. Rather, it is a special proof that
makes up for the failure of the physico teleological proof to convince.
For in fact the latter proof can accomplish only one thing: as reason
judges the basis of nature and the basis of nature's contingent but
admirable order that we come to know only through experience, this
proof directs it and draws its attention to the causality of a cause on
which nature and its contingent order are based in terms of purposes
(a cause that, given the character of our cognitive powers, we have to
think of as intelligent); and through this the proof makes reason more
receptive to the moral proof. [But] what this latter concept requires
[the qualification moral, as added to the concept of that intelligent
cause,] is so essentially different from anything that concepts of
nature can contain and teach us, that we need a special proof, and
basis for it, completely independent of physicoteleological ones, in
order to state the concept of the original being in a way that suffices
for a theology, and to infer that this being exists. Hence the moral
proof (which admittedly proves the existence of God from a point of
view of reason that is only practical, though also indispensable
~ unnachlaj3lich]) would still retain its force if the world offered us no
material at all, or only ambiguous material, for physical teleology. We
can conceive of rational beings finding themselves surrounded by a
nature that showed no distinct trace of organization, but only the
effects of a mere mechanism of crude matter. If ~ they considered I
that nature, and how changeable the merely contingently purposive
forms and relations are that occasionally occur in it, it would seem to
them that there is no basis for inferring an intelligent author, and
nothing would prompt them to ~ try] a physical teleology. And yet

479

374

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

reason, which would get no instruction from concepts of nature,
would still find in the concept of freedom, and in the moral ideas
based on it, a practically sufficient basis for postulating the concept
of the original being as adequate to these ideas, i.e., as a deity, and for
postulating nature (even our own existence) as a final purpose that
conforms to !the concept] and the laws of freedom, [with both of
these postulations made] in response [Rucksicht] to the insistent
[unnachlafllich I command of practical reason. On the other hand, the
fact that the actual world offers the rational beings in it a wealth of
material for physical teleology (which indeed would not have to be
so) does serve the moral argument as welcome confirmation, as far as
nature is able to offer something analogous to the (moral) ideas or
reason. For this [confirmation] provides the concept of a supreme
cause that has understanding (though this [qualification, that the
supreme cause has understanding] is far from sufficient for a theology)
with sufficient reality for reflective judgment. But this concept is not
required as a basis for the moral proof. Nor does the moral proof
serve the physicoteleological proof, which by itself does not point to
morality at all, as a supplement to form one proof by a continued
inference in terms of a single principle; [for) two such heterogeneous
principles as nature and freedom can only yield two different kinds of
proof, and we find that the attempt to start the proof from nature is
insufficient for what is to be proved.
If the physico teleological basis were sufficient for the desired
proof [of the existence of a moral author of the world], speculative reason would be greatly satisfied. For then we could hope
to produce a theosophy (which is the appropriate term for a theoretical cognition of divine nature and [God's] existence that would
suffice to explain both the character of the world and the vocation
of the moral laws). Similarly, if psychology were sufficient for reaching cognition of the immortality of the soul. it would make possible
a pneumatology that would be equally welcome to speculative
reason. But in fact, no matter how dear a theosophy and pneumatology would be to our conceit landl desire for knowledge
(Wissen j, neither fulfills the wish of reason as far as theory is concerned, which would have to be based on a knowledge IKenntnisJ of
the nature of things. Perhaps they would fulfill their objective final
aim better if we based both of them-the first as theology, the second
as anthropology-on the moral principle, i.e .• the principle of freedom.

GENERAL COMMENT ON TELEOLOGY

375

so that they would have a basis adequate for the practical use of
reason; but that is a different question that we need not here pursue
further.
That the physicoteleological basis for proving [the existence of
God J is insufficient for theology is due to the fact that it does not, and
cannot, provide a sufficiently determinate concept of the original
being. Rather, we must get such a concept from a quite different
[source J, or compensate for the deficiency in the concept by choosing
to supplement it. You infer, from the great purposiveness in natural
forms and in their relations. a world cause with understanding; but
what degree of this understanding? Doubtless you cannot presume to
infer the highest possible understanding; for that would require that
you can see that a greater understanding than the one for which you
perceive evidence in the world is inconceivable, which would amount
to attributing omniscience to yourselves. You similarly infer, from the
magnitude of the world, that its author has very great might. But you
will agree that this has meaning only by comparison to your grasp,
and agree that, since you do not cognize everything that is possible
and hence cannot compare it with the world's magnitude that you
know, you are using too small a standard to infer that its author has
omnipotence; and so on. 101 You cannot in this way arrive at a determinate concept of an original being-such a concept as would be
suitable for a theology. For this concept can be found only in that of
the totality of perfections united with an understanding, and merely
empirical data can in no way help you arrive at such a concept. But
without such a determinate concept you also cannot infer a single
intelligent original being, but can only assume it (for whatever aim
[BehufJ). It is true that we may readily allow you to choose to make
an addition (since reason has no well-founded objection against it):
that where we find so much perfection we may surely assume all
perfection as united in a single cause of the world, since reason
manages better, theoretically and practically, with so determinate a
principle. But then you surely cannot extol this concept of the original bemg as one you have proved, since you have only assumed it to
assist you in using reason. Hence all lamentation and impotent rage
about the alleged crime [we commit] in casting doubt on the cogency
101 [For similar

points, see the Critique of Pure Reason. A 622-28
Critique of Practical Reason, Ak. V. 138-39.1

=

B 650-56, and the

480

376

481

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

of your chain of inference is idle swagger; [you] would like for the
doubt we freely express about your argument to be considered doubt
about sacred truth, so that under this cover the shallowness of your
argument may escape [us].
Moral teleology, on the other hand, whose basis is no less firm than
that of physical teleology, even deserves to be preferred to it, because
it rests a priori on principles inseparable from our reason and leads us
to what is required to make a theology possible: a determinate concept
of the supreme cause as cause of the world according to moral laws,
and hence of a cause that satisfies our moral final purpose. And this
requires that this cause has. as properties of its nature, nothing less
than omniscience, omnipotence, omnipresence, etc.; [for] we must
think these properties as connected with, and hence as adequate to,
the moral final purpose, and that purpose is infinite. Thus moral
teleology alone can provide us with the concept of a single author of
the world suitable for a theology.
In this way theology also leads directly to religion, as the cognition 102 of our duties as divine commands: 103 for the cognition
of our duty, and of the final purpose reason enjoins on us in this duty,
is what was first able to produce a determinate concept of God, so
that in its very origin this concept is inseparable from our obligation
to that being. 104 On the other hand, if we could find a determinate
concept of the original being along the merely theoretical route
(namely, the concept of this being as mere cause of nature), even then
it would still be very difficult and perhaps even impossible, without
choosing to interpolate, to [find] careful proofs [that would entitle us]
to attribute to this being a causality in terms of moral laws, while
without such a causality that allegedly theological concept [of the
original being] cannot form a foundation for religion. Even if we
could give religion a basis following this theoretical route, such a
1021Or recognition.]

=

I03[ef. the Critique a/Pure Reason. A 818-19 B 846-47; the Critique o/Practical
Reason, Ak. V. 129; Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone. Ak. VI, 153; and
the Dispute among the [University's] Schools [Fakultatenl, At. VII. 36.]

1041According to the Metaphysics of Morals (Ak. VI, 486-88). the duties we have
toward God are distinct from the duties we have toward man; the latter (presumably
inasmuch as we cognize them as divine commands) are duties (merely) "with respect
to" God. or "actually with respect to the idea we form of such a being."]

GENERAL COMMENT ON TELEOWGY

377

religion would actually differ from one in which the concept of God
and the (practical) conviction of his existence arise from basic moral
ideas: it would differ from it as far as attitude is concerned (yet that is
what is essential in it). For if we had to presuppose the omnipotence
and omniscience, etc. of an author of the world, as concepts given us
from elsewhere, so as only then to apply our concepts of duties to our
relation to this being, then the concepts of these duties would have to
carry with them a very strong tincture of compulsion and forced
submission. On the other hand, if our deep respect for the moral law,
quite freely [and] in accordance with what our own reason prescribes,
[makes us] conceive ofthe final purpose of our vocation, then there is
the truest reverence, which is wholly different from pathological fear,
in our accepting and including in our moral perspectives a cause that
is in harmony with the final purpose and with [the possibility of)
achieving it, and in our submitting to this cause willingly,105
Why are we concerned to have a theology at all? Obviously we do
not need it in order to expand or correct OUf knowledge of nature, or
in fact any theory whatever. We need it solely for a subjective aim: for
religion, i.e., for the practical-specifically, the moral-use of reason.
Now if it turns out that the only argument that leads us to a determinate concept of the object of theology is itself a moral argument. not
only shall we not have misgivings about confessing that such an
argument establishes the existence of God sufficiently only for a
practical aim, our moral vocation, and that in such an argument our
speculation neither proves its strength in any way nor extends the
range of its domain: confessing this will also not make us find the
assent, arising from this basis for proving [the existence of God).
insufficient in any way for its final aim. We might also have misgivings
about, or find an alleged contradiction between, the assertion made
here that a theology is possible, and what the critique of speculative
reason said about the categories, namely. that they can give rise to
lOSThe admiration for Ithel beauty lofnaturel. as well as the emotion aroused by the so
diverse purposes of nature, [hat a meditative mind is able to feel even before it has a
clear conception of an intelligent author of the world. have something about them
similar to a religious feeling. Hence, when they inspire in us that admiration which is
connected with far more interest than mere theoretical contemplation can arouse. they
initially seem to affect the moral feeling (of gratitude and veneration toward the cause
we do not know). because we Ithenl judge {nature I in a way analogous to the moral
way, and therefore they seem to affect the mind by arousing moral ideas.

482

378

483

PART n. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

cognition only if they are applied to objects of sense, but not at all if
they are applied to the supersensible. But these misgivings and this
alleged contradiction will disappear once we see that, though we here
use the categories for a cognition of God, we do so solely from a
practical and not from a theoretical point of view (as to what the
nature of God. which is inscrutable for us, is in itself). Let me take this
opportunity to put an end to the misinterpretation of that doctrine of
the Critique lof Pure Reason 1 which. although very necessary, does
also relegate reason to its [properj bounds, to the vexation of the
blind dogmatist. To this end, I shall here add the following elucidation
of that doctrine.
If I attribute to a body motive force, and hence think it by means
of the category of causality, then as a result I cognize the body at the
same time, i.e., I detennine the concept of it, as an object as such, by
means of what (as [thel condition that makes that Icausall relation
possible) this object itself must have as an object of sense. For if the
motive force that I attribute to it is a repulsive one, then (even if I do
not yet posit another object next to it against which it exerts this
force) the object Imust have all of the following]: it must have a place
in space; it must also have extension, i.e., space within the object
itself, and this space must moreover be permeated by the repulsive
force of the parts of the object; finally. [there must be] the law that
governs this penneation (namely, that the basis for the repulsion of the
parts must decrease in the same proportion as the body's extensionand the space that the parts occupy as a result of that force-increases),
By contrast, if I think a supersensible being as the first mover, and
hence think it by means of the category of causality, since [I findj that
same attribute [Bestimmungl in the world (namely, the motion of
matter), then I must not think this being as having some place or
other in space, nOr as extended; indeed, I must not even think it as
existing in time and simultaneously with other beings. Hence I have
no determinations ior attributes: BestimmungenJ whatever for this
being that could allow me to understand under what condition it is
possible for it to be [thej basis for motion. Therefore, [usingj the
predicate of cause does not in the least allow me to cognize this being
itself (as first mover). All I have is the presentation of a something
that contains the basis of the motions in the world; and the relation
that this being has to these motions, as their cause, gives me no
further Iinformation] about the character of the thing that is this

GENERAL COMMENT ON TELEOLOGY

379

cause, and therefore leaves the concept of it quite empty. This is
because, while predicates whose object[s) are found only in the world of
sense allow me to proceed to the existence of something that must
contain the basis of the world of sense, they do not allow me to
determine IBestimmung) the concept of this something as a supersensible being, since that concept excludes all those predicates. Hence if
I determine the category of causality by means of the concept of a
first mover, then this category does not in the least allow me to
cognize what God is. But what if I [start] from the order in the world:
perhaps I shall be more successful [in my attempt] not merely to think
the causality of that being as the causality of a supreme understanding,
but also to cognize that being by determining the concept [of a first
mover) in this way [i.e., as involving understanding), since then the
irksome condition of space and extension does not come in. Now the
great purposiveness in the world does indeed compel us to think a
supreme cause for that world, and as one having a causality [that it
exercises] through an understanding. But that does not at all authorize
us to attribute this understanding to that cause. (Similarly, we have to
think, e.g., the eternity of God as existence in aU time, because we
can form no other concept of mere existence as a magnitude, i.e., as
duration. 106 Again, we have to think divine omnipresence as existence in all places, so that we can grasp God's direct presence to all
things that are external to one another. But we are not entitled to
attribute any of these determinations to God as something we have
cognized in him.) If I determine the causality of man, in view of
certain products that are explicable only Ias arising] through an
intentional purposiveness, by thinking this causality as an understand·
ing in man, then I need not stop there li.e., at the mere thought) but
can attribute this predicate to him as a very familiar property of his
and cognize him through it. For I know that intuitions are given to the
senses of man, and that his understanding brings them under a
concept and hence under a rule. I know that this concept contains
only the common characteristicls] (and omits the particular) and
hence is discursive, and that the rules for bringing given presentations
under a consciousness as such are given by the understanding even
prior to those intuitions, etc. Hence I attribute this property to man as
106[Cf. Dreams of a Spirit·Seer. Ak. II. 339, and The End of All Things (1794), Ak.
VIII, 327-28.\

484

380

485

PART II. CRITIQUE OF TELEOLOGICAL JUDGMENT

a property through which I cognize him. Now if I want to think a
supersensible being (God) as an intelligence. then for a certain point
of view in my use of reason this is not only permitted but also
unavoidable. But I am in no way entitled to flatter myself that [[canl
attribute [ani understanding to this being and cognize this being
through it as through a property. For in the case of God I have to omit
all those conditions under which alone I am familiar with an understanding; and hence this predicate. which serves to determine only
man, cannot at all be applied to a supersensible object. and therefore
through a causality determined in this way we cannot at all cognize
what God is. And thus it is with all the categories; they cannot have
any significance whatever for cognition from a theoretical point of
view if they are not applied to objects of a possible experience. But
from a certain different point of view, I certainly can, indeed must.
use the analogy with an understanding to think even a supersensible
being, yet without trying to cognize it through this theoretically: I
must do so when this attribute [viz., understanding] of its causality
concerns an effect [to be achieved I in the world which involves an
aim that is morally necessary, but impossible for beings of sense to
achieve. For then we can have, through properties and attributes of
God's causaJity that we think in him merely by analogy, a cognition of
God and his existence107 (a theology) that has all the reality required
for a practical point of view IBeziehung], but it also has it only with
respect to this (the moral) point of view. Hence an ethicotheology is
indeed possible. For although morality with its rule can subsist without theology, morality with the final aim [or intention] that this same
rule enjoins on us cannot subsist without theology. but reason would
in that case be at a loss concerning that aim. On the other hand, a
theological ethics (of pure reason) is impossible; for if laws are not
I07ICf. above. Ak. 351-52. On "cognition by analogy," see also the Prolegomena.
§ § 57-59, Ak. IV, 357-62; the Anthropology, Ak. VII, 191; On Ithel Dignified Tone
Recently Adopted in Philosophy, Ak. VIIl, the n. on 399-401; and On the Progress of
Metaphysics since Leibniz and Woif!. Ak. XX. 280: "In this way las described in the
quote given above, Ak. 351 br. n. 311 I can have a cognition of the supersensible, e.g.,
of God, not actually a theoretical cognition, but still one by analogy, an analogy,
moreover, which it is necessary for reason to think. At the basis of this lcognition! lie
the categories, because they belong necessarily to the form of lalll thought, whether
this thought is directed to the sensible or to the supersensible, even though-and
precisely because-the categories on their own do not yet detennine any object.ii.e.,1
they do not yet amount to any cognition."1

GENERAL COMMENT ON TELEOLOGY

381

originally given by reason, and compliance with them brought about
by it as a pure practical power, they cannot be moral [laws). A
theological physics would be a similar absurdity, because it would
put forth not natural laws, but orders of a supreme will. On the other
hand, a physical (properly speaking, physicoteleological) theology
can at least serve as a propaedeutic to theology proper: for it finds a
wealth of material in natural purposes, and contemplating these
prompts in us the idea of a final purpose, a purpose that nature
cannot offer; and so it can allow us to feel the need for a theology that
would determine the concept of God sufficiently for the highest
practical use of reason, even though it cannot produce such a theology and have an adequate basis for it in the evidence to which it
appeals.

TRANSLATOR'S
SUPPLEMENT
FIRST INTRODUCTION
TO THE
CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

193'

INTRODUCTION
I

On Philosophy as a System
If philosophy is the system of rational [Vemunft-] cognitionl through
concepts, this [characterization] already suffices to distinguish it from
a critique of pure reason [Vemunft]. For though a critique of pure
reason contains a philosophical inquiry into the possibility of such
cognition, it does not belong to a system of philosophy as a part of it,
but outlines and examines the very idea of such a system in the first
place.
If we divide this system, we must start by dividing it into its formal
and its material part. The formal part (logic) encompasses merely the
form of thought in a system of rules, while the material (or real) part
considers systematically the objects we think about, insofar as we can
have rational cognition of them from concepts.
Now this real system of philosophy, in turn, can be divided only into
theoretical andpracticai philosophy. This is because the [respective]
objects [of these two parts of philosophy] are distinct originally, and
because, as a consequence, the [respective] principles of a science
that includes these objects differ essentially. This division of the real
system of philosophy into a theoretical and a practical part must be
such that the one part lis] the philosophy of nature, the other that of
morals. The philosophy of nature can include empirical principles.
but the philosophy of morals must contain no principles other than
pure a priori ones (since freedom cannot possibly be an object of
experience) .
There is however a prevailing [and] serious misunderstanding about
what [objects, or areas] should be considered practical in such a
sense of the term that [they] deserve to be included in a practical
1[Erkenntnis.

cr. above, Ak. 167 br. n. 2.1

385

195'

386

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

philosophy, a misunderstanding that is quite detrimental to the very

196'

way the science [is to] deal [with these areas]. People have thought
they could include in practical philosophy [such areas as] statesmanship,
political economy, rules of household management as well as of
etiquette, precepts for the well-being and hygiene of both soul and
body (indeed, why not all professions and arts?), since all of them do
contain a set [Inbegriffl of practical propositions. Now practical
propositions do differ from theoretical ones, which deal with [enthalten]
the possibility of things and with their attributes; they differ from
them in the way we present2 (this possibility and these attributes].
But that does not mean that they differ from them in content; the
only practical propositions that differ from theoretical ones in content are those that concern freedom under laws. All other practical
propOSitions are nothing more than the theory of what belongs to the
nature of things, except that here this theory is applied to the way we
can produce these things according to a principle, i.e., here we
present [how] they are possible through a voluntary I willkiirlich] act
(and such acts are included among natural causes). Consider. for
example. this problem in mechanics: to find, for a given force that is
to be in equilibrium with a given weight, the proportion [or ratio] of
the respective lever arms. Though the solution of this problem is
expressed as a practical formula, this formula contains no more than
the theoretical proposition that the length of the lever arms is inversely
proportional to that force and that weight when these are in equilibrium,
except that here we present this proportion, as far as its origin is
concerned, as possible through a cause (which is such thatl the basis
determining it [to act) is the presentation of that proportion. (This
cause is our power of choice [Willkur].) The same holds for all
practical propositions that concern merely the production of objects.
Suppose that we are offered precepts for furthering our happiness,
and that, e.g., aU they talk about is what we must do about our own
person to [make ourselves) receptive to happiness. All we present in
such precepts is the conditions within [us J under which this happiness
is possible. such as modesty, moderation of our inclinations to keep
them from becoming passion[s), etc.: we present these conditions as
belonging to the nature of the subject, and we also present the way we
2\ Vorstellen, traditionally rendered as 'to represent.' See above, Ak 175 hr. n. 17 and
Ak. 203 hr. n. 4.1

I. ON PHILOSOPHY AS A SYSTEM

387

[canl produce this equilibrium [within us), namely we present it as a
causality that we ourselves can [exercise]. and so we present everything as [a] direct consequence of the theory of the object [happiness,
in this case) as related to the theory of our own nature ([Le., ofJ] ouI'selves as cause). Hence, while this practical precept differs from a
theoretical [proposition) in formula[tion], it does not differ from it in
content, and hence [wei do not need a special kind of philosophy in
order to gain insight into this connection between [those) bases [or
grounds) and their consequences. In a word: all practical propositions which derive something that nature can contain from our power4
of choice as cause belong to theoretical philosophy, i.e., to cognition
of nature; only those practical propositions that legislate to freedom
are different in kind from theoretical propositions in terms of their
content. The first type of practical propositions may be said to constitute the practical part of a philosophy of nature, but the second type
alone [may be said to I form the basis of a special practical philosophy.

Comment
It is very important to define philosophy precisely, as to its parts;
hence we must not include something as a [distinct} member in the
division of philosophy as a system, if it is only a consequence or an
application of philosophy to given cases and [hence) requires no
special principles.
We distinguish [werden unterschiedenJ practical propositions from
theoretical ones either by their principles or by their consequences. If
we distinguish them by their consequences, then they do not form a
special part of the science [to which they pertain J but belong to the
theoretical part, as a special kind of consequences [drawn} from the
science. Now the possibility of things in terms of natural laws differs
[ist unterschieden], in its principles, essentially from the possibility of
things in terms of laws of freedom. But this difference does not
3[Deleting the comma between 'Natur' and 'runs selbst als Ursache}.l
4[00 my use of 'power,' rather than 'faculty,' see Ak. 167 br. n.

3.J

197'

388

198'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

consist in [the fact J that in the case of the possibility of things in terms
of laws of freedom we posit the cause in a will, while in the case of
their possibility in terms of natural laws we posit the cause outside the
will, in the things themselves. For suppose the will obeys no other
principles than those about which the understanding [can] see that in
terms of them, as mere natural laws, the object is possible: in that
case, though the proposition concerning the object's possibility through
the causality of our power of choice may be called a practical
proposition, yet in its principle it does not differ at all from theoretical propositions about the nature of things; rather, it must borrow its
principle from the nature of things in order to exhibitS an object's
presentation as actualized.
Hence practical propositions that in their content deal merely with
the possibility of a presented object (through voluntary action) are
only applications of a complete theoretical cognition and cannot
form a special part of a science. A practical geometry as a separate
science [of geometry I is an absurdity, no matter how many practical
propositions the pure science [of geometry I contains, most of which
are problems [for] whose solution [we I need special instruction[ s].
The problem of constructing a square by means of a given line and a
given right angle is a practical proposition, but [is nevertheless]
purely a consequence [drawn] from theory. Similarly, the art of surveying ([ ars I agrimensoria) can in no way claim the title of practical
geometry, and be called a special part of geometry in general; rather,
it belongs to the scholia of geometry, concerning the application of
this science to [various I tasks. 6
5{Darstellen. traditionally rendered as 'to present.' See above, Ak. 232 br. n. 51.]

6This pure and, precisely because of that purity, sublime, science of geometry seems
to compromise some of its dignity if it confesses that on its elementary level it needs
instruments to construct its concepts, even if only two: compass and ruler? These
constructions alone are called geometric, while those of higher geometry are called
mechanical, because to construct the concepts of higher geometry we need more
complex machines. Yet even when we call compass [Zirkel[ and ruler [Lineal[ (circinus
et regula) instruments, we mean not the actual instruments, which could never produce those figures [circle and (straight) line I with mathematical precision, but only the
simplest ways {these figures can] be exhibited by our a priori imagination, !a power]
that no instrument can equal.
7{See the Preface to Isaac Newton's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy,
and cf. Kant's Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, Ak. IV, 478.[

I.

ON PHILOSOPHY AS A SYSTEM

389

Consider even a natural science insofar as it rests on empirical
principles, i.e., physics proper: even here the practical arrangements,
called experimental physics, that we make in order to discover hidden
natural laws, can in no way justify our calling this [experimental
physics] a practical physics (another absurdity, just like [a practical
geometry J), as a [distinct] part of natural philosophy. For the principles
we follow in performing experiments must themselves always be
obtained from our knowledge [Kenntnisl of nature, and hence from
theory. The same holds for the practical precepts concerning the
voluntary production in us of a certain state of mind (e.g., the state of
stirring or restraining our imagination, pacifying or abating our
inclinations). There is no practical psychology as a special part
of the philosophy of human nature. For the principles of [how wei
can [produce a certain mental] state by means of art must be
borrowed from those of [how our] attributes can [arise] from what
our nature is like, and although they consist of practical propositions, they still do not form a practical part of empirical psychology but belong merely to its scholia, because they have no special
principles.
In general, practical propositions (whether purely a priori or
empirical) that directly [unmittelbar] assert the possibility of an
object through our power of choice, always belong to our knowledge
of nature and to the theoretical part of philosophy. [They must be
distinguished from] those practical propositions that directly [direktJ
express Idarste/len]. as necessary, the determination of [our power of
choice to] an act by the mere presentation of the act's form (in terms
of laws as such), without regard to the means [used) to achieve the
act's object: only these latter practical propositions can and must
have their own principles (namely, in the idea of freedom); and
although those propositions base on these same principles the concept of an object of the will (the highest good), yet this object belongs
to that practical precept (which is then called (a] moral [precept))
only indirectly, as consequence. Also, our knowledge of nature (i.e .•
theory) gives us no insight into the possibility of this object [the
highest good]. Hence these practical propositions alone belong to a
special part of a system of rational cognitions, a part called practical
philosophy.
All other propositions of performance, with whatever science they

199'

390

200'

201'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

may be affiliated, we might call technical 8 rather than practical, if
we are worried about ambiguity. For they belong to the art of bringing about something that we want to exist [sein]. and in a complete
theory this art is never more than a consequence of it, not an
independent part with whatever kind of injunctions. Hence aU precepts of skill belong, as consequences, to the technic 9 of nature, and
hence to our theoretical knowledge of nature. But I shall henceforth use the term technic in other cases too, namely, where we
merely judge [certain 1objects of nature as if they were made possible
through art. In those cases the judgments are neither theoretical nor
practical (in the [proper] sense just discussed), because they determine
nothing about the character of the object, nor about how to produce
it; rather, in them we judge nature itself, though merely by analogy
with an art, in its subjective relation to our cognitive power, rather
than in its objective [objekti v] relation to objects [Gegenstiinde I.
Now I shall not here call the[ se] judgments themselves technical, but I
shall call technical the power of jUdgment ll on whose laws they are
8[ln the sense derived from the Greek TiXV'1 (techne). i.e., 'art' in the sense that
includes craft.]
"This is the place to correct a mistake I made in the Foundations of the Metaphysics
of Morals: having said there that imperatives of skill command only conditionallylOnamely, under the condition of merely possible, i.e., problematic, purposes-I
called such practical precepts problematic imperatives. But in fact this expression is
contradictory. [ should have called them technical, i.e" imperatives of art. Now it is
true that pragmatic imperatives, i.e., rules of prudence, which command under the
condition of an actual and even subjectively necessary purpose [happiness], are also
[usually] included under the technical imperatives. (For what is prudence but the skill
of using free human beings-and in particular one's own natural predispositions and
inclinations-for one's [own] aims?) Yet we are justified in giving these [so-called]
technical imperatives a special name (viz. ,pragmatic, thus confining the term 'technical'
to (ordinary) imperatives of skill]. For in the case of technical imperatives as such
[allgemein I. the task is merely how] we are] to achieve a (certain] purpose, and what this
purpose itself consists in must be presupposed as known. But in the case of pragmatic
imperatives the purpose we attribute to ourselves and others is not just some purpose
or other, but is one's own happiness, so that here we have the additional task of determining what this purpose itself (happiness) consists in [, not just how (we are) to achieve itl.
IOIThe reference is to Ak. IV, 414-17. The conditional imperatives (there called
"hypothetical'") are there said to be of two kinds: problematic and asser(Qric But there
too, contrary to what Kant goes on to say here, the same distinction is also made using
the terms 'technical' and 'pragmatic.']
Il[ Urteilskraft, rendered either as 'power of judgment' or simply as 'judgment'; see
above, Ak. 167 br. n. 4.]

I. ON PHILOSOPHY AS A SYSTEM

391

based, as weIl as nature las judgedl in accordance with that power.
Since this technic contains no propositions that are determinative
objectively, it also forms no part of doctrinal philosophy, but only a
part of the critique of our cognitive powers.

II

On the System of the
Higher Cognitive Powers
Which Lies at the
Basis of Philosophy
[Nowl suppose we are concerned with dividing, not a philosophy,
but our ability lor power: Vermogen I to cognize a priori through
concepts (our higher cognitive power), i.e., suppose we are concerned with [dividing] a critique of pure reason, but of pure reason
as regards only its ability to think (i.e., leaving out of account
[even! pure intuition): then the systematic presentation of our ability
to think turns out to have three parts. The first part is understanding, the ability to cognize the universal (i.e., rules); the second is
judgment, the ability to subsume the particular under the universal; and the third is reason, i.e., the ability to determine the particular through the universal (i.e., to derive [the particular! from
principles).
The critique of pure theoretical reason was devoted to the sources
of all a priori cognition (hence including the sources of what,
in this cognition,12 belongs to intuition), and it provided us with
the laws of nature, while the critique of practical reason provided us with the Jaw of freedom; and so it seems as if we have
already completed our treatment of the a priori principles of all
philosophy.
On the other hand, if understanding provides us a priori with laws
12(Reading 'ihm' for 'ihr. 'J

202'

392

203'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

of nature, [and] reason with laws of freedom, then surely it is to be
expected by analogy that judgment, which mediates the connection
[Zusammenhang) between understanding and reason, will similarly
provide its own a priori principles for this [mediation], and that
perhaps it will lay the basis for a special part of philosophy, even
though philosophy as a system can have only two parts.
Yet judgment is a very special cognitive power, not at all independent: it gives us neither concepts nor ideas of any object whatever,
whereas understanding does give us such concepts, and reason such
ideas. For judgment is merely an ability to subsume under concepts
given from elsewhere. So if there is to be a concept or rule that arises
originally from the power of judgment, it would have to be a concept
of things of nature insofar as nature conforms to our power ofjudgment,
and hence a concept of a [special] character of nature: the only
concept we could form of this character is that [nature's I arrangement
conforms to the ability we have to subsume the particular laws, which
are given, under more universal laws, even though Idoch I these are
not given. In other words, this concept would have to be that of a
purposiveness of nature for the sake of our ability to cognize nature,
insofar as this ability requires that we be able to judge the particular
as contained under the universal and to subsume it under the concept
of a nature.
Now a concept of this sort is the concept of experience as a system
in terms of empirical laws. For although experience forms a system in
terms of transcendental laws, which comprise the condition under
which experience as such is possible, yet empirical laws might be so
infinitely diverse. and the forms of nature which pertain to particular
experience so very heterogeneous. that the concept IBegriffl of a
system in terms of these (empirical) laws must be quite alien to
the understanding, and that the possibility-let alone the necessityof such a whole is beyond [our) grasp [begriffen j. And yet for
particular experience to cohere thoroughly in terms of fixed principles, it must have this systematic coherence of empirical laws
as well; for only then can judgment subsume the particular under
what is universal though still always empirical, and so on until [it
arrives at j the highest empirical laws and the natural forms conforming to them, and hence only then can it consider the aggregate
of particular experiences as a system of them. For unless this Isystematic coherence of empiricallawsj is presupposed, particular ex-

II. THE SYSTEM OF THE HIGHER COGNITIVE POWERS. . .

393

periences cannot have thoroughly lawful coherence,13 i.e., empirical
unity.
This [systematicity is a] lawfulness [that] intrinsically [an siehl is
contingent (in terms of all concepts of the understanding). Judgment
(only for its own benefit) presupposes it in nature, as a presumption.
This lawfulness is a formal purposiveness of nature that we simply
assume in it; it provides no basis for a theoretical cognition of nature,
nor for a practical principle of freedom, but it does give us a principle
for judging and investigating nature: a principle by which to seek, for
particular experiences, the universal [empirical] laws we must follow
in engaging in such experiences in order to bring out that systematic
connection [of them] which [we] need for coherent experience and
which we have grounds to assume a priori.
Hence the concept that arises originally from judgment, as its own
concept, is the concept of nature as art; in other words. it is the
concept of the technic of nature regarding its particular [besonder]
laws. This concept provides no basis for any theory, and it does not
contain cognition of objects and their character any more than logic
does; it gives us only a principle by which we [can I proceed in terms
of empirical laws. which makes it possible for us to investigate nature.
l3"fhe possibility of experience as such is the possibility of empirical cognitions. which
are (aul synthetic judgments. Hence we cannot (as is commonly supposed) derive
(ziehen( this possibility analytically!,( from [a] mere comparlison ofl perceptions; for
the connection of two different perceptions in the concept of an object (to yield a
cognition of the object) is a synthesis, and the only way in which this synthesis makes
empirical cognition possible, in other words. experience, is in tenns of principles
[Prinzipum] of the synthetic unity of appearances. j,e., in tenIlli of principles [GrundsiUze I
by which they are brought under the categories. Now these empirical cognitions [with
the synthetic unity that each has I do (in tUfn ( form an analytic unity of all experience.
[namely,( in tenns of what they necessarily have in common (the transcendental laws of
nature I just mentioned (which are the principles of the synthetic unity of every
appearance J); but they do not form that synthetic unity. of experience as a system, that
connects the empirical laws under a principle even in tenns of that in which they differ
(and where the[ir] diversity can be infinite). Now what a category is for lin Ansehungl
every particular experience (giving it its synthetic unity]. this the purposiveness or
appropriateness of nature (even in its particular laws) [for our power of judgment I is for
(zu] that power [in judging nature, as experienced. in tenns of the synthetic unity of a
system]. In terms of (the concept ofl this purposiveness or appropriateness of nature.
we present nature not merely as mechanical [as we do under the categoriesl. but also as
technical; and though it is true that this concept does not objectively determine (thisl
synthetic unity. as a category does [for every particular experiencel. yet it provides us
with subjective principles [of judgment I that serve us as a guide in investigating nature.

204'

205'

204'

394

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

But this [concept of the technic of nature I does not enrich our
knowledge of nature with a special [besonder] objective law, but only
serves judgment as the basis for a maxim by which we [can I observe
nature and to which we [canl hold up [and compare] nature's forms.
Now [using] this [concept of the technic of nature I does not add a
new part to philosophy as a doctrinal system of our cognition of
nature and of freedom: for our presentation of nature as art is a mere
idea that serves as a principle for our investigation of nature, and
hence merely for ius) subjects, so that we may possibly introduce into
the aggregate of empirical laws, as empirical laws, the coherence that
a system has, by attributing to nature a reference to this our need [for
systematicity). On the other hand, our concept of a technic of nature,
as a heuristic principle for judging nature, will belong to the critique
of our cognitive power. [the part of this critique I which indicates
what cause we have for presenting nature in this way, where this idea
originates and whether it is to be found in an a priori source, and also
what the range and the limit of its use are. In a word, such an inquiry
will belong, as a part, to the system of the critique of pure reason, but
not to the system of doctrinal philosophy.14

III

On the System of
All the Powers
of the Human Mind

206'

We can reduce all the powers of the human mind, without exception,
to these three: the cognitive power, the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure, and the power of desire. It is true that philosophers who
otherwise deserve unlimited praise for the thoroughness in their way
of thinking have asserted that this distinction is only illusory, and
have tried to bring all powers under nothing but the cognitive power.
Yet it is quite easy to establish, and has in fact been realized for some
14[Cf.Ak.170incl. br.n.l1.]

III. ON THE SYSTEM OF ALL THE POWERS. . .

395

time, that this attempt to bring unity into that diversity of powers,
though otherwise undertaken in the genuine philosophic spirit, is
futile. For there is always a great difference between presentations
insofar as, on the one hand, they belong to [theoretical) cognition.
when they are referred merely to the object and to the unity of
consciousness these presentations [contain)-or, similarly, insofar as
they have objective reference when they are considered at the same
time as cause of the actuality of this object and are included with the
power of desire [a power that can give rise to practical cognition)and, on the other hand, presentations insofar as they are referred
merely to the subject: for here the presentations themselves are bases
merely for preserving their own existence in the subject, and in so far
are considered [merely I in relation to the feeling of pleasure; but this
feeling neither is nor provides any cognition at all, though it may
presuppose cognition as a basis that determines it.
Now thelre is a) connection between the cognition of an object and
the feeling of pleasure lor) displeasure in the object's existence, !and
in this connection consists) the determination, of the power of desire.
to produce the object. But while this link is knowable enough
empirically, it is not based on any a priori principle; and hence to that
extent the mental powers form no system, but only an aggregate. It is
true that we can show Ithe following I a priori connection between the
feeling of pleasure and the other two powers [of cognition and of
desire). We can connect a [certain) a priori cognition, namely, reason's
concept of freedom, with the power of desire, as the basis determining this power, and can then find in this objective determination
[something] subjective as well: a feeling of pleasure contained in the
determination of the will. But if this is how the cognitive power and
the power of desire are connected, then they are not connected by
means of pleasure or displeasure; for then the pleasure or displeasure
does not precede [the determination ofl the power of desire, but
either only Ia/lererst I follows it, or perhaps is nothing other than our
sensation of this very ability of the will to be determined by reason, in
which case it is no special feeling and separate [eigentumlich) receptivity
at all that would need [to occupy I a special division among the
properties of the mind. On the other hand, an analysis of the mental
powers in general yields incontestably a[ nother I feeling of pleasure!,
one I that is independent of the determination of the power of desire
and can even serve as a basis determining it. But in order for this

207'

396

208'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

feeling of pleasure to be connected with the other two powers in a
system, this feeling must, as these other two powers do, also rest not
on merely empirical bases but on a priori principles. Hence for the
idea of philosophy as a system we also need a critique (even if not a
doctrine) of the feeling of pleasure and displeasure insofar as its basis
is not empirical.
Now the power of cognition according to concepts has its a priori
principles in pure understanding (in its concept of nature), and the
power of desire has its a priori principles in pure reason (in its
concept of freedom). That leaves, among the general properties of
the mind, an intermediate power or receptivity, the feeling of pLeasure and displeasure. just as judgment is left as an intermediate power
between the [other] higher cognitive powers [understanding and reason\. What is more natural than to suspect that judgment will also
contain a priori principlesl,] for the feeling of pleasure and displeasure?
Even before we decide anything about the possibility of this
connection, we can already [see] a certain unmistakable appropriateness
of the power of judgment to the feeling of pleasure, an appropriateness
either for serving the feeling of pleasure as [a] basis that determines
it, or for finding in the feeling of pleasure tal basis that determines the
power of judgment. For, in the division of our power of cognition
through concepts, while understanding and reason refer their presentations to objects in order to acquire concepts of them, judgment
refers solely to the subject and does not on its own produce any
concepts of objects. Similarly, while in the general division of all the
mental powers both the cognitive power and the power of desire
[havel an objective reference in the presentations, the feeling of
pleasure and displeasure is only the subject's receptivity to a [certain]
state [Bestimmung]. Therefore, if the power of judgment is indeed to
determine [bestimmen] anything on its own, then presumably this
can only be the feeling of pleasure; and, conversely, if the feeling of
pleasure is indeed to have an a priori principle, then presumably we
can find it only in the power of judgment.

IV
On Experience as a System for
the Power of Judgment
We saw in the Critique of Pure Reason that nature as a whole, as the
sum total of all objects of experience, constitutes a system in terms of
transcendental laws, those that the understanding itself gives a priori
(to appearances insofar as, connected in one consciousness, they are
to constitute experience). That is why experience too, considered
objectively, i.e., in the way experience as such is possible (ideally),
must constitute a system of possible empirical cognitions, and it must
do so in terms of both universal and particular laws: for the unity of
nature [which is implicit in the concept of nature l5 as spelled out by
those transcendental laws l6 ] requires [that intrinsically experience
form) such [a system, one] in terms of a principle of the thorough
connection of everything contained in that sum total of all appearances.
To this extent, then, experience as such must be regarded, according
to transcendental laws of the understanding, as a system and not as a
mere aggregateP
But it does not follow from this that nature is, even in terms of [its)
empiricaiiaws, a system which the human cognitive power can grasp
lfassenJ, and that the thorough systematic coherence of its appearances in an experience, and hence experience itself as a system, is
possible for human beings. For the empirical laws might be so diverse
and heterogeneous that, though we might on occasion discover particular laws in terms of which we could connect some perceptions to
[form] an experience, we could never bring these empirical laws
themselves under a common principle land sol to the unity [characteristic) of kinship. We would be unable to do this if-as is surely
151See above, Ak. 18O.J
161Cf. above, Ak. 359.1
171Cf. below. Ak. 232'-33'. Though understanding asserts that there is (this system in
terms of) such a principle, it does not know this principle (cf. ibid.), i.e., it does not
know what sort of thorough connection there is among all appearances. It is judgment
which fills this gap by presupposing a principle ofits own. Cf. above, Ak. 203'-04'.1

397

209'

398

210'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

possible intrinsically (at least insofar as the understanding can tell a
priori)-these laws, as well as the natural forms conforming to them,
were infinitely diverse and heterogeneous and manifested themselves
to us as a crude chaotic aggregate without the slightest trace of a
system. Yet, according to transcendental laws, we must presuppose
such a system [even as one that can be manifested to us, Le., a system
of experience I.
For unity of nature in time and space, and unity of the experience
possible for us, are one and the same, since nature is a sum total
[lnbegrlffl of mere appearances (ways [we) present [thingsl), [a concept (Begriff) which) can have its objective reality solely in experience;
[hence,) if we think of nature as a system (as indeed we must), then
experience [too) must be possible [for us] as a system even in terms of
empirical laws. Therefore it is subjectively necessary [for us to make
the) transcendental presupposition that nature [as experience possible for us I does not have this disturbing boundless heterogeneity
[Ungleichartigkeit) of empirical laws and heterogeneity [Heterogeneitat]
of natural forms, but that, rather, through the affinity of its particular
laws under more general ones it takes on the quality of experience as
an empirical system.
Now this presupposition is the transcendental principle of judgment.
For judgment is not merely an ability to subsume the particular under
the universal (whose concept is given), but also, the other way round,
an ability to find the universal for the particular. But [the principle it
needs for this cannot come from the understanding. For I the understanding, in its transcendental legislation to nature, considers only
the conditions under which experience as such is possible as far as its
form is concerned, [Le.,) the understanding abstracts from all the
diversity of possible empirical laws, and hence this principle of the
affinity of the particular natural laws cannot be in the understanding.
But since judgment does have to bring the particular laws under
higher-though still always empirical-laws, even with regard to what
is different about them in terms of the universal (a priori) laws, it is
judgment [itself) which must [here I lay such a principle at the basis of
its procedure. For suppose judgment [could only) grope about among
natural forms: though [it might still find] them harmonizing with one
another to [form certain) higher-though [still] empirical-laws they
had in common, it would yet have to regard this harmony as quite
contingent; and the contingency would be even greater if particular

IV. ON EXPERIENCE AS A SYSTEM. . .

399

perceptions ever happened to take on the quality of an empirical law;
but the contingency would be far greater [yet] if diverse empirical
laws were fit, in their overall coherence. to [give rise tol the systematic unity of a cognition of nature in a possible experience, unless
!judgment] presupposed such a form in nature by means of an a priori
principle.
Consider all these formulas that have come to be in vogue: Nature
takes the shortest way; Nature does nothing in vain; Nature makes no
leap in the diversity of its forms (continuum formarom I8); Nature is
rich in species and yet parsimonious in genera; and so on. These
formulas are nothing but that same transcendental utterance of judgment [by which] it stipulates to itself a principle for [considering]
experience as a system. and hence for its own needs. Neither understanding nor reason can provide a priori a basis for such a natural law.
For although our insight can tell us that nature in its merely formal
laws (the laws through which it is object of experience as such)
conforms to our understanding, yet in its particular laws, their diversity and heterogeneity, nature is free from all restrictions [imposed]
by our legislative cognitive power. Rather. the basis of that principle
is a mere presupposition that judgment makes for its own use, for the
sake of unifying empirical laws. so that it can always ascend from
what is empirical [and) particular. to what is more general [even if]
also empirical. Experience, too, can in no way be credited with
[offering us] such a principle. because only by presupposing this
principle can we engage in experiences in a systematic way.

v
On Reflective Judgment
Judgment can be regarded either as mere[ly] an ability to reflect. in
terms of a certain principle, on a given presentation so as to [make] a
concept possible. or as an ability to determine an underlying concept
by means of a given empirical presentation. In the first case it is the
181Continuum of forms.)

211'

400

212'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

reflective, in the second the determinative, power of judgment. To
reflect (or consider [iiberlegenJ)19 is to hold given presentations up
to, and compare them with, either other presentations or one's cognitive power [itself]. in reference to a concept that this [comparisonl
makes possible. The reflective power of judgment [Urtei/) is the one
we also call the power of judging [Beurleilungllfacultas diiudicandi).1D
When we reflect (even animals reflect, though only instinctively,
i.e., in reference not to acquiring a concept, but to-say-determining
an inclination), we need a principle just as much as we do when we
determine, where the underlying concept of the object prescribes the
rule to judgment and so takes the place of the principle.
The principle by which we reflect on given objects of nature is this:
that for all natural things concepts can be found that are determined
empirically. 21 This means that we can always presuppose nature's
products to have a form that is possible in terms of universal laws
which we can cognize. For if we were not allowed to presuppose this,
191Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 260

=

B 316,1

2°IOn Kant's difficulty with this terminological distinction, see above, Ak. 169 br. n.

9·1
21 At

212'

first glance this principle does not look at all like a synthetic and transcendental
proposition, but seems rather to be tautologous and to belong to mere logic. For logic
teaches how we can compare a given presentation with others, and form a concept by
extracting, as a characteristic for general use, what this presentation has in common
with different ones. Yet logic teaches us nothing about whether. for each object, nature
can offer us, for comparison, many more objects with a somewhat similar form. which
is Ithel condition under which it is possible to apply logic to nature. Rather, this
condition is a principle by which we present nature as a system for our judgment, a
system in which dividing the diverse into genera and species enables us, by making
comparisons, to bring all the forms we find in nature to (more or less general) concepts.
It is true that even pure understanding teaches us (though it too does so by means of
synthetic principles) to think all things of nature as contained in a transcendental
system in terms of a pnori concepts (the categories). Yet (reflective) judgment, which
seeks concepts even for empirical presentations, qua empirical. must make for this
lendl this further assumption: it must assume that nature, with its boundless diversity,
bas hit upon a division of this diversity (into genera and species)22 that enables our
judgment to find accordance among the natural forms it compares, and [sol enables it
to arrive at empirical concepts, as well as at coherence among these by ascending to
concepts that are more general Ithoughl also empirical. In other words, judgment
presupposes a system of nature even in terms of empirical laws, and it does so a priori
and hence by means of a transcendental principle.
22[Parentheses added.]

V.

ON REFLECTIVE JUDGMENT

401

and did not base our treatment of empirical presentations on this
principle, then all our reflection would be performed merely haphazardly and blindly, and hence without our having a basis for expecting
that this [reflection] is in agreement with nature.
With regard to the universal concepts of nature, which first make
possible a concept of experience at all (apart from the particular
determinationl, which it gets empirically]), judgment requires no
special principle by which to reflect: the instruction for this reflection
is already [contained] in the concept of a nature as such, i.e., in the
understanding, and judgment schematizes a priori and applies these
schemata to each empirical synthesis, {the synthesisl without which
no empirical judgment whatever would be possible. Here judgment
not only reflects but also determines, and its transcendental schematism also provides it with a rule under which it subsumes given
empirical intuitions.
But for concepts that must first be found for given empirical
intuitions, and that presuppose a special ibesonder] natural law in
terms of which alone particular ibesonder] experience is possible,
judgment needs for its reflection a principle of its own, a principle
that is also transcendental; and we cannot refer it to other [wiederum I,
already familiar, empirical laws and tum reflection into mere comparison with empirical forms for which we already have concepts. For
this question arises: How could we hope that comparing perceptions
would allow us to arrive at empirical concepts of what different
natural forms have in common, if nature, because of the great variety
in its empirical laws, had made these forms (as is surely conceivable)
exceedingly heterogeneous, so heterogeneous that comparing [theml,
so as to discover among them an accordance and a hierarchy of
species and genera, would be completely-or almost completelyfutile? Surely something is presupposed whenever we compare empirical presentations in order to cognize, in natural things, empirical laws
and specific forms that conform to them, land] in order to cognize,
by comparing these Iforms] with others, even forms that harmonize
generically: what is presupposed is that nature, even in its empirical
laws. has adhered to a certain parsimony suitable for our judgment,
and adhered to a uniformity we can grasp; and this presupposition
must precede all comparison, as a priori principle of judgment.
So when reflective judgment tries to bring given appearances
under empirical concepts of determinate natural things, it deals with

213'

402

214'

215'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

them technically rather than schematically. In other words, it does
not deal with them mechanically, as it were, like an instrument,
guided by the understanding and the senses; it deals with them
artistically, in terms of a principle that is universal but also indeterminate: the principle of il purposive arrangement of nature in a
system-an arrangement [madel, as it were, for the benefit of our
judgrnent- by which the particular natural laws (about which the
understanding says nothing) are Imade I suitable for the possibility of
experience as a system, as we must presuppose if we are to have any
hope of finding our way in [the) labyrinth [resulting] from the diversity of possible particular laws. Hence judgment itself makes a priori
the technic of nature Ia I principle for its reflection. But it can neither
explain this technic nor determine it more closely; nor does it have
for this Iadoption of that principle J an objective basis ([ derived I from
a cognition of things in themselves) determining the universal concepts of nature. Rather, judgment makes this technic its principle
only so that it can, according to its needls], reflect in terms of its own
subjective law, and yet in a way that also harmonizes with natural laws
in general.
But the principle of reflective judgment, by which we think nature
as a system in terms of empirical laws, is merely a principle for the
logical use of judgment. Though in its origin it is a transcendental
principle, it allows us only to regard nature a priori as having in its
diversity the quality of a logical system under empirical laws.
The logical form of a system consists merely in the division of
given universal concepts (here the concept of a nature as such); [we
make this division] by thinking, in terms of a certain principle, the
particular (here the empirical) in its diversity as contained under the
universal. In order to do this we must, if we proceed empirically and
ascend from the particular to the universal, classify the diverse, i.e.,
compare several classes, each falling under a definite concept; and,
when these classes are complete[ ly enumerated J in terms of the[ irJ
common characteristic, we must subsume them under higher classes
(genera), until we reach the concept containing the principle of the
entire classification (and constituting the highest genus). On the other
hand, if we start from the universal concept, so as to descend to the
particular by a complete division, we perform what is called the
specification of the diverse under a given concept, since we proceed
from the highest genus to low genera (subgenera or species) and from

V. ON REFLECTIVE JUDGMENT

403

species to subspecies. Instead of saying (as we do in ordinary speech)
that we must make specific the particular that falls under a universal,
it would be more correct to say, rather, that we make the universal
concept specific by indicating the diverse [that falls) under it. For the
genus is (logically considered) as it were the matter, or the crude [roh)
substrate, that nature processes into particular species and subspecies
by determining it multiply; and so we can say that nature makes itself
specific in terms of a certain principle (or in terms of the idea of a
system), by analogy with how teachers of law use this term when they
talk about the specification of certain raw [roh I material [Materien). 23
Now it is clear that reflective judgment, by its nature, cannot
undertake to classify all of nature in terms of its empirical variety
unless it presupposes that nature itself makes its transcendental laws
specific in terms of some principle. Now this principle can only be
that of [nature's I appropriateness for tne power of judgment itself,
[i.e., for judgment's attempt) to find among things, [despite) their
immense diversity in terms of [all the I possible empirical laws, sufficient kinship to be able to bring them under empirical concepts
(classes), and bring these under more general laws (higher genera),
and so arrive at an empirical system of nature. Now this kind of
classification is not [derived from I ordinary empirical cognition, but
is artificial; by the same token, so far as we think of nature as making
itself specific in terms of such a principle, we regard nature as art.
Hence judgment necessarily carries within itself a priori a principle of
the technic of nature; this technic differs from the nomothetic of
nature, in terms of transcendental laws of the understanding, in that
the nomothetic can assert [geltend machen I its principle as a law, while
the technic can assert its principle only as a necessary presupposition.24
Hence judgment's own principle is: Nature, for the sake of the

216'

2:Yfhe Aristotelian school too called the genus matter, but the specific difference the
form.
24Une may wonder whether Linnaeus 25 could have hoped to design a system of nature
if he had had to worry that a stone which he found, and which he called granite, might
differ in its inner character from any other stone even if it looked the same, so that all
he could ever hope to find would he single things-isolated, as it were, for the
understanding- but never a class of them that could be brought under concepts of
genera and species.
2S[See above, Ak. 427 incl. hr. n. 17.]

216'

404

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

power ofjudgment, makes its universal laws specific [andl into empirical ones, according to the form of a logical system.
This is where the concept of a purposiveness of nature arises. This
concept belongs to reflective judgment, not to reason, because the
purpose is not posited in the object at all, but is posited solely in the
subject: in the subject's mere power to reflect. For we call something
purposive if its existence seems to presuppose a presentation of that
same thing; [and] natural laws that are constituted, and related to one
another, as if judgment had designed them for its own need! s J are
[indeed] similar to [the cases where] the possibility of [certain] things
presupposes that these things are based on a presentation of them.
Hence judgment, by means of its principle, thinks of nature as
purposive, in [the way] nature makes its forms specific through empirical laws.
But in thinking of nature as purposive in this way, what we think of
as purposive is not these forms themselves but only their relation to
one another, as well as the suitability which, despite their great
diversity, they have for a logical system of empirical concepts. Now if
nature showed us no more than this logical purposiveness, we would
indeed already have cause to admire it for that [purposiveness], since
we cannot indicate a basis for it in terms of the universal laws of the
understanding. Yet hardly anyone but perhaps a transcendental philosopher would be capable of this admiration, and even he could not
point to a definite case that proved this purposiveness in concreto,
but would have to think it only in a universal way.

VI
On the Purposiveness
That [Certain Individual]
Natural Forms Have as
So Many Particular Systems
There is a logical purposiveness in the [overall) form of nature,
inasmuch as nature in its empirical laws makes itself specific as is
required to make experience possible as one system of empirical
cognition. This purposiveness [lies in) nature's harmonizing with what
the subjective conditions of judgment are under which empirical
concepts can cohere to [form) a whole of experience. But this
[purposiveness) does not allow us to infer that nature is capable
[tauglich] of [having] a real purposiveness within its products, i.e.,
capable of producing individual [einzeln] things that have the form of
systems. For these things might well be-as far as [our] intuition can
tell-mere aggregates, even if aggregates that are possible [only] in
terms of empirical laws that together with others cohere in a system
of logical division, [so that) we would not be entitled to assume, as the
condition of the possibility of these particular things, a concept
expressly directed to it, and hence a purposiveness of nature as
underlying this possibility. Thus we see that earths, stones, minerals,
and so on have no purposive form whatever [but] are mere aggregates,
and yet are so akin in their inner character, and in the bases on which
we cognize their possibility, that they are suitable for a classification
of things under empirical laws in a system of nature, even though they
do not individually [an ihnen selbst] manifest the form of a system.
So in saying that [certain) natural forms have an absolute pu,-.
posiveness, I mean that their shape or inner structure is of such a
character that we must, in our power of judgment, base their possibility
on an idea. [We must do so] because purposiveness is a lawfulness that
[something) contingent [may] have [insofar) as [it) is contingent. Insofar
as nature's products are aggregates, nature proceeds mechanically, as
mere nature; but insofar as its products are systems-e.g., crystal
formations, various shapes of flowers, or the inner structure of plants

405

217'

406

218'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

and animals-nature proceeds technically, i.e., it proceeds also as
art. The distinction between these two ways of judging natural beings
is made merely by reflective judgment. [Making this distinction is I
something that determinative judgment did not (under principles of
reason) allow it [to do I. as regards the possibility of things themselves,
wishing perhaps to have everything reduced to a mechanical kind of
explanation. [But I reflective judgment certainly can, and perhaps
must, permit [geschehen lassen I this distinction. For there is no
inconsistency whatever between a mechanical explanation of an
appearance. which is a task that reason performs in terms of objective
principles. [and I a technical rule for judging that same object in
terms of subjective principles of reflection on [such anI object.
So, on the one hand, it is true that judgment's principle of the
purposiveness of nature in the specification of its universal laws by no
means extends far enough for us to infer from it the production of
natural forms that are themselves purposive (for even without such
forms it is possible for nature to [forml this system in terms of
empirical laws, and it is for the postulation of this alone that judgment
had a basis), and [so I these forms must be given solely through
experience. On the other hand. since we do have a basis for regarding
nature in its particular laws as based on a principle of purposiveness,
it always remains possible and permissible for us, if experience shows
us purposive forms in nature's products, to ascribe such purposive
forms to the same basis on which the first purposiveness may rest.
lt may even be that this basis itself lies in the supersensible, and
beyond the sphere of what insights into nature are possible for us; still
we have already gained something even by having ready. in our power
of judgment, a transcendental principle of the purposiveness of nature,
a principle for [dealing with] whatever purposiveness experience
[may] show us in natural forms. Though this principle is not adequate
to explain how such forms are possible, it does at least give us
permission to apply to nature and its lawfulness a very special concept,
the concept of purposiveness, even though this concept cannot be an
objective concept of nature, but is taken merely from the subjective
relation of nature to a power of the mind.

VII
On the Technic of
Judgment as the Basis
of the Idea of a
Technic of Nature
As we have shown above. judgment first makes it possible, indeed
necessary. for us to think of nature as having not only a mechanical
necessity but also a purposiveness; if we did not presuppose this
purposiveness, there could not be systematic unity in the thorough
classification of particular forms in terms of empirical laws. We
showed initially that this principle of purposiveness does not dete....
mine anything regarding the forms of natural products, since it is only
a subjective principle of the division and specification of nature. So
[to that extent] this purposiveness would remain merely conceptual:
while it would supply us, to assist us in using reason in regard to
nature's objects. with a maxim on which to base the logical use of
judgment in experience (the maxim of the unity of nature in terms of
its empirical laws),26 yet nu natural objects would be given us as
products that in their [own I form correspond to that special kind of
systematic unity, the systematic unity in terms of the presentation of a
purpose. Now nature's causality regarding the form that its products
have as purposes I would call the technic of nature. It contrasts with
the mechanism of nature, which consists in the causality nature has
insofar as it connects the diverse without [there being] a concept
underlying the manner of this unification, roughly as when we call
certain lifting devices-e.g., a lever or an inclined plane-machines
but not works of art, since they can produce their purpose-directed
effect even without [there being] an underlying idea; for while these
devices can be used for purposes, their [own I possibility does not
require a reference to purposes.
The first question that arises here is this: How can the technic of
nature be perceived in nature's products? The concept of purposiveness
26[Parentheses added. [

407

219'

408

220'

221'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

is not at all a constitutive concept of experience; it is not [a concept
that can I determine an appearance [and so I belong to an empirical
concept of the object, for it is not a category. [Rather,] we perceive
purposiveness in our power of judgment insofar as it merely reflects
on a given object, whether it reflects on the object's empirical intuition so as to bring it to some concept or other (which concept this is
being indeterminate), or on the empirical concept itself so as to bring
the laws it contains under common principles. So it is actually the
power of judgment that is technical; nature is presented as technical
only insofar as it harmonizes with, and [so) necessitates, that [technical]
procedure of judgment. I shall show presently how the concept of
reflective judgment, which enables us to perceive inwardly a purposiveness of our presentations, can also be applied to the presentation of the object [itself] as falling under this concept.27
Every empirical concept requires three acts of the spontaneous
cognitive power: (1) apprehension (apprehensio) of the manifold of
intuition; (2) comprehension 28 of this manifold, i.e., synthetic unity
of the consciousness of this manifold, in the concept of an object
(apperceptio comprehensiva); (3) exhibition (exhibitio), in intuition,
of the object corresponding to this concept. 29 For the first of these
acts we need imagination; for the second. understanding; for the
third, judgment, which would be determinative judgment if we are
dealing with an empirical concept.
But when we merely reflect on a perception we are not dealing
with a determinate concept. but are dealing only with the general rule
for reflecting on a perception for the sake of understanding. as a
power of concepts. Clearly, then, in a merely reflective judgment
imagination and understanding are considered as they must relate in
general in the power of judgment. as compared with how they actually relate in the case of a given perception.
So if the form of an object given in empirical intuition is of such a
character that the apprehension, in the imagination, of the object's
manifold agrees with the exhibition of a concept of tbe understanding
(wbich concept this is being indeterminate), then imagination and
27We say that we put final causes into things, rather than, as it were,lifting them out of
our perception of things.
28[Zusammenfassung; see above, Ak. 251 hr. n. 14.J

29[Cf. the Critique of Pure Reason, A 98-110.]

VII.

ON THE TECHNIC OF JUDGMENT. . .

409

understanding are-in mere reflection-in mutual harmony, a harmony that furthers the task of these powers; and the object is pe~
ceived as purposive, [though] purposive merely for judgment. Hence
we then consider the purposiveness itself30 as merely subjective; by
the same token, this [purposiveness] neither requires nor produces a
determinate concept of the object, and the judgment itself is not a
cognitive one. Such a judgment is called an AESTHETIC judgment of
reflection.
On the other hand, if empirical concepts and empirical laws,
conforming to the mechanism of nature, are already given, judgment
may compare such a concept of the understanding with reason and its
principle concerning the possibility of a system; and if we then find
this [systematic] form in the object. we judge th[is] purposiveness
objectively and call the thing a natural purpose, whereas above we
judged things only as indeterminately purposive natural forms. A
judgment about the objective purposiveness of nature is called
TELEOWGICAL. It is a cognitive judgment, yet it belongs only to
reflective and not to determinative judgment. For nature's technic as
such, whether it is merely formal or real, is only a relation of things to
our power of judgment. In this power alone can we find the idea of a
purposiveness of nature, and only in relation to this power do we
attribute this purposiveness to nature.

VIII
On the Aesthetic of
the Power of Judging
The expression, aesthetic way of presenting, is quite unambiguous if
we mean by it that the presentation is referred to an object, as
appearance, to [give rise tol cognition of that object. For here the
term aesthetic means that the form of sensibility ([i.e.,] how the
subject is affected) attaches necessarily to the presentation, so that
JO(As distinguished from the object that manifests it.]

410

222'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

this form is inevitably transferred to the object (though to the object
only as phenomenon). That is why it was possible to have a transcendental aesthetic, as a science pertaining to the cognitive power.
However, for a long time now it has become customary to call a way
of presenting aesthetic,3! i.e., sensible, in a different meaning of the
term as well, where this means that the presentation is referred. not to
the cognitive power, but to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure.
Now it is true that (in line with this meaning of the term aesthetic) we
are in the habit of calling this feeling too a sense (a modification of
our state), since we have no other term for it. Yet this feeling is not an
objective sense, not a sense the determination of which we would use
to cognize an object, but a sense that contributes nothing whatever to
our cognition of objects. (For to intuit, or otherwise cognize, something with pleasure is not merely to refer the presentation to the
object, but is a receptivity of the subject.) Precisely because all
determinations of feeling have only subjective significance. there
cannot be, as a science, an aesthetic of feeling as there is, say, an
aesthetic of the cognitive power. Hence the expression, aesthetic way
of presenting, always retains an inevitable ambiguity, if sometimes we
mean by it a way of presenting that arouses the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure, but sometimes a way of presenting that concerns merely
the cognitive power insofar as we find in it sensible intuition that
allows us to cognize objects, [though l only as appearances.
But we can remove this ambiguity if we apply the term aesthetic
not to intuition, let alone to presentations of the understanding, but
solely to the acts of the power of judgment. [For to speak ofl an
aesthetic judgment. if [this were interpreted as meaning a judgment J
to be used for objective determination, would be so strikingly contradictory that we would have sufficient assurance against [such a l
misinterpretation. For while intuitions can be sensible, judging pertains
to absolutely nothing but the understanding (in the broader meaning
of that term); and aesthetic or sensible judging, where this is Imeant l
to be cognition of an object, is contradictory even in cases where
sensibility meddles in the task of the understanding and (by a vitium
sUbreptionis 32 ) points the understanding in a false direction; rather,
an objective judgment is always made only by the understanding, and
31[From Greek alo(}/o(}al (aisthesthail. 'to sense.'1
32[Fallacy of subreption. Cf. above. Ak. 257 br. n. 22.1

VIII. ON THE AESTHETIC OF THE POWER OF JUDGING

411

in so far cannot be called aesthetic. Hence our transcendental aesthetic of the cognitive power was indeed able to talk about sensible
intuitions, but not at all about aesthetic judgments; for since it deals
only with cognitive judgments, which determine the object, its judgments must all be logical. Therefore, in calling a judgment about an
object aesthetic, we indicate immediately that, while a given presentation is being referred to an object, by judgment we mean here not the
determination of the object, but the determination of the subject and
of his feeling. 33 For in the power of judgment we consider understanding and imagination as they relate to each other, [and we can
do this in two ways:] We can consider that relation objectively (as was
done in the transcendental schematism of judgment),34 as belonging
to cognition; but we can also consider this same relation between
[those] two cognitive powers merely subjectively, [namely,] insofar as
one of these powers furthers or hinders the other in one and the same
presentation and thereby affects one's mental state, so that here we
consider this relation as one that can be sensed (as does not happen
in the case of the separate use of any cognitive power other [than
judgment]). Now although this sensation [Empfindung] is not a sensible [sinnlichl presentation of an object,35 it is connected subjectively
with judgment!'s general activity of] making concepts of the understanding sensible, and hence may be included with sensibility, namely,
3JIHere, and in some of the occurrences below, 'feeling' refers to the receptivity,
which is one of our mental powers; in other occurrences below, it refers to a state of
that receptivity. i.e .. to an individu(ll feeling. Also, whereas here Kant equates an
aesthetic judgment with the determination-later (Ak. 229') he will also say that an
aesthetic judgment "determines"-of the subject and his feeling (the receptivity), he is
about to talk about an (individual) feeling as the basis determining something. Does the
individual feeling determine the feeling as receptivity? In some cases Kant seems to
have meant this, even though one would have expected him, in that case, to distinguish
the two senses of 'feeling.' But in other cases below (identified, where possible, with
bracketed insertions) it seems more plausible to interpret him as switching to the
terminology he adopted in the work itself, where he says (explicitly, e.g., above, Ak.
221) that what the feeling determines is an aesthetic judgment. The only other
alternative for the translation (too unhelpful, it seems, in the case of this terminology)
would have been to leave the ambiguity and speak merely of the "detennining basis of'
an aesthetic judgment. 1
341See the Critique of Pure Reason, A 137-47 = B 176-87.]

35[But a feelmg. On the ambiguity of both 'Empfindung' and 'sensation,' see also
above, Ak. 291-92 incl. br. n. 19.1

223'

412

224'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

as a sensible presentation of the state of the subject who is affected by
an act of that power [of judgment]. We may include this [kind of]
sensation with sensibility, and call a judgment aesthetic, i.e .• sensible
(as regards the subjective effect [the feeling, as effect of the harmony
between the two cognitive powers36 I, not as regards the [whole37 ]
basis determining [the judgment)). even though judging is (objectively)
an act of the understanding (i.e., of one of the [ilberhaupt I higher
cognitive power[s]), not an act of sensibility.
Every determinative judgment is logical. because its predicate is a
given objective concept. But a merely reflective judgment about a
given individual object can be aesthetic; [it is aesthetic] if (before we
attend to a comparison of the object with others) the power of
judgment, having no concept ready for the given intuition, holds [for
the sake of comparison] the imagination [itself] (as it merely apprehends the object) up to the understanding [itself] ([so that] a concept
as such38 is exhibited) and perceives a [certain] relation between the
two cognitive powers, a relation that constitutes the condition, which
we can only sense, under which [alone] we can use the power of
judgment objectively (namely, the mutual harmony of imagination
and understanding). But there can also be an aesthetic judgment of
sense [rather than of reflection]; [such a judgment occurs] if the
predicate of the judgment cannot be a concept of an object at all,
because it does not belong to the cognitive power at all-as, e.g., in
the judgment: The wine is agreeable-so that the predicate expresses
that a presentation is referred directly to the feeling of pleasure and
not to the cognitive power.
Hence we may define an aesthetic judgment in general as one
whose predicate can never be cognition (i.e., concept of an object,
though it may contain the subjective conditions for cognition as
such). In such a judgment, the basis determining [it] is sensation.
There is, however, only one so-called sensation that can never become
36[Kant is so far talking only about aesthetic judgments of reflection. but is here
beginning to distinguish them from aesthetic judgments of sense. See the Translator's
Introduction, Iv-lvl.]
37[The basis determining aesthetic judgments of reflection. Kant will tell us shortly,
includes not only a feeling but also a certain rule. [
38[Rather than any individual concept. [

VIII. ON THE AESTHETIC OF THE POWER OF JUDGING

413

a concept of an object: the feeling of pleasure and displeasure. This
sensation is merely subjective, whereas all other sensation can be
used for cognition. Hence an aesthetic judgment is one in which the
basis determining lit) lies in a sensation that is connected directly
with the feeling of pleasure and displeasure. 39 In an aesthetic judgment of sense the basis determining Iit I is the sensation that is
produced directly by the empirical intuition of the object. In an
aesthetic judgment of reflection, on the other hand, the basis determining Iit J is the sensation brought about, in the subject, by the
harmonious play of the two cognitive powers [involved) in the power
of judgment, imagination and understanding; [they are in harmonious
play) when, in the given presentation, the imagination's ability to
apprehend, and the understanding's ability to exhibit, further each
other. In such a case this relation between them brings about,
through its mere form, a sensation; and this sensation is the basis
determining a judgment, which is therefore called aesthetic, and
amounts to [alsl 40 subjective purposiveness (without a concept) and
hence is connected with the feeling of pleasure.
An aesthetic judgment of sense contains material purposiveness;
an aesthetic judgment of reflection, formal purposiveness. But since
an aesthetic judgment of sense does not refer to the cognitive power
at all but refers-through sense-directly to the feeling of pleasure.
only an aesthetic judgment of reflection is to be regarded as based on
the power of judgment's own principles. For if reflection on a given
presentation precedes the feeling of pleasure (where this feeling is the
basis determining the judgment), then we think the subjective purposiveness before we sense it Iby I its effect, and to this extent an
aesthetic judgment belongs-as far as its principles are concerned39[A moment ago the sensation was said to be this feeling. One might wonder jf Kant
is now talking about an "objective" sensation (cf. above, Ak. 206}-i.e., the kind that
can enter into cognition of an object-as "connected with" the feeling. Yet this same
sensation will now be said to be produced either by an empirical intuition (which
already includes "objective" sensation) or by the bannoniou5 play of imagination and
understanding (and the "sensation" that this produces is feeling). So clearly the
sensation in question must indeed be the feeling; and since this feeling is an individual
one, we may take Kant to be saying that it is "connected with" the receptivity which he
also calls 'feeling.' 1
4O!lnserting a comma after 'heijJt. 'I

225'

414

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

to the higher cognitive power, specifically, the power of judgment,
under whose subjective, and yet universal, conditions41 the presentation of the object is subsumed. But since a merely subjective condition of a judgment permits no determinate concept of the basis
determining this judgment, that basis can only be given [us] in the
feeling of pleasure. Yet [it must be given us] in such a way that the
aesthetic judgment is always a judgment of reflection; the aesthetic
judgment must not be one of sense, which is an aesthetic judgment
that does not presuppose a comparison of the presentation with the
cognitive powers that work in unison in the power of judgment.
[though] it too refers a given presentation to the feeling of pleasure
(but not by means of the power of judgment and its principle). The
mark by which we can tell this difference [between the two kinds of
aesthetic judgment] cannot be stated [in full] until we get to the
treatise itself. It consists in the claim of the [aesthetic I judgment [of
reflection I to universal validity and necessity. For if an aesthetic
judgment carries such a claim with it, it also claims that the basis
determining [it] must lie not merely in the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure by itself, but also in a ruLe of the higher cognitive powers,
specifically. in the power of judgment, which thus legislates a priori as
regards the conditions of reflection. and [hence] proves that it has
AUTONOMY. This autonomy. however, is not valid objectively (as is
the autonomy of the understanding in regard to the theoretical laws
of nature, or as is that of reason in practical laws of freedom); i.e., it is
not valid through concepts of things or of possible acts. It is valid
merely subjectively, for the judgment based on [aus] feeling, [a feeling] which, if it can claim universal validity, proves that it originates
on the basis of a priori principles. We should actually call this legislation heautonomy: for judgment legislates neither to nature nor to
freedom, but solely to itself; and it is not a power to produce concepts
of objects, but a power only to compare occurring cases with concepts given it from elsewhere, and to state a priori the subjective
conditions under which this connection is possible.
This also allows us to understand why judgment, in an act that it
performs for itself. as merely reflective judgment (without presupposing
a concept of the object), instead of referring the given presentation to
this power's own rule, while being conscious of this [rule\. directly
41[The harmonious relation between imagination and understanding. I

VIII.

ON THE AESTHETIC OF THE POWER OF JUDGING

415

refers the reflection only to sensation, which like all sensations is
always accompanied by42 pleasure or displeasure. (None of the other
higher cognitive powers does this.) This is because that rule itself is
only subjective, and agreement with it can be recognized only in
something that also expresses a reference merely to the subject,
namely, in sensation, as the mark of the judgment and as the basis
determining lit], which is also why the judgment is called aesthetic.
Hence all our judgments can be divided, in terms of the order of the
higher cognitive powers, into theoretical, aesthetic, and practical
ones; but by the aesthetic ones I mean [here] only aesthetic judgments of reflection, which alone refer to a principle of the power of
judgment, as a higher cognitive power, whereas aesthetic judgments
of sense directly concern only the relation of presentations to the
inner sense, insofar as that sense is feeling.

Comment
It is very important here that we examine the explication Ithat some
people give] of pleasure, namely, as the sensible presentation of an
object's perfection. According to this explication an aesthetic judgment of sense or of reflection would always be a cognitive judgment
about the object, because perfection is an attribute IBestimmung]
that presupposes a concept of the object. Hence a judgment ascribing
[this alleged] perfection to an object [would] in no way be distinguished from other logical judgments, except perhaps by the confusedness which-as [those] people allege-this concept has [in this
kind of judgmentJ (and which they presume to call sensibility). But in
fact such confusedness cannot possibly constitute a difference in kind
between judgments; for otherwise an endless multitude of Ifurther I
judgments, not only of understanding but even of reason, would also
have to be called aesthetic [i.e., sensible], because in them [tooJ an
object is determined [bestimmt] by a confused concept, e.g., judg42\Kant must mean that the sensation in question is the (feeling of) pleasure or
displeasure, and it is only the other, viz., "objective," sensations which are always
"accompanied by" pleasure or displeasure. J

226'

416

227'

227'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

ments about right and wrong, since most people (even most philosophers) do not have a distinct concept of what right is. 43 [The expression] sensible presentation of perfection is an explicit contradiction,
and if the harmony of [something] manifold to [form] a unity is to be
called perfection, then we must present it through a concept; otherwise we must not give it the name perfection. If pleasure and displeasure are to be nothing but mere cognitions of things through the
understanding (except that the understanding is not conscious of its
concepts) and are only to seem to us to be mere sensations, then any
judging of things by pleasure or displeasure would have to be called
intellectual, not aesthetic (i.e., sensible), and senses would basically
be nothing but a judging understanding (though this understanding
would be judging without being adequately conscious of its own
acts), so that the aesthetic way of presenting would not differ in
kind from the logical; hence the boundary between the two could
not possibly be drawn in a determinate way, so that it would be
quite pointless to give them different names. (Not to mention [the
problems with I this mystical way of presenting the things of the
world, which rules out a sensible intuition that differs from concepts as such and so presumably reduces to nothing but an intuiting
understanding.)
A further question might be raised: Does not our concept of a
purposiveness of nature mean exactly the same as what the concept
of perfection says, and is not therefore the empirical consciousness of
subjective purposiveness (i.e., the feeling of pleasure in certain
4'We may say in general that we must never consider things as differing in kind by
virtue of a quality that passes into some other quality by a mere increase or decrease in
its degree. Now in the case of the difference between the distinctness and confusedness
of concepts, the difference does lie solely in the degree to which we are conscious of
the characteristics. which depends on how much attention we direct to them; and so to
this extent the two ways of presenting (Le., the distinct and the confused way I do not
differ in kind. But intuition and concept do differ in kind; for they do not pass into each
other, no matter how much our consciousness of the two and of their characteristics
increases or diminishes. For the greatest lack of distinctness in the conceptual way of
presenting (e.g.. if the concept is that of right) still leaves what is different in kind about
that way of presenting and has to do with the fact that it originates in the understanding;
and the greatest distinctness of intuition does not in the least bring it closer to
concepts, since intuition resides in sensibility. Moreover, logical distinctness and
aesthetic distinctness are as different as day and night [himmelweitl, and aesthetic
distinctness [mayl occur even if we do not present the object through concepts at all,
i.e., even if our presentation is an intuition and hence sensible.

VIII. ON THE AESTHETIC OF THE POWER OF JUDGING

417

objects)44 the sensible intuition of a perfection, as some would
explicate pleasure as such'!
I reply: Perfection, [construed] as mere completeness of the many
insofar as [they] together constitute a unity, is an ontological concept;
it is identical with the concept of the totality [Totalitiit (Allheit)) of
something composite ([the totality which results] if the manifold
[elements) in an aggregate are coordinated, or simultaneously subordinated [to one another) in a series as grounds and consequences) and
has nothing whatever to do with the feeling of pleasure and displeasure.
The perfection a thing has in the reference of its manifold to a
concept of that thing is only formal. But if I speak of a perfection ([ so
that) a thing may, under the same concept of it, have many perfections).
then I always presuppose the concept of something as a purpose, to
which [purpose) I apply that ontological concept of the harmony of
the manifold to [form] a unity. This purpose need not always be a
practical one, which does presuppose or imply a pleasure in the
object's existence; it may also pertain to technic, and hence concerns
merely the possibility of things and is the lawfulness of an intrinsically
contingent connection of the manifold in the object. As an example
let me mention the purposiveness that we necessarily think when we
think [howl a regular hexagon is possible, since it is quite contingent
that six equal lines in a plane should happen to [geradel meet at
nothing but equal angles, which is a lawful connection and IsoJ
presupposes a concept [that serves] as the principle making this
connection possible. 45 This kind of objective purposiveness, which
we observe in things of nature (above all in organized beings), we
think as objective and material. and it carries with it necessarily the
concept of a purpose of nature (either actual or ascribed to it
fictitiously) by reference to which we also attribute perfection to
things. A judgment about this purposiveness is called teleological; it
carries with it no feeling of pleasure whatever. as, in general, pleasure
must not be sought at all in judgments about mere causal connection.
So [it holds) in general [that I the concept of perfection as objective
441 Parentheses added.]
451Kant means a regular hexagon we find drawn somewhere: cf. above, At. 370,
where a regular hexagon is found traced in the sand on some beach. That is why this
purposiveness is about to be called "objective and material," whereas that of geometric
figures as such is objective and formal: see above, At. 362-66.]

228'

418

229'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

purposiveness and the feeling of pleasure have nothing whatever to
do with each other. To judge perfection we must have a concept of
the object, whereas we need no concept to judge by pleasure, Ibut]
can get pleasure through mere empirical intuition. In contrast, the
presentation of a subjective purposiveness in an object Inot only has
something to do with but 1is even identical with the feeling of pleasure (nor do we need for this Ifeeling of pleasure J an abstracted
concept of a relation to a purpose). [Sol there is a very great gulf
between subjective and objective purposiveness. For in order to
[decide] whether something that is subjectively purposive is also
objectively purposive we must usually engage in fairly extensive
investigation, one that not only [deals with] practical philosophy but
also [looks into I the technic of either nature or art. In other words, to
find perfection in a thing we need reason, to find agreeableness in it
we need mere sense, and to find beauty in it we need nothing but
mere reflection (without any concept whatever) on a given presentation.
Hence our aesthetic power of reflection judges only the subjective
purposiveness of an object (not its perfection); and so the question
arises whether this judgment is made only by means of the pleasure
or displeasure we sense, or whether perhaps it even is a judgment
about this pleasure or displeasure, in which case it would also determine that this presentation of the object must be connected with
pleasure or displeasure.
As I have already mentioned, this question cannot yet be decided
adequately here. We shall have to wait for the exposition of this kind
of judgments in the treatise, to tell us whether these judgments carry
with them a universality and necessity that qualifies them for derivation from an a priori basis determining [the subject and his feeling46l.
If so, [suchl a judgment would indeed determine something by means
of the sensation47 of pleasure or displeasure, yet it would also determine a priori - through the cognitive power (specifically the power of
judgment)- something about the universality of the rule for connecting
this sensation with a given presentation. On the other hand, should
these judgments contain nothing but the relation between the presentation and the feeling lof pleasure or displeasure I (without mediation
by a cognitive principle), as is the case with aesthetic judgments of
46IThe receptivity. I
47[The individual feeling. I

VIII. ON THE AESTHETIC OF THE POWER OF JUDGING

419

sense (which are neither cognitive nor reflective), then all aesthetic
judgments would belong merely to the empirical realm.
For now, we may make this further comment: that from cognition
to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure there is no transition through
concepts of objects (insofar as these Iobjects] are to relate to that
[feeling]). Hence we must not expect to determine a priori Iwhat]
influence a given presentation Iwill] have on the mind. Similarly, in
the Critique of Practical Reason,48 while we noted that the presentation of a universal lawfulness in volition must-as a law contained, a
priori, in our moral judgments-also determine the will and thereby
must also arouse the feeling of respect. we were nonetheless unable to
derive this feeling from concepts. In the same way our analysis of aesthetic judgments of reflection will show that they contain the concept.
which rests on an a priori principle. of the formal but subjective
purposiveness of objects. aln indeterminate) concept that is basically
identical with the feeling of pleasure but cannot be derived from any
[determinate] concepts, even though it is to the possibility of concepts as such that our presentational power refers when it affects the
mind in reflecting on an object.
A definition of this feeling in general [termsl. without considering the distinction as to whether it accompanies sensation proper
[Sinnesempfindung j, 49 or accompanies reflection. or the determination of the will, must be transcendenta1. 5o It may read: Pleasure is
48lSee Ak. V,71-89.]
491I.e., sensation that involves a sense (in the ordinary meaning of this term), as
distinguished from feeling: see above, Ak. 291 br. n. 19.]
sOIf concepts are used as empirical principles and there is cause to suppose that there
is a kinship between them and the pure a priori cognitive power, then it is useful to
attempt to give a transcendental definition of them. We then proceed like the
mathematician, who makes it much easier to solve his problem by leaving the empirical
data in it undetermined and bringing the mere synthesis of them under the expressions
of pure arithmetic. I followed that procedure when (in the Kritik der praktischen
VernunJt, p. 16, in the Prefaces I ) I explicated the power of desire as the power of being
the cause, through ones presentations, of the actuality of the objects of these presentations.
But against this it was objected that the power of desire cannot be defined in this way,
because-so the objection goes-mere wishes are desires too, and yet each of us
knows that they Ialone I cannot produce their objects. But in fact this proves nothing
more than that the power of desire can also be determined in such a way that it
contradicts itself. This phenomenon is certainly important for empirical psychology

SIIOf the first edition (1788) of the Critique of Practical Reason, Ak. V,9n.]

230'

420

231'

232'

231 r

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

a mental state in which a presentation is in harmony with itself [and I
which is the basis either for merely preserving this state itself (for the
state in which mental powers further one another in a presentation
preserves itself) or for producing the object of this presentation. On
the first alternative the judgment about the given presentation is an
aesthetic judgment of reflection; on the second, a pathological aesthetic judgment or a practical aesthetic judgment. We can easily see
from [all ofl this: that, since pleasure [andl displeasure are not ways
of cognizing, they cannot at all be explicated on their own; that we
cannot have insight into them but can only feel them; and that
consequently we can explicate them only in a meager way, by the
influence that a presentation has by means of this feeling on the
activity of the mental powers.

(as, e.g .. it is important for logic to note the influence that prejudices have on the
understanding); but it must not influence how we define the power of desire considered
objectively, i.e., as to what it is in itself before anything at all interferes with Iablenken I
its being determined lin a certain way]. In fact man can desire something most
fervently and persistently even though he is convinced that he cannot achieve it, or that
it is perhaps even Isomething] absolutely impossible, e.g., if his wish is to undo what is
done. or if his desire land] longing is that a certain bothersome interval shQuld pass
faster, etc. And it is indeed an important article for morality to warn us emphatically
against such empty and fanciful desires, which are often nourished by novels and
sometimes also by mystical presentations, similar to novels. of superhuman perfections
and fanatical bliss. But some empty desires and longings, which lalternately] expand
the heart and make it languid I welil. do have their effect on the mind: they make it
languish Ischmachtenl by exhausting its forces; and even that effect Ialready I proves
sufficiently that these forces are indeed repeatedly made tense by presentations so as to
actualize their object, but that each time they allow the mind to relapse into the
consciousness of its impotence. [t is indeed a not unimportant problem for anthropology to investigate why it is that nature has given us the predisposition to such fruitless
expenditure of our forces as lwe see in] empty wishes and longings (which certainly
playa large role in human life). It seems to me that here, as in all else, nature has made
wise provisions. For if we had to IIlisure ourselves thai we can in fact produce the
object, before the presentation of it could determine us to apply our forces, our forces
would presumably remain largely unused. For usually we do not come to know what
forces we have except by trying them out. So nature has provided for the connection
between the determination of our forces and the presentation of the object Ito be
there] even before we know what ability we have, and it is often precisely this effort,
which to that very mind seemed at first an empty wish, that produces that ability in the
first place. Now wisdom is obligated to set limits to that instinct, but wisdom will never
succeed in eradicating it, or Irather) it will never even demand its eradication.

IX
On Teleological Judging
By a formal technic of nature I meant the purposiveness that nature
has in intuition; by real technic I mean the purposiveness it has in
terms of concepts.52 The formal technic of nature provides shapes
that are purposive for the power of judgment, i.e .• the [kind ofl form
where, as we present it, imagination and understanding harmonize
with each other on their own to make a concept possible. The real
technic of nature [involves] the concept of things as natural purposes,
i.e., as things whose inner possibility presupposes a purpose and
hence a concept that is the underlying condition of the causality
[responsible] for their production.
As far as purposive forms [in] intuition are concerned, judgment
itself can indicate and construct these a priori, namely if it finds
[eifindet] them to be such in l/iir] apprehension that they are suitable
for exhibiting a concept. But purposes, i.e., presentations that themselves are regarded as conditions of the causality [responsible] for
their objects (their effects), must always [uberhaupt] be given from
somewhere before judgment Ican] concern itself with the conditions
under which the manifold [will] harmonize with these purposes; and
if these purposes are to be natural purposes, then we must be able to
consider certain natural things as jf they were products of a cause
whose causality could be determined [to its action] only by apresentation of the object. But we cannot determine a priori how and in
what variety of ways things are possible through their causes; for that
we need empirical laws.
A judgment about the [kind ofl purposiveness in things of nature
that we consider the basis for their possibility (as natural purposes) is
called a teleological judgment. Now in the case of aesthetic judgments,
although they themselves are not possible a priori, yet a priori principles are given [us] in the necessary idea of experience as a system,S3
and these principles contain the concept of a fonnal purposiveness of
S2[The distinction, in these terms, was made above, Ak. 221'.J
53[Cf. above, Ak. 208'-09'.1

421

422
233'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

nature for our judgment and [so] reveal a priori the possibility of
aesthetic judgments of reflection as judgments based on a priori
principles. [ForI not only does nature in its transcendental laws harmonize necessarily with our understanding: in addition, nature in its
empirical laws harmonizes necessarily with judgment and its ability
to exhibit nature when the imagination apprehends nature's forms
empirically j [but I this harmony of nature with our judgment [is there]
merely for the sake of [systematizing] experience, and so nature's
formal purposiveness as regards this harmony (with judgment) can
still be established as necessary. But now nature, as object of our
teleological jUdging, is to be thought as harmonizing, in its causality,
with reason as well, as harmonizing with it in terms of the concept
reason forms of a purpose. That is more than we can require of
judgment alone; for all that judgment can do, as a separate cognitive
power, is to consider the relation, prior to any concept, in which two
powers-imagination and understanding-are in a presentation, and
thereby perceive, as the object is apprehended (by imagination), the
object's subjective purposiveness for the cognitive powers. Hence,
while judgment can indeed have a priori principles of its own for the
form of intuition, yet it cannot have a priori principles of its own for
the concepts [concerning] the production of things, and so the concept of a real natural purpose lies completely beyond the realm of the
power of judgment, considered by itself. Hence in [dealing with] the
teleological purposiveness things have as natural purposes, a purposiveness that can be presented only through concepts, judgment
will have to put the understanding in a relation to reason ([ while I
reason is not needed at all for experience) in order to present things
as natural purposes.
In judging natural forms aesthetically, we were able to find, without presupposing a concept of the object, that certain objects which
occur in nature are purposive in the mere empirical apprehension [of
them in] intuition, namely, purposive merely in relation to the subjective conditions of the power of judgment. So when we judged
aesthetically, no concept of the object was needed, nor was one
produced. By the same token, there we did not make an objective
judgment and declare these objects natural purposes, but declared
them only purposive in relation to the subject, namely, for his presentational power; we may call this purposiveness of forms figurative

IX.

ON TELEOlOGICAL JUDGING

423

purposiveness, and similarly for nature's technic concerning it (technica
speciosaS4 ).
In a teleological judgment, on the other hand, we presuppose a
concept of the object, and judge [howl the object is possible in terms
of a law about the connection of causes and effects. Hence this
technic of nature could be called plastic, if that word were not
already in vogue in a more general sense, as including not only
natural intentions but natural beauty as well. So perhaps we could
call it the organic technic of nature, since this expression does stand
for the concept of [al purposiveness for the possibility of things
themselves, not merely [al purposiveness for the way we present [theml.
But I suppose that what is most essential and important for this
section is this: It is the proof that the concept of Jinal causes in
nature-which separates the teleological judging of nature (rom a
judging of it in terms of universal, [Le.,] mechanical, laws-is a
concept that belongs merely to judgment, not to understanding or
reason. In other words, it is the proof that, while we could use the
concept of natural purposes in an objective sense too, Le., as [meaning]
natural intention. this use would already [involve I reasoning, and so
could not possibly be based on experience. For though experience
can show us purposes, nothing in it can prove that these purposes are
also intentions. So whenever we encounter, in experience, something
belonging to teleology, it refers objects of experience solely to judgment,
namely, to a principle of this power by which, as reflective judgment,
it legislates to itself (not to nature).
It is true that the concept of purposes and of purposiveness is a
concept of reason insofar as we attribute to reason the basis that
makes an object possible. But [the concept of the I purposiveness of
nature, or even the concept of things as natural purposes, relates
reason, as cause, to things where no experience informs us that
reason is [in fact I the basis that makes them possible. For only in
products oj art can we become conscious of reason's causality [as
giving rise to] objects, which are therefore called purposive or purposes;
and to call reason technical with regard to products of art is in
keeping with the experience we have of the causality of our own
power [of reason]. But to present nature as technical like a reason
S4[Technic regarding shape (or perhaps regarding appearance [to the subjectJ).]

234'

424
235'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

(and so attribute purposiveness and even purposes to nature) is [to
use) a special concept that we cannot find in experience; it is a
concept that judgment only puts into its reflection on objects, so as to
let this concept direct it as it engages in experience in terms of
particular laws, those that have to do with the possibility of a system.
For all purposiveness of nature can be regarded either as natural
(forma jinalis naturae spontanea) or as intentional ([forma jinalis
naturae I intentionalis55 ). Mere experience justifies only the first way
of presenting [the purposiveness of nature I; the second way of
presenting [itl is a hypothetical way of explaining [certain things]
which is an addition to the above concept of things as natural purposes.
The first concept of things, as natural purposes, belongs originally to
reflective judgment (though to judgment reflecting not aesthetically
but logically); the second concept [Le., of things as intentional natural
purposes, i.e., as purposes of nature 1belongs originally to determinative
judgment. For the first concept too we need reason, but here we need
it only in order to engage in experience in terms of principles (hence
this is reason in its immanent use); but for the second concept reason
would have to stray into what is excessive I for it I (hence this would be
reason in its transcendent use).
In our empirical investigation of nature in its causal connection,
we can and should endeavor to [proceed I in terms of nature's merely
mechanical laws as far as we can, for in these laws lie the true physical
bases for (ani explanation [of nature, the bases] which [in their I
coherence constitute what scientific knowledge of nature we have
through reason. On the other hand, we find among the products of
nature some special and very widespread genera, in which the efficient causes are connected in such a way that we must base this
connection on the concept of a purpose, if we want so much as to
experience [these natural products), Le., observe [them) in terms of a
principle appropriate to their inner possibility. Suppose we tried to
judge their form and its possibility merely in terms of mechanical
laws, where it is not the idea of the effect which is regarded as the
basis that makes [it) possible [forI the cause [to be the cause) of this
effect, but the other way round [the cause is regarded as the basis that
makes the effect possible I: if we tried this, we could not acquire
55[The distinction, as expressed in the Latin, is between spontaneous and intentional
purposive form of nature.]

IX.

ON TELEOLOGICAL JUDGING

425

regarding the specific form of these natural things even so much as an
empirical concept that would enable us to get from their intrinsic
predisposition, as cause, to the effect. For the effect we see in these
machines is caused by their parts not insofar as each part on its own
contains a separate basis, but only insofar as all of them together
contain a joint basis making these machines possible. But it is quite
contrary to the nature of physical-mechanical causes that the whole
should be the cause that makes possible the causality of the parts; rather,
here the parts must be given [us I first in order for us to grasp from
them the possibility of a whole. Moreover, when the special presentation of a whole precedes the possibility of the parts, then it is a mere
idea; and when this idea is regarded as the basis of the causality. it is
called a purpose. Clearly. then, if there are such products of nature,
we cannot even investigate their character and its cause in experience
(let alone explain them by reason) without presenting them, their
form and causality, as determined according to a principle of purposes.
Now, it is clear that in such cases the concept of an objective
purposiveness of nature serves [us] merely for reflecting on the
object, not for determining the object through the concept of a
purpose, and that the teleological judgment about the inner possibility of a natural product is a merely reflective and not a determinative
judgment. For example, if we say that the crystal lens in the eye has
the purpose of bringing about by means of a second refraction of the
light rays [the result I that the light rays emanating from one point will
be reunited in one point on the retina of the eye, all we are saying is
that our thought of the causality nature [exercised] in producing an
eye includcs thc thought of the presentation of a purpose, because
such an idea serves us as a principle by which we can guide our
investigation of the eye as far as its lens is concerned, and also
because thinking the presentation of a purpose here might [heipi us
devise means to further that effect [if the natural lens does not do so
adequately]. But in talking this way we do not yet attribute to nature a
cause that acts in terms of the presentation of purposes, i.e., intentionally; if we did, we would be making a determinative teleological
judgment, and hence a transcendent judgment, inasmuch as it [would I
suggest a causality that lies beyond the bounds of nature.
Hence the concept of natural purposes is a concept solely of
reflective judgment, a concept [it must use I solely for its own sake in
pursuing the causal connection in objects of experience. In [using] a

236'

426

237'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

teleological principle for explaining the inner possibility of certain
natural forms, we leave undetermined whether their purposiveness is
intentional or unintentional. If a judgment asserted either of these
alternatives. it would no longer be merely reflective but would be
determinative; and the concept of a natural purpose would also no
longer be a mere concept of the power of judgment, for immanent
use (i.e., use in experience), but would be connected with a concept
of reason: the concept of a cause that we posit beyond nature and
that acts intentionally, a concept that is transcendent, whether we are
in this case judging affirmatively or negatively.

x
On the Inquiry into a Principle
of Technical Judgment
If for something that happens we are to find merely the basis that explains it, this basis may be either an empirical principle, or an a priori
principle, or a combination of both, as we can see in the physicalmechanical explanations of events in the corporeal world, which find
their principles partly in universal (rational) natural science, and partly
in the natural science that contains the empirical laws of motion. The
situation is similar if we try to find psychological bases that explain
what goes on in our minds. The only difference here is that, as far as I
am aware, in the case of mental events the principles lof explanation]
are one and all empirical, with just one exception: the principle of the
continuity of all changes. (This principle is an exception because
time, which has only one dimension, is the formal condition of inner
intuition.)56 But although this principle lies a priori at the basis of these
perceptions, it is virtually useless for explanation, because the universal
theory [Lehre 57 ] of time, unlike the pure theory of space (geometry),
does not provide us with enough material for a whole science.
S6iSee the Critique of Pure Reason. A 30-49

=

846-73.1

S7[On Lehre as theory, see above. Ak. 172 br. n. 15.1

X.

ON THE INQUIRY INTO A PRINCIPLE. . .

427

Hence if our concern were to explain how what we call taste first
arose among people, how these objects [objects of taste) came to
occupy taste much more than others and induced people to make
judgments about beauty under varying local and societal circumstances,
what cause enabled taste to grow into a luxury, and so on, we would
have to seek the principles of such an explanation largely in psychology.
(In all cases like this, only empirical psychology is meant.) Thus
moralists demand that psychologists explain to them the strange
phenomenon of greed, where [people] posit an absolute value in the
mere possession of the means for living well (or the means for any
other aim), and yet [are J also resolved never to use them; or the desire
for distinction IEhrbegierde], where [people) think [they] find this
distinction in mere reputation, without Ihaving) any further aim. The
moralists demand this explanation so that they can adjust their precepts accordingly, not the precepts of the moral laws themselves, but
those concerning the removal of the obstacles that interfere with the
influence of the moral laws. Yet we must concede that psychological
explanations are in very sad shape compared to physical ones, that
they are forever hypothetical, and that for any three different bases
explaining la mental event] we can easily think up a fourth that is
equally plausible. And so we have a multitude of alleged psychologists
like this, who can tell us the causes of every mental response [Affektion I
or agitation aroused by plays, presentations of poetry, or objects of
nature-and will even call this ingenuity of theirs philosophy- [butl
who fail to show not only the knowledge, but perhaps even the
capacity for [acquiring] it, that is needed to explain scientifically the
most ordinary natural event in the corporeal world. Empirical psychology will hardly ever be able to claim the rank of a philosophical
science, and probably its only true obligation is to make psychological observations (as Burke does in his work on the beautiful and
sublime58 ), and hence to gather material for future empirical rules
that are to be connected systematically, yet to do so without trying to
grasp these rules.
Suppose, on the other hand, a judgment offers itself as universally
valid and hence claims necessity for what it asserts, whether this
alleged necessity rests on a priori concepts of the object, or on
subjective conditions underlying a priori [our acquisition ofl concepts.
;8lSee above, Ak. 277-78.1

238'

428

239'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

If we grant this sort of claim to such a judgment, it would be absurd if
we justified it by explaining the origin of the judgment psychologically,
since we would then be acting against our own aim: if the attempted
explanation were perfectly successful, it would prove that the judgment cannot possibly claim necessity, precisely because we can prove
that its origin is empirical.
Now aesthetic reflective judgments (which we shall later analyze
under the name of judgments of taste) are of the kind just mentioned:
they claim necessity; they do not say that everyone judges like thatin which case the task of explaining them would fall to empirical
psychology- but say that we ought to judge like that, which amounts to
saying that they have for themselves an a priori principle. If these
judgments, in claiming necessity, did not contain a reference to such a
principle, we would have to assume it legitimate to assert that the
judgment ought to hold universally because observation proves that it
actually holds universally, and to assert, conversely, that from the fact
that everyone judges a certain way it follows that he also ought to
judge that way. But that is obviously absurd.
It is true that aesthetic judgments of reflection manifest the difficulty that they are never based on concepts and hence cannot be
derived from a determinate principle, because then they would be
logical; landl the subjective presentation of purposiveness is in no
way to be a concept of a purpose. And yet, when a judgment claims
necessity, there still can and must always be a reference to an a priori
principle. This claim, and the possibility of such a claim, is all that is
at issue here; but the same claim prompts a rational critique to search
for the underlying principle itself, even if that principle is indeterminate.
That critique may in fact succeed in finding this principle, and
succeed in acknowledging it as one that underlies the judgment
subjectively and a priori, even though this principle can never provide a determinate concept of the object.

lAs we just did for aesthetic reflective judgments,} we must concede
that teleological judgments Itool are based on an a priori principle,
and are impossible without one, even though in such judgments we
discover the purpose of nature solely through experience, and without experience could not cognize that things of this kind are so much
as possible. For teleological judgments too, like aesthetic reflective

X.

ON THE INQUIRY INTO A PRINCIPLE. . .

429

judgments. are always only reflective, even though (unlike them) they
connect with the presentation of the object a determinate concept of
a purpose and regard the possibility of the object as based on that
concept. Teleological judgments in no way presume to assert that, in
this objective purposiveness. nature (or some other being [acting]
through nature) in fact proceeds intentionally. Le., that the causality
of nature or of nature's cause is determined [to its action) by the
thought of a purpose. All they assert is that we must use the mechani·
cal laws of nature in accordance with this analogy (relations of causes
and effects), if we are to cognize [how I such objects are possible, and
to acquire a concept of them that can provide those mechanical
laws with a coherence [that will allow us] to engage in experience
systematically.
A teleological judgment compares [two] concept[sj of a natural
product; it compares what [the product] is with what it is [meant] to
be. Here our judging of the object's possibility is based on a concept
(of a purpose) that precedes a priori [that possibility]. In products of
8rt we do not find it difficult to conceive of the possibility of objects
in this way. But if we think that a product of nature was [meant] to
be something. and judge the product as to whether it actually is
[that I. then we are already presupposing a principle that we cannot
have derived from experience (which teaches us only what things
are).
That our eyes allow us to see, this we experience directly, and we
also experience directly their outer structure and their inner structure,
which contain the conditions that make it possible to use them in this
way. and so we experience directly the causality [our eyes involve] in
terms of mechanical laws. Now if I use a stone to smash something on
it, or to build [something] on it, etc .• I can [regard] these effects too as
purposes [and] refer them to their causes; but that does not entitle me
to say that the stone was Imeant I to serve for building. Only about the
eye do I make the judgment that it was Imeant] to be suitable for
sight; and though its shape, the character of its parts and their
combination is quite contingent for my power of judgment if lit]
judges them in terms of merely mechanical laws of nature, yet I think
a necessity in this form and structure of the eye: Ithe) necessity of
being built a certain way, namely, in terms of a concept which
precedes [the action ofl the causes that build this organ. and without
which (unlike in the case of that stone) no mechanical law of nature

240'

430

241'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

will allow me to grasp the possibility of that natural product. Now this
isoto-be contains a necessity that differs distinctly from the physicalmechanical necessity under which a thing is possible in terms of mere
laws of efficient causes (without a prior idea of the thing). and it
cannot be defined [bestimmtJ through merely physical (empirical)
laws any more than the necessity of an aesthetic judgment can through
psychological laws; rather. it requires an a priori principle of its own
in the power of judgment insofar as that power is reflective, a principle under which teleological judgments fall and by which we must
also define their validity and limitation.
Hence all judgments about the purposiveness of nature, whether
they are aesthetic or teleological, fall under a priori principles: a
priori principles that belong exclusively to the power of judgment. as
its own principles, because tllese judgments are merely reflective and
not determinative. That is also why they belong to the critique of
pure reason (in the most general sense of that expression). Teleological judgments need this critique more than aesthetic judgments do.
For teleological judgments. if left to themselves, invite reason to
inferences that may stray into the transcendent. Aesthetic judgments,
on the other hand. require laborious investigation in order to keep
them from limiting themselves-even as regards their principle-to
just the empirical, and hence to keep them from destroying their
claims to necessary validity for everyone.

XI
Encyclopaedic Introduction
[Introduktion] of
the Critique of Judgment
into tile System of
the Critique of Pure Reason
Any introduction [Einleitung] of a discourse either introduces [us] to
a proposed doctrine [Lehrel. or introduces the doctrine itself into a
system to which it belongs as a part. The first kind of introduction
precedes the doctrine. The second kind should properly form only
the conclusion of the doctrine; there it should, in terms of principles,
assign the doctrine its place within the body of the doctrines to which
it is connected by common principles. The first kind of introduction
is a propaedeutic one, the second may be called encyclopaedic.
Propaedeutic introductions are the usual ones. They prepare us for
a doctrine about to be offered; for they point to whatever prior
cognition, from other doctrines or sciences already available, is needed
for this doctrine. and hence such introductions allow us to make the
transition. If they aim at distinguishing carefully the newly offered
doctrine's own principles ([principia I domestica) from those belonging to another doctrine ([principia] peregrina). then they serve to
determine the boundaries of the sciences-a precaution that can
never be recommended too much, since without it we cannot hope
for thoroughness, especially not in philosophical cognition.
What an encyclopaedic introduction presupposes, on the other
hand. is not a doctrine akin and preparatory to the newly announced
one, but the idea of a system that this doctrine will first render
complete. Now we cannot arrive at a system if we [merely] pick up
and gather together the diverse [items] we have found along the path of
investigation, but can do so only if we can indicate completely the subjective or objective sources of a certain kind of cognitions. For this we
need the formal concept of a whole, a concept that also contains a priori
the principle for a complete division [of that whole]. Hence we can

431

242'

432

243'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

easily grasp why encyclopaedic introductions, however useful they
would be, are yet so unusual.
Now the power whose own principle we are here trying to discover
and discuss-the power of judgment-is of a very special kind: it
does not on its own produce any cognition at all (whether theoretical
or practical); and regardless of its a priori principle it does not supply
a part [uf} transcendental philosophy as an objective doctrine, but
constitutes only the connection [Verbandl of two other higher cognitive powers (understanding and reason). Therefore, as I determine
the principles of such a power-one that is fit not for a doctrine but
merely for a critique- I may be permitted to depart from the order
that is indeed necessary elsewhere, and to begin [rather than conclude I with a brief encyclopaedic introduction of judgment. I shall
introduce this power not into the system of the sciences of pure
reason, but merely into the critique of all the powers of the mind that
can be determined a priori, insofar as together they constitute a
system in the mind. In this way I shall combine the propaedeutic
introduction with the encyclopaedic one.
The introduction of judgment into the system of the pure powers
of cognition through concepts rests on tbat power's own transcendental principle: the principle that nature, in the specification of the
transcendental laws of understanding (the principles of nature's possibility as a nature as such), Le., in tbe diversity of its empirical laws,
proceeds in terms of the idea of a system for dividing nature, so as to
make experience possible as an empirical system. This principle is
what first provides us, a priori, with the concept of a lawfulness that is
contingent objectively but necessary subjectively (for our cognitive
power)-the concept of a purposiveness of nature. Although this
principle determines nothing regarding the particular natural forms,
[and I their purposiveness must always be given 'us I empirically. still
the judgment about these forms, as a merely reflective judgment,
acquires a claim to universal validity and necessity. It does so because
in it the subjective purposiveness that a given presentation has for
judgment is referred to that a priori principle of judgment, the principle of the purposiveness nature' displays 1in its empirical lawfulness
in general. Hence we shall be able to regard aesthetic reflective judgments as resting on an a priori principle (even if not on a determinative one), and the power of judgment will, regarding these judgments,

XI.

ENCYCLOPAEDIC INTRODUCTION. . .

433

find itself entitled to a place in the critique of the higher pure powers
of cognition.
However, if the concept of a purposiveness of nature (as a technical purposiveness that differs essentially from practical purposiveness)
is not to be a mere fraudulent replacement of what nature is by what
we turn it into, then this concept lies outside of all dogmatic philosophy (both theoretical and practical): its sole basis is that principle of
judgment, which precedes empirical laws and first allows them to
harmonize to [forml the unity of a system. This shows that, of the two
ways (aesthetic and teleological) of using the reflective power of
judgment, the judgment that precedes any concept of the object, and
hence the aesthetic reflective judgment, is the only one in which the
basis determining [it] lies solely in the power of judgment, unmixed
with an[y] other cognitive power. Teleological judgments, on the
other hand, are judgments about the concept of a natural purpose;
and although in these judgments themselves we use this concept only
as a principle of the reflective rather than of the determinative power
of judgment, yet we can make these judgments only by connecting
reason with empirical concepts. Hence it is easy to show the possibility of teleological judgments about nature, without our being entitled
to regard them as based on a special principle of the power of
judgment, since [here I judgment merely follows the principle of reason.
By contrast, [in order to show] the possibility of a judgment of taste,
i.e., a judgment of mere reflection that is aesthetic and yet based on
an a priori principle, we certainly do need a critique of the power of
judgment as a power having (like understanding and reason) its own
transcendental principles, if it can be proved that an aesthetic reflective judgment is in fact justified in claiming universal validity. Only
such a critique Ican I qualify this Ipower of] judgment for acceptance
into the system of the pure cognitive powers. This is because, while
aesthetic judgments attribute purposiveness to their object, and do so
with universal validity, yet they do this without presupposing a concept of that object; and hence the principle for this Iattribution J must
lie in the power of judgment itself. Teleological judgments, on the
other hand, do presuppose a concept of the object, a concept that
reason brings under the principle of connection in terms of purposes,
and the only [special feature of these judgments] is that the power of
judgment uses this concept of a natural purpose in a merely reflective
and not in a determinative judgment.

244'

434

245'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

So it is actually only in taste, and in taste concerning objects of
nature Irather than of art 1, that judgment reveals itself as a power that
has its own principle and hence is justified-which in the case of this
power might come as a surprise-in claiming a place in the general
critique of the higher cognitive powers. But once judgment's ability to
set itself principles a priori is given, we must also determine the range
of that ability; and in order thus to complete the critique we must
cognize judgment's aesthetic ability, together with its teleological
ability, as contained in one ability and resting on the same principle,
since teleological judgments about things of nature belong to the
reflective (and not the determinative) power of judgment just as
much as aesthetic ones do.
Critique of taste, in other [contexts], is used only to improve or
solidify taste itself. But if the treatment of it has a transcendental aim,
then this critique fills a gap in the system of our cognitive powers, and
hence opens up a striking and-I think-most promising prospect
[for] a complete system of all the mental powers, insofar as in being
determined they are referred not just to the sensible but also to the
supersensible, though referred to it without any shifting of the boundary stones that a strict critique has laid down for such use of these
powers. To help the reader gain an overview of how the upcoming
inquiries cohere, it may be useful if I sketch even now an outline of
this systematic connection, even though its proper place, as indeed
that of this entire section, would be at the end of the treatise.
AU the powers of the mind can be reduced to the following
three:

cognitive power
feeling of pleasure and displeasure
power of desire
But employment of all three of these powers is always based on the
cognitive power, even if not always on cognition (since a presentation
can belong to the cognitive power and yet be (only) an intuition,
pure or empirical, without concepts). Hence, insofar as what we deal
with is the power of cognition according to principles, the following
higher mental powers take their place next to the mental powers in
general:

Xl.

ENCYCLOPAEDIC INTRODUCTION. . .

cognitive power

understanding

feeling 9f pleasure and displeasure

judgment

power of desire

reason

435

It turns out that understanding has its own a priori principles for the
cognitive power, judgment only for the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure, and reason merely for the power of desire. These formal
principles [righthand column, below] are the basis of a necessity.
Some of this necessity is objective, some subjective, but some by
being subjective is objectively valid too, [the alternative J depending
on [which) higher power it is, next to them [in the middle column].
through which these principles determine the [general] mental powers
Ileft column) corresponding to these:
cognitive power

understanding

lawfulness

feeling of pleasure and displeasure

judgment

purposiveness

power of desire

reason

purposiveness
that is also law
(obligation)

Finally, these a priori bases for the possibility of forms are joined by
the following forms, their products:
POWERS OF THE MIND

cognitive power

HIGHER
COGNITIVE
POWERS

A PRIORI

PRODUCTS

PRINCIPLES

understanding lawfulness

nature

feeling of pleasure and judgment
displeasure

purposiveness

power of desire

purposiveness morals
that is also law
(obligation)

reason

art

SO NATURE bases its lawfulness on a priori principles of the understanding as a cognitive power; ART is governed a priori in its

246'

436

247'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

purposiveness by judgment in reference to the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure; finally, MORALS (as product of freedom) fall under the idea
of such a form of purposiveness as is qualified to be universal law, as a
basis by which reason determines the power of desire. The judgments
that arise in this way from a priori principles belonging to each basic
power of the mind are theoretical, aesthetic, and practical judgments.
Thus we find a system of the mental powers in their relation to nature
and to freedom, each having its own determinative a priori principles
and hence constituting the two parts of philosophy (theoretical and
practical) as a doctrinal system, as well as a transition by means of
judgment, which connects the two parts through a principle of its
own. This transition is from the sensible substrate of theoretical
philosophy to the intelligible substrate of practical philosophy; iit is
made I through the critique of a power (judgment) that serves only for
imaking this I connection. Hence this power cannot on its own provide any cognition or contribute anything whatever to doctrine; but
its judgments-called aesthetic judgments (whose principles are merely
subjective), since they differ from all those that are called logical. i.e.,
from those (whether theoretical or practical) whose principles must
be objective- are of so special a kind that they refer sensible intuitions to an idea of nature in which inature's I lawfulness is beyond
[our I understanding unless [we I rela~e nature to a supersensible
substrate. The proof of this is in the treatise itself.
Rather than calling the critique ot'this power, with regard to its
aesthetic judgments, [anI aesthetic (doctrine of sense, as it were), we
shall call it critique of aesthetic judgment. 59 This is because the first
expression has too broad a meaning, since it could also mean the
sensibility of intuition. which belongs to theoretical cognition and
provides the material for logical (objective) judgments; that is why we
have already defined the expression, [anI aesthetic, exclusively as
Ihaving to do with] the predicate which in cognitive judgments belongs
to intuition. But we need not worry about being misinterpreted if we
call a power of judgment aesthetic because it does not refer the
presentation of an object to concepts and hence does not refer the
judgment to cognition (in other words, because it is not determinative
at all but only reflective), This is because for the logical power of
judgment intuitions, despite being sensible (aesthetic), must first be
59\10 fact, Kant does not always adhere to this stipulation. I

XI.

ENCYCWPAEDIC INTRODUCTION. . .

437

raised to [the level ofl concepts, so that they can serve for cognition
of the object; but this is not the case with the aesthetic power of
judgment.

XII
Division of the
Critique of Judgment
Dividing Ithe J range of a certain kind of cognitions, so that we can
conceive of it as a system, is more important than people realize, but
is also more difficult. If the parts of such a possible whole are
regarded as already completely given, the division is performed
mechanically, according to mere comparison, and the whole becomes
an aggregate (roughly as cities become if land is divided among
applicant settlers according to the intentions of each and without
concern for policy). But if before determining the parts we can, and
are to, presuppose the idea of a whole in terms of a certain principle,
then we must perform the division scientifically; and only in this way
does the whole become a system. The latter Iprocedure] is required
whenever we are dealing with a range of a priori cognition (which
together with its principles rests on a special legislative power of the
subject), since here the range within which these laws lean] be used is
determined a priori by the particular character of this power, but
through this is also determined the number of the parts and their
relation by means of which they form a whole of cognition. But one
cannot make a justified division without also making the whole itself
and exhibiting it completely beforehand in all its parts, even if only
according to the rule of la] critique. In order, thereafter, to put this
whole into the systematic form of a doctrine (insofar as, in view of the
nature of this cognitive power, there can indeed be a doctrine),
nothing more is needed than to add elaborateness Iin the J application
[of the division] to the particular, and the elegance of precision.
Now in order to divide a critique of judgment (this power. even
though based on a priori principles, is indeed one that can never

248'

438

249'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

provide the material for a doctrine), we must presuppose the distinction [between determinative judgment and reflective judgment, which
I shall now spell out]. It is not determinative judgment, but merely
reflective judgment, that has a priori principles of its own. Determinative judgment proceeds only schematically, under laws of another
power (the understanding), and reflective judgment alone proceeds
technically (according to laws of its own). This technical procedure is
based on a principle of the technic of nature, and hence on the
concept of a purposiveness, a purposiveness we must presuppose a
priori in nature. Judgment, in accordance with the principle of reflective judgment, presupposes this purposiveness necessarily [but] only
as subjective, i.e., judgment presupposes it only in relation to this
power itself. even though this purposiveness does also carry with it
the concept of a possible objective purposiveness, i.e., of a lawfulness
of things of nature as natural purposes.
A purposiveness which is judged merely subjectively, [and] which
therefore neither is based on a concept nor, insofar as it is judged
merely subjectively, can be based on one, is the reference [of something] to the feeling of pleasure and displeasure; and a judgment
about such a purposiveness is aesthetic (and this is moreover the only
possible way to judge aesthetically). However, [first,] if this feeling
accompanies merely the sensible presentation of the object, i.e., the
sensation of it, the aesthetic judgment is empirical and Ihence]
requires no special power of judgment, but only a special receptivity.
Moreover, [second,! if we assume this power as determinative, [the
judgment] would have to be based on a concept of [a] purpose, so
that the purposiveness would be objective and hence would have to
be judged logically, not aesthetically. Hence we must [adopt the third
alternative and] regard aesthetic judgment, [considered] as a special
power, as necessarily reflective judgment: and we must regard the
feeling of pleasure (which is identical with the presentation of subjective
purposiveness) as attaching neither to the sensation in an empirical
presentation of the object, nor to the concept of that object. but
consequently as attaching to- and as connected with, in terms of an a
priori principle-nothing but the reflection and its form ([i.e., with/
judgment's own act), [the reflection] by which judgment endeavors
[to proceed I from empirical intuitions to concepts as such. Hence the
aesthetic of reflective judgment will occupy one part of the critique
of this power, while the logic of reflective judgment constitutes,

XII. DIVISION OF THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

439

under the name of teleology, the other part of that critique. In both,
however, nature itself is regarded as technical, i.e., as purposive in
its products: in the aesthetic case we regard nature as purposive
subjectively, mere[ly] with reference to the subject's way of presenting
[something]; in the teleological case we regard nature as purposive
objectively, by reference to the possibility of the object itself. We shall
see later that the purposiveness that [a] form has in appearance is
beauty, and that our ability to judge it is taste. It might seem to follow
from this that the division of the critique of judgment into aesthetic
and teleological must comprise merely the theory [Lehre] of taste and
the theory of physical purposes (Le., of our judging of things of the
world as natural purposes).
And yet aU purposiveness, whether subjective or objective, can be
divided into intrinsic and relative. Intrinsic purposiveness has its
basis in the presentation of the object itself, relative purposiveness
merely in the contingent use of this presentation. Accordingly, [to
start with subjective purposiveness, there is,] first, [the case of beauty,
intrinsic subjective purposiveness,l where the form of an object even
on its own, i.e., in mere intuition [and J without concepts, is perceived
as purposive for reflective judgment, and here we attribute the subjective purposiveness to the thing and to nature itself; second, (there is
the case of sublimity, relative subjective purposiveness: J even assuming that the object, when we perceive it, has nothing for our reflection
that [would) be purposive for a[nyl determination of its form, yet
[here J the presentation of it, applied to a purposiveness lying a priori
in the subject (such as the supersensible vocation of the subject's
mental powers) and [so) arousing a feeling of this purposiveness, is
the basis of a [different J aesthetic judgment: this aesthetic judgment
also refers to an a priori principle (though this principle is only
subjective), but-unlike the first kind of aesthetic judgment-it refers
not to a purposiveness of nature concerning the subject, but only to a
possible purposive use which, by means of merely reflective judgment,
Iwe can make J of certain sensible intuitions as far as their form is
concerned. If, then, the first kind of aesthetic judgment attributes
beauty to objects of nature, while the second attributes sublimity, but
with both judgments doing so merely aesthetically (reflectively), without concepts of the object, but merely in regard to subjective
purposiveness, still the latter kind of aesthetic judgment would not
require us to presuppose a special technic of nature; for all that

250'

440

251'

FIRST INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

matters in that judgment is a contingent use [we make I of the
presentation, not for the sake of cognizing the object but for the sake
of a different feeling [different from the feeling involved in beauty]
- the feeling of the inner purposiveness in the predisposition of our
mental powers. Yet, on the other hand, the judgment about the
sublime in nature could not [on that account] be excluded from the
division of the aesthetic of reflective judgment, because it too expresses
a subjective purposiveness that does not rest on a concept of the
object.
The same [distinction, between intrinsic (inner) and relative,]
applies also to objective purposiveness of nature, i.e., to the possibility of things as natural purposes, which we judge. in a judgment called
teleological, only in terms of concepts of these [natural purposes!.
and hence not aesthetically (in reference to the feeling of pleasure or
displeasure) but logically. Objective purposiveness is the purposiveness
on which we base either the inner [inner] possibility of the object or
the relative possibility of its outward consequences. In the first case
the teleological judgment considers the perfection of a thing in terms
of a purpose that lies in that thing itself (where the manifold [elements]
in it relate to one another as purpose[s] and means); in the second
case the teleological judgment about a natural object deals only with
its usefulness, i.e.. with [whether I the object harmonizes with a
purpose that lies in other things.
Accordingly, the critique of aesthetic judgment contains, first, the
critique of taste (the ability to judge the beautiful); second, the
critique of intellectual feeling, 60 which is what I provisionally call
the ability to present a sublimity in objects. Since the teleological
power of judgment refers its presentation of purposiveness to the
object not by means of feelings but rather through concepts, [Le.,]
since it refers its reflection always to reason (not to feeling). we do not
need special names in order to distinguish the abilities it contains,[as
pertaining, respectively, to] intrinsic and relative [purposiveness I (though
in both cases the purposiveness is objective).
A further comment is needed: It is not the causality of man's
presentational powers, which is called art (in the proper sense of that
term), but rather the technic in nature, concerning which we are here
investigating purposiveness as a regulative concept of judgment; and
601Geistesgefiihl;

see above, Ak. 335 br. n. 76.1

XII. DIVISION OF THE CRITIQUE OF JUDGMENT

441

we are not here inquiring into the principle of artistic beauty or of an
artistic perfection, even though, when we consider nature as technical (or plastic), because we must present its causality by an analogy
with art, we may call nature technical in its procedure, i.e., as it were,
artistic. For we are dealing with the principle of merely reflective and
not of determinative judgment (determinative judgment underlies all
human works of art), and in the case of reflective judgment the
purposiveness is to be considered unintentional and hence can belong
only to nature [but not to art). Our judging of artistic beauty will have
to be considered, afterwards, as a mere consequence of the same
principles that underlie judgments about natural beauty.
Hence the critique of reflective judgment regarding nature will
consist of two parts: the critique of our aesthetic and the critique of
our teleological ability to judge things of nature.
The first part will contain two books: the first will be the critique
of taste, or of our judging of the beautiful, the second the critique of
intellectual feeling (in mere reflection on an object) or of our judging
of the sublime.
The second part also contains two books: the first will bring under
principles our judging of things as natural purposes as regards their
inner possibility. the other judgments about their relative purposiveness.
Each of these books will contain two divisions, an analytic and a
dialectic of the ability to judge.
The analytic will seek to accomplish, again in two chapters, first
the exposition and then the deduction of the concept of a purposiveness
of nature.

SELECTED
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A. EDITIONS OF THE GERMAN TEXT
1. Original Editions
Crilik der Urtheilskraft von Immanuel Kant. Berlin and Libau: Lagarde und
Friederich, 1790.
Critik der Urtheilskraft von Immanuel Kant. 2d ed. Berlin: F. T. Lagarde,
1793.
Critik der Urtheilskraft von Immanuel Kant. 3d ed. Berlin: F. T. Lagarde,
1799.

2. Contemporary Editions
Akademie edition: Kants gesammelte Schriften. Koniglich Preutlische Akademie
der Wissenschaften. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co. and Predecessors,
1902-. The third Critique, ed. Wilhelm Windelband, is in vol. 5 (1908); the
First Introduction, ed. Gerhard Lehmann, is in vol. 20 (1942).
Philosophische Bibliothek edition: Kants siimtliche Werke. Leipzig: Felix
Meiner Verlag, 1921-40. The third Critique, ed. Karl Vorlander, is in vol.
39a (1924); the First Introduction. ed. Gerhard Lehmann, is in vol. 39b
(1927). Second edition of the First Introduction: Erste Einleitung in die
Kritik der Urteilskraft; nach der Handschrift. Ed. Gerhard Lehmann.
Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, 1970.
Cassirer edition: Immanuel Kants Werke. Ed. Ernst Cassirer. Berlin: Bruno
Cassirer, 1912-22. The third Critique as well as the First Introduction,
both edited by Otto Buek, are in vol. 5 (1914).
Further edition of the First Introduction: FaksimiledlUck der Ersten Einleitung
in die Kritik der Urteiifkraft. Ed., with an introduction. by Norbert Hinske
et al. Stuttgart: Fromman-Holzboog, 1965.

B. PREVIOUS ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS
Critique of Judgment. Trans., with an introduction, by J. H. Bernard. London:
Macmillan & Co., 1892. 2d ed., rev.. 1914.
The Critique of Aesthetic Judgment. Trans.. with seven introductory essays,
notes, and analytical index, by James Creed Meredith. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1911.
The Critique of Teleological Judgment. Trans., with introduction, notes, and

443

444

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

analytical index, by James Creed Meredith. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1928.
The Critique of Judgment. Trans., with analytical indexes, by James Creed
Meredith. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952. (Reprint of the above two editions
without the introductions and notes.)
Analytic of the Beautiful from the Critique of Judgment, with Excerpts from
Anthropology from a Pragmatic Poi711 of View. Trans., with an introduction,
comments, and notes, by Walter Cerf. Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc., 1963.
First Introduction to the Critique of Judgment. Trans. James Haden. Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc., 1965.
Immanuel Kant on Philosophy in General. (Translation of the First Introduction.) Trans., with four essays, by Homayun Kabir. Calcutta: The University
Press, 1935.

C_ OTHER WORKS BY KANT
CITED IN THIS TRANSLATION
Volume and page numbers refer to the original texts in the Akademie
edition. The index lists these works under their English titles, as given
here.
Announcement That a Treatise on Perpetual Peace in Philosophy Is Nearly
Completed (VerkWidigung des nahen Abschlusses eines Traktats zum ewigen
Frieden in der Philosophie). Vol. 8,411-22.
Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point oj View (Anthropologie in pragmatischer
Hinsicht). Vol. 7, 117-333.
Brief Outline of Some Reflections Concerning Fire (Meditationum quarundam
de igne succincta delineatio). Vol. 1, 369-84.
Critique of Practical Reason (Kririk der praktischen Vernunft). Vol. 5, 1-163.
Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vemunft). Vol. 3; vol. 4, 1-252.
Dispute Among the University's Schools (Streit der Fakultiiten). Vol. 7,
1-116.
Dreams of a Spirit-Seer (Traume eines Geistersehers). Vol. 2, 315-73.
The End of All Things (Vas Ende aller Dinge). Vol. 8, 325-39.
Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals (Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der
Sitten). Vol. 4, 385-463.
Idea for a Universal History from a Cosmopolitan Point of View (Idee zu
einer allRemeinen Geschichte in weltbiirgerlicher Absicht). Vol. 8, 15-31.
Logic (Logik). Vol. 9, 1-150.
Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science (Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde
der Naturwissenschaften). Vol. 4, 465-565.
Metaphysics of Morals (Metaphysik der Sitten). Vol. 6, 203-493.
New Elucidation of the First Principles of Cognition in Metaphysics (Principorum primorum cognitionis metaphysicae nova dilucidatio). Vol. 1, 385416.

SELECTED BmLIOGRAPHY

445

Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime (Beobachtungen
Wher das Gefiihl des SchOnen und Erhabenen). Vol. 2, 205-56.
On a Discovery According to Which Any New Critique of Pure Reason Has
Been Made Superfluous by an Earlier One (Ober eine Entdeckung, nach
der aile Kritik der reinen Vemunft dureh eine iiltere entbehrlick gemackt werden soll). Vol. 8, 185-251.
The Only Possible Basis of Proof for Demonstrating the Existence of God
(Der einzig mOgliche Beweisgrund zu einer Demonstration des Daseina
Gottes). Vol. 2, 63-163.
On Medicine of the Body, as far as This Discipline Belongs 10 Philosophy (De
medicina corporis, quae philosophorum est). Vol. 15,939-53.
On the Dignified Tone Recently Adopted in Philosophy (Von einem neuerdinga
erhobenen vomehmen Ton in der Philosophie). Vol. 8, 387-w6.
On the Failure of All Philosophical Endeavors in Theodicy (Uber das MijJlingen
aller pkilosophischen Versuche in der Theodizee). Vol. 8, 253-71.
On the Fonn and Principles of the Senaible and Intelligible World (De mundi
sensibilis atque intelligibilis Janna et principiis). Vol. 2, 385-419.
On the Progress of Metaphysics since I.eibniz and Wolff (Ober die Fortschritte
der Metaphysik seit Leibniz' und WoUls Zeiten). Vol. 20, 253-351.
On the Saying: That May Be Correct in Theory but Is Inadequate for Practice
(Uber den Gemeinspruch: Das mag in der Theorie richtig sein, taugt aber
niehl flir die Praxis). Vol. 8, 273-313.
On the Various Races of Human Beings (Von den verschiedenen Rassen der
Menschen). Vol. 2, 427-43.
On Using Teleological Principles in Philosophy (Uber den Gebrauch teleologischer Prinzipien in der Philosophie). Vol. 8, 157-84.
Perpetual Peace (Zum ewigen Frieden). Vol. 8, 341-86.
Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (Prolegomena zu einer jeden kUnftigen
Metaphysik . .. ). Vol. 4, 253-383.
Religion within the Bounds of Reason Alone (Die Religion innerhalb deT
Grenzen der blo,Pen Vemunft). Vol. 6, 1-202.
Thoughts on the True Estimation of Living Forces (Gedanken von der wahren
Schtirzung der lebendigen Krlt{te). Vol. 1, 1-181.
Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens (Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels). Vol. 1, 215-368.
What Does It Mean: to Orient Oneself in One's Thought? (Was heijJt: sich im
Denken orientieren?) Vol. 8, 131-47.

D. EIGHTEENTH CENTURY BACKGROUND
WORKS CITED IN THIS TRANSLATION
Further works of the eighteenth-century Gennan, British, and French
background are listed in the bibliography of Cohen & Guyer (see F
below),310-12.

446

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Baumgarten. Alexander Gottlieb. Aesthetica. 2 vols. Frankfurt an der Oder.
1750-58. Reprint. Hildesheim: Georg Holms Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1961.
Burke. Edmund. A Philosophical Enquiry Into the Origin of Our Ideas of the
Sublime and Beautiful. London: R. & J. Dodsley, 1757. Modern edition.
Ed .• with an introduction and notes, by James T. Boulton. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul. 1958.
Hume, David. Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. Ed., with commentary,
by Nelson Pike. Indianapolis: The Babbs-Merrill Company, 1970.
- - . An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Ed., with an introduction, by Eugene Freeman. La Salle: Open Court Publishing Company,
1907 (2d ed., 1966).
- - . Essays. Moral and Political. Edinburgh, 1741-42.
- - . Of the Standard of Taste and Other Essays. Ed. John W. Lenz.
Indianapolis: The Babbs-Merrill Company, 1965.
- - . A Treatise of Human Nature. Ed., with an analytical index. by t. A.
Selby-Bigge. 2d ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1888.
Hutcheson, Francis. An Inquiry Concerning Beauty, Order. Harmony. Design.
Ed .• with an introduction and notes, by Peter Kivy. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1973.
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. 1. W. Yolton.
2 vols. New York: E. P. Dutton Company, 1961.
Meier, Georg Friedrich. Anfangsgriinde allerschonen Wissenschaften. Halle
im Magdeburgischen, 1754. Modern edition. Hildesheim and New York:
Georg Holms Verlag, 1976.
Mendelssohn. Moses. aber das Erhabene und Nai've in den schOnen Wissen·
schaften. 1758. In Moses Mendelssohn, Asthetische Schriften in Auswahl.
Ed. Otto F. Best. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1974.

E. SECONDARY SOURCES
CITED IN THIS TRANSLATION
Allison, Henry E. Kant's Transcendental Idealism. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983.
Beck, Lewis White. A Commentary on Kant's Critique of Practical Reason.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1960.
- - . "A Prussian Burne and a Scottish Kant." In Essays on Kant and Hume.
111-29. New Haven: Yale University Press. 1978.
- - . Early German Philosophy: Kant and His Predecessors. Cambridge,
Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1969.
Butts, Robert E. Kant and the Double Government Methodology. Dordrecht.
Boston, Lancaster: D. Reidel Publishing Company. 1984.
Cohen. Ted. "Why Beauty Is a Symbol of Morality." In Essays in Kant's
Aesthetics. Ed. Ted Cohen and Paul Guyer. 221-36. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1982.
Cramer, Konrad. "Non-Pure Synthetic A Priori Judgments in the 'Critique of
Pure Reason.''' Proceedings of the Third International Kant Congress.
246-54. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1972.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

447

Crawford, Donald W. Kant's Aesthetic Theory. Madison: The University of
Wisconsin Press, 1974.
Ellington, James W. Translator's Introduction to Kant's Prolegomena. In
Immanuel Kant, Philosophy of Material Nature, ix-xix. Indianapolis: Hackett
Publishing Company, 1985.
Guyer, Paul. Kant and the Claims of Taste. Cambridge, Mass. and London:
Harvard University Press, 1979.
McFarland. John D. Kant's Concept of Teleology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1970.
Pluhar, Werner S. "How to Render ZweckmiijJigkeit in Kant's Third Critique."
In Interpreting Kant. Ed. Moltke S. Gram. 85-98. Iowa City: University of
Iowa Press, 1982.
Wallace. William. Kant. Philadelphia: 1. B. Lippincott Company, no date.

F. SOME FURTHER MAJOR AND
CONTEMPORARY SECONDARY SOURCES
IN ENGLISH
Additional book-length studies, besides those included in E above,
are listed in the bibliography of Cohen & Guyer (see below, in this
section),312-16.
Cassirer. Heinrich Walter. A Commentary on Kant's Critique of Judgment.
London: Methuen & Co., 1938. Reprint. London and New York: Methuen
& Co. and Barnes & Noble. 1970.
Cohen. Ted. and Paul Guyer, ed. Essays in Kant's Aesthetics. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press, 1982.
Coleman. Francis X. 1. The Harmony of Reason: A Study in Kant's Aesthetics.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1974.
Schaper. Eva. Studies in Kant's Aesthetics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh UniverSity
Press, 1979.
Uehling. Theodore E., Jr. The Notion of Form in Kant's Critique of Aesthetic
Judgment. De Proprietatibus Litterarum, Series Minor. 5. The Hague:
Mouton & Co., 1971.

G. FURTHER SECONDARY SOURCES IN ENGLISH
AND SELECTED FOREIGN LANGUAGES
This list supplements. updates, and broadens the excellent one in
Cohen & Guyer (see F above), 312-23. In particular, it excludes
works dealing specifically with aesthetics that are already listed in
Cohen & Guyer, whose bibliography heavily (and appropriately) emphasizes aesthetics. See also Anthony C. Genova, "Selected Bibliography:

448

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Kant's Critique of Judgment," Philosophy Research Archives, 5 (1979).
Since the list below is again dominated somewhat by aesthetics,
works focusing expressly on other major subjects are marked, for
convenience, in the outside margin, as follows:

=

T (physical) teleology, including physical theology
M = moral teleology, including moral theology and rational faith in the
existence of God and in immortality
U = unity of the critical system
M
T

T

Adams, Robert Merrihew. "Moral Arguments for Theistic Belief:' In Rationality
and Religious Belief Ed. C. F. Delaney. Notre Dame: University of Notre
Dame Press, 1979, 116-40.
Adickes, Erich. Kant als Naturforscher. Berlin, 1924-25.
Agich, George J. "Lewis White Beck's Proposal of Meta·Critique and the
'Critique of Judgment.''' Kant-Studien, 74 (1983), 261-70.
Ameriks, Karl. "Huw to Save Kant's Deduction of Taste." Journal of Value
Inquiry, 16 (1982), 295-302.
- - . "Kant and the Objectivity of Taste." British JouTTUlI of Aesthetics, 23
(1983),3-17.
- - . Kant's Theory of Mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982.
Andersen, Svend. Ideal und SinguJaritiit; Ober die Funktion des Gottssbegriffs
in Kants theoretischer Philosophie. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1983.
Aquila. Richard E. "A New Look at Kant's Aesthetic Judgment." Kant-

Studien, 70 (1979), 17-34.
M

u
T
M

Auxter, Thomas. Kant's Moral Teleology. Macon: Mercer University Press.
1982.
Baeumler, Alfred. Das Irrationalitiitsproblem in der Asthetik und Logik des
18. lahrhunderts; Kants Kritik der Urteilskraft. Ihre Ge5chichte und
Systematik. Vol. 1 (the only volume published). Halle: Max Niemeyer,
1923. Reprint. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1967.
- - . Das Problem der Aligemeingilitigkeit in Kants Asthetik. Munich, 1915.
Barker, Stephen. "Kant on Experiencing Beauty." In Essays on Aesthetics.
Ed. John Fisher. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1983, 69-85.
Bartuschat, Wolfgang. "Neuere Arbeiten zu Kants Kritik der Urteilskraft."
Philosophische Rundschau. 18 (1972), 161-89.
--. Zum systematischen Ort von Kanis Kritik der Urteilskrtlft. Philosophische Abhandlungen. 43. Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostennann, 1972.
Bauch, Bruno. Imf1llJnuel Kant. Berlin and Leipzig: Vereinigung wissen·
schaftlicher Verleger, 1921 (1917).
Baumanns. Peter. Das Problem der organischen ZweclcmliPigiflit. Bonn,
1965.
Baumer, William H. "Kant and 'God Is': A Reply to Mr. Engel." KantStudien, 55 (1964).498-504.
Baumgart. Hermann. "Ober Kants Kritik der aesthetischen Urteilskraft."

AltpreufJische MOlUJlsschrift, 23 (1886), 258-82.
Beardsley, Monroe C. Aesthetics from Classical Greece to the Present,

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

449

209-25. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1966.
Beck, Lewis White. "Kant on the Uniformity of Nature." Synthese. 47 (1981),
449-64.
- - . "Was haben wir von Kantgelernt?" Kant-Studien. 72 (1981), I-tO.
Benedikt, Michael. Bestimmende und reflektierende Urteilskraft. Reihe
Referate 4 der Klagenfurter Beitrage zur Philosophie. Ed. J. Huber and
Thomas Macho. Vienna: Verlag des Verbandes der wissenschaftlichen
Gesellschaften Osterreichs. 1981.
Bolzano, Bernard. "Ober den Begriff des Schonen. Eine philosophische
Abhandlung." Prague, 1843. In Bernard Bolzano, Untersuchungen zur
Grundlegung der Asthetik. Frankfurt am Main, 1972.
Bommersheim, Paul. "Der Begriff der organischen Selbstregulation in Kants
Kritik der Urteilskraft." Kant-Studien, 23 (1919).
- - . "Der vierfache Sinn der inneren Zweckmafligkeit in Kants Philosophie
des Organischen." Kant-Studien 32 (1927),290-309.
Brocker, Walter. Kants Kritik der iisthetischen Urteilskraft. Marburg, 1928.
Bubner, Rudiger. "Ober einige Bedingungen gegenwiirtiger Asthetik." Neue
Heftefor Philosophie, 5 (1973), 38-73.
Buchdahl. Gerd. "Der Begriff der Gesetzmiifligkeit in Kants Philosophie der
Naturwissenschaft." In Zur Kantforschung der Gegenwart. Ed. Peter Heintel
und Ludwig Nagl. Darmstadt. 1981,90-121.
Buttner, Manfred. "Kant and the Physico-theological Consideration of the
Geographical Facts." Organon, 1975,231-49.
Butts, Robert E. "Hypothesis and Explanation in Kant's Philosophy of Science;'
Archiv for Geschichte de,. Philosophie, 43 (1961),153-70.
- - . "Kant on Hypothesis in the 'Doctrine of Method' and the Logik."
Archiv fiir Geschichte der Philosophie, 44 (1962), 185-203.
Byrne, Peter. "Kant's Moral Proof of the Existence of God." Scottish Journal
of Theology, 32 (1979),333-43.
Caird, Edward. The Critical Philosophy of Immanuel Kant. Glasgow,
1889.
Carchia, Gianni. "l..e rovine della rappresenlazione. l..etture della Critica del
Giudizio. " Rivista di Estetica (Padua), 21 (1981),57-84.
Carritt, E. F. "The Sources and Effects in England of Kant's Philosophy of
Beauty." Monist, 35 (1925). 315-28.
Chung-Yuan, Chang. "Kant's Aesthetics and the East." Journal of Chinese
Philosophy, 3 (1976), 399-411.
Collins, James. "Functions of Kant's Philosophy of Religion." Monist, 60
(1977), 157-80.
Copleston, Frederick. '~esthetics and Teleology." In his A History of Philosophy,
v. 6. New York: Doubleday, Image Books, 1964.
Cortina Orts, Adela. Dios en la filosofia trascendental de Kant. Biblioteca
Salmanticensis, Studios 36. Salamanca: Universidad Pontifica, 1981.
- - . "Los intereses de la rawn en el criticismo kantiano." Estudios de
Metajlsica, 4 (1974), 81-95.
- - . "El lugar de Dios en el sistema trascendental kantiano."
Pensamiento, 37 (1981),401-16.

T
T

T
T
T
T
M

M

M,U
M,U
M,U

450

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

M,U

- - . "La teologia trascendental. el mas elevado punto de vista de la filosofia
trascendental kantiana." Annafes del Seminaria de Metaf(sica, 13 (1978).

U

Cox, 1. Gray. "The Single Power Thesis in Kant's Theory of the Faculties."
Man and World, 16 (1983), 315-33.
Crawford, Donald W. "Kant's Prillciples of Judgment and Taste." Proceedings
of the Sixth International Kant Congress. Forthcoming.
- - . "The Place of the Sublime in Kant's Aesthetic Theory." In The
Philosophy of Immanuel Kant. Ed. Richard Kennington. Washington: Catholic University of America Press, 1985. 161-83.
- - . "The Unity of Kant's Three Critiques." The Heraclitean Society. The
Heritage of Kant. 1 (1974),309-26.
Crowther, Paul. "Fundamental Ontology and Transcendental Beauty: An
Approach to Kant's Aesthetics." Kant-Studien. 76 (1985), 55-71.
- - . "Kant and Greenberg's Varieties of Aesthetic Formalism." The Journal
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism. 42 (1984), 442-45.
Danzel, Theodor Wilhelm. "Ober den gegenWiirtigen Zustand der Philosophie
der Kunst und ihre nachste Aufgabe." In his Gesammelte Aufsiitze. Ed.
Otto Jahn. Leipzig, 1855.
Debrock, G. "Enkele Beschouwingen over de Status van teleologische
Bewerungen." Algemeen Nederlands Tijdschrift voor Wijsbegeerte. 73 (1981),

47-66.

U

T

151-67.
T
U

U

T
T

Debru. Claude. "Vintroduction du concept d'organisme dans la philosophie
kantienne." Archives de Philosophie. 43 (1980),487-517.
Deleuze, Gilles. Kant's Critical Philosophy: The Doctrine of the Faculties.
Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam. Minneapolis: Unive~ity
of Minnesota Press. 1984.
Dissanayake, Ellen. "Aesthetic Experience and Human Evolution." The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism. 41 (1982),145-55.
Dobrileit-Helmich, Margitta. "Asthetik bei Kant und Schopenhauer." Schopenhauerlahrbuch, 64 (1983),125-37.
Donaldson, Th. J. "Connecting Nature and Freedom in Kant's Third Critique."
Aus[egung. 1-2 (1973-75),98-107.
Driesch, Hans. "Kant und das Ganze." Kant-Studien. 29 (1924).
Duque, Felix. "Teleologie und Leiblichkeit beim spilten Kant." Kant-Studien.

75 (1984),381-97.
T

T

Dusing, Klaus. Die Teleologie in Kanrs WeltbegriJf. Kantstudien Ergllnzungshefte, 96. Bonn: H. Bouvier Verlag, 1968.
Engfer. Hans-Jiirgen. "Ober die Unabdingbarkeit teleoiogischen Denkens.
Zum Stellenwert der reflektierenden Urteilskraft in Kants kritischer Philosophie." In Formen teleologischen Denkens. Philosophische und wissensclulftshistorische Analysen. Kolloquiurn an der Technischen Universitiit Berlin
WS 1980/81. Ed. Hans Poser. Berlin, 1981, 119-160.
Erdmann, Johann Eduard. Geschichte der neuern Philosophie. Vol. 3, 1.
Leipzig, 1848.
Falk, Barrie. "The Communicability of Feeling." In Pleasure, Preference and
Value: Studies in Philosophical Aesthetics. Ed. Eva Schaper. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1983,57-85.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

451

Ferreira, M. Jamie. "Kant's Postulate: The Possibility or the Existence of
God?" Kant-Studien, 74 (1983),75-80.
Flach, Werner, "Zu KanIS Lehre von der symbolischen Darstellung." KantStudien, 73 (1982),452-62.
Fontan, Pierre. "L'unire du kantisme." Revue Thomiste, 76 (1976), 576-90_
Forrest, William. "Philosophical Anthropology and the Critique of Aesthetic
Judgment." Kant-Studien, 46 (1954-55).
Freudenberg, G. Die Rolle von Schonheit und Kunst im System der Transzendentalphilosophie. Meisenheim am Glan: A. Hain, 1960.
Frost, Walter. "Kants Teleologie." Kant-Studien, 11 (1906).
Funke, Gerhard. "Logik, Systematik, Architektonik in der Transzendentalphilosophie Kants." In Oberlieferung und Aufgabe. Festschrift {iir Erich
Heintel zum 70. Geburtstag. Ed. Herta Nagl-Docekal. Vol. 1. Vienna, 1982,

M

U
U
T
U

23-34.
Gadarner, Hans-Georg. "On the Problematic Character of Aesthetic Consciousness." Graduate Faculty Philosophy Journal, 9 (1982), 31-40.
Gambazzi, Paolo. Sensibilita, immaginazione e bellezza. Introduzione alia
dimensione estetica nelle tre Critic he eli Kant. Verona, 1981.
Gauthier, David. "The Unity of Reason: A Subversive Reinterpretation of
Kant." Ethics, 96 (1985), 74-88.
Genova, Anthony C. "Aesthetic Justification and Systematic Unity in Kant's
Third Critique." Proceedings of the Sixth International Kant Congress.
Forthcoming.
- - . "Kant's Complex Problem of Reflective Judgment." Review of Metaphysics, 23 (1970), 452-80.
- - . "Kant's Three Critiques: A Suggested Analytical Framework." KantStudien, 60 (1968-69),135-46.
- - . "The Purposive Unity of Kant's Critical Idealism." Idealistic Studies. 5

U
U

U
U

(1975),177-89.
Gilbert, Kathryn. and Helmut Kuhn. A History of Esthetics. Ch. 11. New
York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1939.
Gilead, Amihud. "Restless and Impelling Reason: On the Architectonic of
Human Reason, According to Kant." Idealistic Studies, 15 (1985),137-50.
- - . "Teleological Time: A Variation on a Kantian Theme." Review of
Metaphysics. 38 (1985), 529-62.
Gniffke, Franz. "Ober den Geschmack kann man streiten. Asthetisches Urteil
und Genie bei Kant." In Die Kunst gibt zu denken. aber dIlS Verhaltnis von
Philosophie und Kunst. Eds. Ursula Franke and Volker Gerhardt. Munster,

U
T

1981.32-53.
Gomez Cafiarena, Jose. "Fe racional y existencia de dios." Revista de Filosofla.
Ser. 2. vol. 4 (1981),179-95.
Gordon, Kate. "Criticism of Two of Kant's Criteria of the Aesthetic." In
Essays in Honor of John Dewey. New York: Henry Holt, 1929, 148-55.
Gram, Moltke S. "Intellectual Intuition: The Continuity Thesis." Journal of
the History of Ideas, 42 (1981), 287-304.
Graubner. Hans. "Kant (1724-1804)." In Klassiker der Literaturtheorie. Von
Boileau bis Barthes. Ed. Horst Turk. Munich, 1979,35-61.
Gregor, Mary J. "Aesthetic Form and Sensory Content in the Critique of

M

452

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Judgment. " In The Philosophy of Immanuel Kant. Ed. Richard Kennington.
Washington: Catholic University of America Press, 1985,185-99.

M

Groot, Ger, and Charo Crego. "Pierre Bourdieu en de Filosofische Es·
thetica." Aigemeen Nederlands Tijdschrift voor Wijsbegeerte, 77 (1985),
21-35.
Guanti, Giovanni. Romanticismo e musica. L'estetica musicale cia Kant a
Nietzsche. Turin, 1981.
Guerin, M. "Kant et l'ontologie analogique." Revue de Memphysique et de
Morale, 79 (1974), 516-48.
Guillermit, Louis. "Esthi:tique et Critique." In Sinnlichkeit und Verstand in

der deutschen und franzOsischen Philosophie von Kant bis Hegel. Ed. Hans
Wagner. Bonn, 1976, 124-40.
Gulyga, A. V. "The Beautiful: Its Principles." Soviet Studies in Philosophy, 22
0983-84),49-67.
Guyer, Paul. "Autonomy and Integrity in Kant's Aesthetics." Monist, 66
(1983), 167-88.
- - . "Kant's Distinction between the Beautiful and the Sublime." Review of
Metaphysics, 35 (1982), 753-84.
Hancock, Robert.• ~ Note on Kant's Third Critique." Philosophical Quarterly,
8 (1958), 261-65.
Harrell, Jean G. "Kant's A Priori in the Critique of Judgment." The Journal of
.Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 39 (1980),198-200.
M
T

Hattingh, J. P. "The Problem of Art and Morality in the Context of Kant's
Aesthetics" (in Dutch). South African Journal ofPhilosophy, 4 (198S), 8-1 S.
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. Glauben und Wissen (Faith and Knowl·
edge). Trans. and ed. Walter Cerf and H. S. Harris. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1977.
HeinteI, Erich. "Naturzwecke and Wesensbegriff." In Zur Kantforschung
der Gegenwart. Ed. Peter Heintel and Ludwig Nag!. Darmstadt, 1981,

271-97.
U

T
U

M

Heintel, Peter. Die Bedeutung der Kritik der asthetischen Urteilskraft fur
die transzendentale Systematik.. Kantstudien Erginzungshefte. 99. Bonn:
H. Bouvier Verlag, 1970.
Henckmann, Wolfhart. "Das Problem der asthetischen Wahrnehmung in
Kants Asthetik." Philosophisclrss Jahrbuch, 78 (1971).
Hermann. Istvan. Kants Teleoiogie. Budapest: Akademiai Kiad6, 1972.
Horkheimer, Max. ()ber Kants Kritik der Urteilskraft als Bindeg/ied zwischen
theoretischer und praktischer Philosophie. Frankfurt am Main. 1925.
Hund, William B. "Kant and A. Lazaroff on the Sublime." Kant·Studien. 73
(1982),351-55.
"The Sublime and God in Kant's 'Critique of Judgment.' The New
Scholasticism, 57 (1983), 42-70.
Imbert, Claude. "La philosophie critique et l'enigme du jugement de gout
(Kant, Husserl et Heidegger)." In Les fins de l'homme II partir du travail de
Jacques Derricla. Paris, 1981,619-35.
Jacoby, Gunther. Herders und Kants Asthetik. Leipzig: Dtirr, 1907.
Jergius, Holger. Subjektive Allgemeinheit. Untersuchungen im AnschlujJ an
Kant. Freiburg: Verlag K. Alber, 1984.

--a

II

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

453

Jordan, Elijah. The Constjtutive and Regulative Principles in Kant. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1912.
Kalinnikov, L.A. "What Sense is Concealed in the Postulates of Practical
Reason?" Proceedings ofthe Sixth International Kant Congress. Forthcoming.
Kaulbauch, Friedrich. Asthetische Welterkenntnis bei Kant. Wiirzburg: Verlag
Konigshausen & Neumann, 1984.
- - . "Der Zusammenhang zwischen Naturphilosophie und Geschichtsphilosophie bei Kant." Kant-Studien, 56 (1965).
Kemal, Salim. "Aesthetic Necessity, Culture and Epistemology." Kant-Studien,

M

T

74 (1983),176-205.
- - . "The Importance of Artistic Beauty." Kant-Studien, 71 (1980),488-507.
- - . "Kant and the Production of Fine Art." Proceedings of the Sixth
International Kant Congress. Forthcoming.
Kim, Jong 000. "Wissen und Glauben bei I. Kant und H. Dooeyweerd."
PhilosophiaReformata, 48 (1983), 1-144.
Kirchmann, Johann Heinrich. Erliiuterungen zu Kants Kritik der Urteilskraft.
Heidelberg, 1888 (Leipzig, 1882).
Kirschner, Gilbert. "Schelling et Kant: Finalite et organisme." Studi Urbina!,:

M

T

1977,191-215.
Kitcher, Philip. "Kant's Philosophy of Science." Midwest Studies in Philosophy.

T

8 (1983), 387-407.
Konhardt, Klaus. Die Einheit der Vemunft. Zum Verhiiltnis von theoretischer
und praktischer Vernunft in der Philosophie Kants. Meisenheim-Konigstein,

U

1979.
Komer, Stephan. "Kant's Theory of Aesthetic Taste." In his Kant. Ch. 8. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1982 (Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1955).
Kraft, Michael. "Kant's Theory of Teleology." International Philosophical
Quarterly, 22 (1982), 41-50.
- - . "The Moral Interest in Aesthetics." Zeitschrift /iir philosophische
Forschung. 37 (1983), 588-98.
- - . "Thinking the Physico-Teleological Proof." International Journal for
Philosophy of Religion, 12 (1981), 65-74.
Kriimling, Gerhard. Die systembildende Rolle von Asthetik und Ku/turphilosophie bei Kant. Freiburg: Verlag K. Alber, 1985.
Kroner, Richard. Von Kant bis Hegel. Vol. 1,224-302. TUbingen, 1921.
Kuehn, Manfred. "Kant's Transcendental Deduction of God's Existence as a
Postulate of Pure Practical Reason." Kant-Studien, 76 (1985),152-69.
Kulenkampff, Jens, ed. Materialien zu Kants 'Kritik der Urteilskraft. 'Frankfurt
am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1974.
Kuypers, Karel. Kants Kunsttheorie und die Einheit der Kritik der Urteilskraft.
Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschapen,
Afd. l.etterkunde. Nieuwe Reeks, Vol. 77, no. 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland
Publishing Co., 1972.
Laermann, Klaus. "Kants Theorie des Geschmacks." In Litteraturwissenschaft
und Geschichtsphilosophie. Festschrift /iir Wilhelm Emrich. Eds. H. Arntzen
et al. Berlin and New York, 1975,96-108.
Lamacchia, Ada. "Cognitio symbolica: un problema de la hermeneutica
kantiana." Cuadernos de Filosoffa, 13 (1973), 371-411.

T

T
U
M

M

454

M

T

U
T
T

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Lebrun, Gerard. Kant et la fin de la metaphysique. Paris, 1970.
- - . "La Troisieme 'Critique' ou la theologie retrouvee, Proceedings of the
Ottawa Congress on Kant in the Anglo-American and Continental Traditions.
Eds. Pierre Laberge, Frant;:OisDuchesneau, and Bryan E. Morrisey. Ottawa:
University of Ottawa Press, 1976,297-317,
Lehmann, Gerhard. "Hypothetischer Vemunftgebrauch und GesetzmiSigkeit
des Besonderen in Kants Philosophie," In his Kants Tugenden: Neue Beitriige
zur Geschichte und Interpretation der Philosophie Kants. Berlin and New
York: Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1980, 5-26.
- - . "Kants Nachlafiwerk und die Kritik der Urteilskraft." In his Beitriige
zur Geschichte und Interpretation der Philosophie Kants. Berlin: Walter
de Gruyter & Co., 1968.295-373.
- _ . "System und Geschichte in Kants Philosophie." Ibid., 152-70.
- - . "Die Technik der Natur." Ibid., 289-94.
Lieber, Hans Joachim. "Kants Philosophie des Organischen und die Biologic
seiner Zeit." Philosophia Naturalis, 1 (1950).
Liedtke, Max. "Der Begriff der Reflexion bei Kant," Archiv tar Geschichte

de' Philosoph ie, 48 (1966), 207-16.
U

Lindsay, A. D. Kant. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1934,
Long, David. "Critique and the Completion." Proceedings of the Fifth International Kant Congress. Ed. Gerhard Funke. Bonn, 1981, I. 2,737-42,
LOpez Molina, Antonio Miguel. "Sentido y funciones de la facultad de juzgar
en la reflexi6n kantiana sobre la naturaleza." Annales del Seminario de

Metaflsica, 13 (1978),47-66.
Lories, Danielle. "Kant et la Iiberte esthetique." Revue Philosophique de

Louvain, 79 (1981),484-512.
Lotze, Hermann. Geschichte der Asthetik in Deutschland. Munich, 1868.
Liithe, Rudolf. "Kants Lehre von den asthetischen Ideen." Kant-Studien, 75

(1984),65-73.
M

Macintosh, J. 1. "The Impossibility of Kantian Immortality." Dialogue (Canada),

M

Mackinnon, n.M. "Kant's Philosophy of Religion." Philosophy, 50 (1975),

19 (1980). 219-34.
131-44.
U

MacMillan. Claude. "Kant's Deduction of Pure Aesthetic Judgments." KantStudien, 76 (1985), 43-54.
Macmillan, R. A. C. The Crowning Phase of the Critical Philosophy. London:
Macmillan & Co., 1912. Reprint. New York: Garland Publishing, 1976.
Makkreel, Rudolf A. "Imagination and Temporality in Kant's Theory of the
Sublime." The lournal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 42 (1984),303-16.
- - . "The Role of Synthesis in the Critique of Judgment. .. Proceedings 01
the Sixth International Kant Congress. Forthcoming.
Malter, Rudolf. "Yom Zeichencbarakter iisthetischer Lust. Bemerkungen zu
Kants Kritik der Urteilskraft." In Alte Fragen und neue Wege des Denkens.

Festschrift/urlosef Stallmach. 1977,

1~200.

- - . "Reflexionsbegriffe." Philorophill Naturalis, 19 (1982), 124-49.
Marc-Wogau, Konrad. Vier Studilln zu Kants ''Kritik der Urteilskraft." Uppsala
Universitets Xrsskrift 1938, 2. Uppsala: A.-b. Lundequistka Bokhandeln,

1938.

SELECTED BmLIOGRAPHY

455

McLaughlin, Peter. "What Is an Antinomy of Judgment?" Proceedings of the
Sixth International Kant Congress. Forthcoming.
McRae, Robert. "Kant's Conception of the Unity of the Sciences." Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research, 1957-58,1-17.
Menzer, Paul. Kants Lehre von der Entwicklung in Natur und Geschichte.
Berlin. 1911.
Mertens, Helga. Kommentar zur ersten Einleitung zu Kanis Kritik der
Urteilskraft: zur systematischen Funktion der Kritik der Urteilskraft fUr
das System der Vernunftkritik. Epimelea. 25. Munich: Berchmann, 1975.
Michaelson, G. E. The Historical Dimensions of a Rational Faith: The Role
of History in Kant's Religious Thought. Washington: University Press of
America, 1979.
Mitias, Michael H. "Kant and Art Object." The Pakistan Philosophical Journal,
13 (1974), 1-9.
Mothersill, Mary. Beauty Restored. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984.
Milller, U. "Objektivitiit und Fiktionalitat. Einige Oberlegungen zu Kants
Kritik der asthetischen Urteilskraft." Kant-Studien, 77 (1986),203-23.
Muyskens, James L. "Kant's Moral Argument." Southern Journal of Philosophy,
12 (1974), 425-34.
Nelson, Leonard. Fortschritte und Ruckschritte der Philosophie. Frankfurt
am Main, 1962.
Nivelle. Armand. Les theories esthetiques en AllenuJgne de Baumgarten
Kant. Paris: Societe d'bdition "Les Belles Lettres," 1955.
O'Farrell, Francis. "Kant's Concern in Philosophy of Religion." Gregorianum,
58 (1977), 471-522.
- - . "Kant's Treatment of the Teleological Principle." Gregorianum. 56
(1975),639-80.
- - . "Problems of Kant's Aesthetics." Gregorianum, 57 (1976), 409-58.
- - . "System and Reason for Kant." Gregorianum. 62 (1981), 5-49.
Oppell. Baron von. "Beauty in Shakespeare and Kant." Hibbert Journal, 40
(1942).
Pagano, Giacomo Maria. "n concetto di 'Erhabene' nel pensiero di E. Kant."
Rivista di Filoso/ia Neo-Scolastica. 67 (1975),267-87.
- - . "11 problema dell'immortalita in Kant." Rivista Rosmilzna de Filosofia
(Stresa), 73 (1979), 172-80.
Palmquist, Stephen. "Faith as Kant's Key to the Justification of Transcendental Reflection." Heythrop Journal. 25 (1984), 442-55.
Paul. Gregor. "Der Begriff des interesselosen Wohlgefallens als systematische
Konsequenz Kantischer Transzendentalphilosopbie. Eine Notiz zum systematischen Charakter der Kritik der reinen Vernunft." Proceedings of the Fifth
International Kant Congress. Ed. Gerhard Funke. Bonn, 1981, I. 2,839-51.
Philonenko, A. "L'antinomie du jugement teleologique chez Kant." Revue de
Metaphysique et de Morale, 82 (1977),13-37.
Plat, J. "Fysiscbe Teleologie bij lnunanuel Kant." Wijsgerig Perspectief op
Maatschappij en Wetenschap, 21 (1980), 17-24.
Plessner, Helmut. "Ein Newton des Grashalms." In Argumentationen: Festschrift fUr Josef Konig. Gottingen, 1964.
- - . "Kants Kunstsystem der enzyklopiidischen Propiideutik." In Der

U
T
U
M

M

a
M
T
U

M
M

U

T
T
T
U

456

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Idealismus und seine Gegenwart. Festschrift fUr Werner Marx zum 65.
Geburtstag. Ed. Helmut Plessner. Hamburg. 1976. 349-60.
- - . "Untersuchungen zu einer Kritik der philosopbischen Urteilskraft." In
his Gesammelte Schriften. V. 2. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag.

U

U,T
U

T
T

1981.7-321.
Prauss, Gerold. "Kants Problem der Einbeit theoretischer und praktischer
Vernunft." Kant-Studien. 72 (1981). 286-303.
- - . "Kants Theorie der asthetischen Einstellung." Dialectica. 35 (1981),
265-81.
Reed. Arden. "The Debt of Disinterest: Kant's Critique of Music." Modem '
Language Notes. 95 (1980). 563-84.
Reibenschuh, Gernot. "Ober Ordnung." Proceedings of the Fifth International Kant Congress. Ed. Gerhard Funke. Bonn, 1981.1. 2. 1168-75.
Riedel, Manfred. "System der Vernunft und Natursystem: Kants Oberwindung
der neuzeitlichen Wissenschaftsidee." Proceedings of the Sixth International Kant Congress. Forthcoming.
Rogers, Wiley Kim. "On a Comprehensive Principle in the Kantian Critiques."
Kant-Studien. 52 (1960-61). 448-51.
Rogerson, Kenneth F. "The Meaning of Universal Validity in Kant's Aesthetics."
The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism. 40 (1981), 301-08.
Roque, Alicia Juarrero. "Self-Organization: Kant's Concept of Teleology and
Modern Chemistry." Review of Metaphysics. 39 (1985).107-35.
Roretz. Karl. Zur Analyse von Kants Philosophie des Organischen. Vienna,
1922.
Rotenstreich. Nathan. Experience and Its Systematization: Studies in Kant.

M

The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 1972.
- - . "The Problem of the Critique of Judgment and Solomon Maimon's
Scepticism." In H. A Wolfson Jubilee Volume on the occasion of his
seventy-fifth birthday. Jerusalem: American Academy for Jewish Research,
1965,677-702.
- - . "The Scepticism of the Critique of Judgment. " In Experience and Its
Systematization. 2d ed. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 1972, 88-110.
Salvo, Gloria di. Cristianesimo efede razionale in Kant. Milan. 1981.
Savile. Anthony. "Objectivity in Aesthetic Judgment: Eva Schaper on Kant."
British Journal of Aesthetics. 21 (1981).363-69.
- - . "What Is a Judgment of Taste?" Proceedings of the Sixth International
Kant Congress. Forthcoming.
Scarre, Geoffrey. "Kant on Free and Dependent Beauty." British Journal of
Aesthetics. 21 (1981),351-62.
Schaper, Eva. "The Kantian 'as-if and Its Relevance for Aesthetics." Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 65 (1964-65),219-34.
- - . "Kant on Imagination." Philosophical Forum (Boston), 2 (1971).
430-45.
- - . "The Pleasures of Taste." In Pleasure. Preference and Value: Studies
in Philosophical Aesthetics. Ed. Eva Schaper. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983. 39-56.
Schasler, Max. Kritische Geschichte der Asthetik von Plato bis auf die
Gegenwart. Berlin, 1872.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

457

Schrader, George. "The Status of Teleological Judgment in the Critical
Philosophy." Kant-Studien, 45 (1953-54),204-35.
Schubert, Giselher. "Zur Musikasthetik in Kants 'Kritik der Urteilskraft.'''
Archiv fUr Musikwissenschaft, 32 (1975), 12-25.
Schiimer, Ingeborg. "Wissenschaftliche und asthetische Wahmehmung: Kants
Lehre von der Wahrnehmung." Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale. 86

T

(l981), 180-92.
Sessions. William Lad. "Kant and Religious Belief." Kant-Studien. 71 (1980).

M

455-68.
Sichirollo, Livio. "Fede e sapere. Giobbe e gIi amici. Reflessioni in tema di
filosofia, religione e filasofia della religione in Kant e Hegel." In Hegel
interprete di Kant. Ed. Valerio Ven-a. Naples, 1981, 219-66.
Silber, John. "The Ethical Significance of Kant's Religion." Introductory
essay in Kant's Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone. Trans. T. M.
Greene and H. H. Hudson. New York: Harper & Row, 1960, lxxix-cxxxvii.
Simon, Josef. ''Teleologisches Reflektieren und kausales Bestimmen." Zeitschrift
fUr philosophische Forschung. 30 (1976), 369-88.
Soffer, Walter. "Kant on the Tutelage of God and Nature." Thomist. 45

M

M

T
M,D

(1981),26-40.
Souriau, Michel. Le jugement reflechissant dans la philosophie critique de
Kant. Paris: Librairie Felix Alcan, 1926.
Stadler, August. Kants Teleologie und ihre erbnntnistheoretische Bedeutung.
Berlin, 1912 (1874),
Stallknecht, Newton P. "Kant's Concept of the Aesthetic Idea and the Appreciation of Modern Art." Review of International Philosophy, 29 (1975),

T

175-86.
Stout, Jeffrey. The Flight from Authority: Religion. Morality and the Quest
for Autonomy. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1981.
Strube, Werner. "Burkes und Kants Theorie des Schonen," Kant-Studien. 73

M

(1982),55-62.
Taminiaux, Jacques. "Des interpretations de la 'Critique de la Faculte
de juger.''' Proceedings of the Ottawa Congress on Kant in the AngloAmerican and Continental Traditions. Eels. Pierre Laberge, Fran~ois
Duchesneau, and Bryan E. Morrisey. Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press,

1976, 124-42.
Tonelli, Giorgio. "La formazione del testo della Kritik der Urteilskraft.·'
Revue lnternationale de Philosophie, 8 (1954), 423-48.
- - . "Kant, dall'estetica metafisica all'estetica psicoempirica." Memorie
dell 'Academia delle Scienze di Torino. Ser. 3, vol. 3, pt. 2 (1955).
- - . "Von den verschiedenen Bedeutungeo des Wortes 'ZweckmitJigkeit'
in der Kritik der Urteilskraft." Kant-Studien. 49 (J957-58), 154-66.
Trede. Johann Heinrich. "Asthetik und Logik: Zum systematischen Problem
in Kants Kritik dec Urteilskraft." In Dos Problem der Sprache: VII/.
Deutscher Kongress der Philosophie. Ed. Hans-Georg Gadamer. Munich:
Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1967,169-82.
- - . Die Dif!erenz von theoretischem undpraktischem Vernun!tgebrauch
und dessen Einheit innerhalb der Kritik der Urteilskraft. Heidelberg,

1965.

U

D

458
T

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Tufts, 1. H. The Sources and Development

0/ Kant's Teleology.

Chicago,

1892.
T,M

M

M
M

U

U

Vanni Rovighi. Sofia. "Ricerche sull'evidenza dei principi della teologia
naturale e della morale." Atti del Convegno di Saint-Vincent 25/27 marzo
1981. Rome, 1981, 111 ff.
Velkley, Richard L. "Gadamer and Kant: The Critique of Modem Aesthetic
Consciousness." Truth and Method. Interpretation. 9 (1980-81). 353-64.
Verra. Valerio. "Immaginazione trascendentale e intelletto intuitivo." In Hegel
interprete di Kant. Ed. Valerio Verra. Naples. 1981,67-89.
Vieira Jordao, Francisco. "Criticismo Kantiano e pressupostos racionais de fe
religiosa." Revista Portuguesa tkJ Filoso/la. 37 (1981),249-86.
VorUinder, Karl. Immanuel Kant. Der Mann "nd das Werk. Vol. 1,343-405.
Leipzig, 1924.
Vuillemin, Jules. "La conception kantienne des beaux-arts comme
exemple d'esthetique intuitionniste." Proceedings 0/ the Sixth International
Kant Congress. Forthcoming.
Wagner, Hans. "Moralitat und Religion bei K.ant." In his Kritische Philosophie.
Systematische und hlstorische Abhandlungen. Eds. Karl Biirthlein and
Werner Flach. Wiirzburg, 1980,339-48.
- - , "Die vier gro8en Probleme Immanuel Kants: Wissen- SittlichkeitRecht-Religion." Ibid., 290-301.
Weiler, Gershon. "Kant's 'Indeterminate Concept' and the Concept of Man."
Revue Internationale de Philosophie, 16 (1962),432-46.
Werkmeister, W. H. Kant: The Architectonic and Development 0/ His
Philosophy. London: Open Court Publishing Company, 1980.
Wettstein, Ronald Harri. Kanis Prinzip der Urteilskra/t. Forum Academicum,
1981.
White, David A. "On Bridging the Gulf between Nature and Morality in the
Critique 0/ Judgment." The Journal 0/ Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 38

(1979), 179-88.
M

Wiebe, Don. ''The Ambiguous Revolution: Kant and the Nature of Faith."

M

Winter. Alois. "Gebet und Gottesdienst bei Kant: nicht 'Gunstwerbung,' son·
dern 'Form a1Ier Handlungen.''' Theolog;e und PhI1osophie, 52 (1977), 341-77.
- - . "Theologische Hintergrfinde der Philosophie Kants." Theologie und
PhiJosophie, 51 (1976), 1-51.
Wolandt, Gerd. "Oberlegungen zu Kants Erfahrungsbegriff." Kant-Studien,
69 (1978), 46-57.
Wolff, E. "La structure du monde intelligible." Archives de Philosophie, 31
(1968),464-67.
Wood, Allen W. "The Immorality of Moral Faith." Proceedings 0/ the Sixth
International Kant Congress. Forthcoming.
- - . Kant's Moral Religion. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1970.
- - . Kant's Rational Theology. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1978.
Zeldin, Mary-Barbara. "Formal Purposiveness and the Continuity of Kant's
Argument in the Critique of Judgment." Kant-Studien. 74 (1983), 45-55.

M

M
M
M

Scottish Journal 0/ Theology, 6 (1980),515-32.

- - . Freedom and the Critical Undertaking: Essays on Kant's lAter Critiques.
Ann Arbor: UMI Monographs. 1980.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

459

Zimmermann, Robert. Geschichte der Asthetik als phil030phischer Wirsenschalt. Vienna, 1858.
Zocher, Rudolf. Kanis Grundlehre. Erlangen. 1959.
Zumbach, Clark. "Kant's Argument for the Autonomy of Biology." Nature
and System, 3 (1981), 67-79.
- - . The Transcendental Science: Kant's Conception of Biological Methodology. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff. 1984.

T

T

GLOSSARY

(The German terms are given in their modem spellings, in order to
facilitate finding them in a modern German dictionary.)
A
Ablinderung
Abbruch tun
Aberglaube
abgeschmackt
Abgotterei
Abgrund
ableiten
Abschnitt
Absicht

alteration
impair
superstition
insipid
idolatry
abyss
derive
division
intention, aim,
point of view
isolation,
Absonderung
separation
originate from,
abstammen
stem from
abstoSend
repulsive
division
Abteilung
deviate
abweichen
respect
Achtung
affect
Affekt
Akzidenz
accident
algebra
Algebra
allegory
Allegorie
supremely real
allerrealst
universal
allgemein
Allgemeingtiltig- universal validity
keit

Allgemeinheit
Allheit
allmiichtig
allweise
Allweisheit
allwissend
Alten,die
Analogie
analytisch
Anatomie
anbeten
Andachtsilbung
anerkennen
angemessen
angenehm
Anlage
anmutig
annehmen
Anordnung
Anreiz
anschauend
Anschauung
an sich

461

universality
totality
omnipotent
all-wise
omniscience
omniscient
the ancients
analogy
analytic
anatomy
worship
prayer
acknowledge
commensurate,
adequate, fitting
agreeable
predisposition
graceful
assume, accept,
adopt
arrangement
stimulus
intuitive
intuition
in itself,
intrinsically, in
principle

462

GLOSSARY

ansinnen
Anstrengung
Anthropologie
Anthropomorphismus
Anthropophobie
Antinomie
Antipathie
antreiben
Anwendung
anzeigen
anziehend
apodiktisch
Architekt
Architektonik
architektonisch
Arithmetik
Art

require
effort
anthropology
anthropomorphism
anthropophobia
antinomy
antipathy
impel
application
indicate, point out
attractive
apodeictic
architect
architectonic
architectonic
arithmetic
kind, way, manner,
species
Artikel
article
Artikulation
articulation
Assoziation
association
Asthetik
aesthetics,
aesthetic
asthetisch
aesthetic
Ather
aether
Attribut
attribute
Aufenthalt
residence
auferlegen
enjoin
Auffassung
apprehension
auffinden
discover
Aufgabe
problem
aufheben
cancel
Aufklarung
enlightenment
aufiosen
solve, resolve
aufnehmen
receive, adopt,
take up
Aufopferung
sacrifice
aufrichtig
sincere
Aufschlufi
disclosure
aufsuchen
look for, discover,
locate
Aufwand
expenditure
augenscheinlich obvious
expression, term
Ausdruck
carry out, achieve
ausfiihren
auslegen
construe

ausmachen
ausnehmen
ausrichten
aussagen
Ausschlag
aufier
Aufierung
Aussicht
auswartig
Auswicklung
Autokratie
Autonomie

establish, tell,
constitute
exempt
accomplish, carry
out
predicate, assert
result
outer, extrinsic,
external
manifestation
prospect
foreign
evolution
autocracy
autonomy

B
Bastard
Bau
Baukunst
Baum
Bauwerk
Bedauern
Bedeutung
bedingt
Bedingung
Bedurfnis
Befehl
befordern
Begehrung
Begehrungsvermogen
Begeisterung
Begierde
begreifen
begrenzt
Begriff
behaglich
BeifaU
beilegen
Beispiel
Beistimmung
Beitritt
bekommen

hybrid
structure,
construction
architecture
tree
edifice, work of
architecture
regret
meaning, sense
conditioned
condition
need
command
further, promote
desire
power of desire
enthusiasm
desire
grasp
bounded
concept
appealing
approval, assent
attribute
example
assent
cooperation,
agreement
acquire, receive

GLOSSARY

belehen
beleht
Belege
beliebig
Bemiihung
Beobachtung
berechtigt
Beredsamkeit
Beredtheit
beruhen
Beschaffenheit
Beschiiftigung
Beschauung
Beschriinkung
beseelt
besonder
bestandig
Bestandstiick
Bcstandteil
bestarken
bestimmen
bestimmend
Bestimmung

Bestimmungsgrund
Bestrebung
bestreiten
Betrachtung
Betriibnis
Betrug
beurteilen
Beurteilung
bewegend
Bewegung
Beweis
Beweisgrund
Beweistum
bewirken

arouse, animate,
quicken
animate, vivid
support
this or that
endeavor
observation
entitled
oratory
rhetorical power
rest
characteristic.
character.
constitution
occupation.
activity
contemplation
restriction
animate
particular. special.
separate
permanent.
constant
constituent
constituent
reinforce
determine
determinative
attribute.
determination,
vocation,
destination
determining basis
effort
dispute
contemplation
grief
deceit
judge
judging. judgment
motive
agitation, motion.
movement
proof
basis of proof
manifestation
bring about, effect

Bewunderung
Bewu6tsein

463

Bild
bilden
bildende Kunst
Bildhauerkunst
Bildungen
Bildungskraft
Bildungstrieb
Bildwerk
billigen
Blume
Boden
bomiert
bOse
brauchbar
biindig
bfirgerlich

admiration
consciousness,
awareness
designate. mark
reference, relation,
respect
image, effigy
mold. construct
visual art
(art of) sculpture
formations
formative force
formative impulse
work of sculpture
approve. endorse
flower
territory. soil
narrow-minded
evil
useful
cogent
civil

C
Chaos
Charakterismus
Chemie
Chiffreschrift
Christentum

chaos
characterization
chemistry
cipher
Christianity

bezeichnen
Beziehung

D
Dllmonologie
darlegen
darstellen
Darstellung
dartun
Dasein
Dauer
Deduktion
Definition
Deismus
Dekadik
Demonstration
Demut
Denken
Denkungsart
deutlich

demonology
set forth
exhibit
exhibition
establish
existence
duration.
continuance
deduction
definition
deism
decadic system
demonstration
humility
thought. thinking
way of thinking
distinct

464

GLOSSARY

Dialektik
Diallele
Diatetik
dichten
Dichter
Dichtkunst
Ding
Ding an sich
diskursiv
disputieren
Disziplin
dogmatisch
Doktrin
Drangsal
Dummkopf
Dunkel
durchdringen
durchgangig
dynamisch

dialectic
circle
hygiene
engage in fiction
poet
(art of) poetry
thing
thing in itself
discursive
dispute
discipline
dogmatic
doctrine
tribulation
fool
conceit
permeate
throughout
dynamical

E
echt
edel
Edukt
Ehrfurcht
Eifer
eigenttimlich
Einbildung
Einbildungskraft
Eindriicke
einfach
Einfalt
Einflufi
Eingebung
einheimisch
Einheit
Einhelligkeit
Einleitung
EinOde
einraumen
einrichten
Einschachtelung
einschUe{;en
einschmeicheln
einschranken
einsehen
Einsicht

genuine
noble, lofty
educt
reverence
zeal
peculiar, own
imagination
imagination
impressions
simple
simplicity
influence
inspiration
indigenous
unity, unit
accordance
introduction
wasteland
grant, concede
arrange
encapsulation
imply
ingratiate
restrict, confine,
limit
see
insight

EinstiDlmigkeit
Einstimmung

agreement
hannony,
agreement
Einteilung
division
Eintracht
concord
Einwicklung
involution
Einwurf
objection
singular, individual
einzeln
einzig
single
Ekel
disgust
Ektypon
ectype
Eleganz
elegance
Element
component, element, ingredient
Elementarlehre elementology
Elend
misery
Empfanglichkeit receptivity
Empfindelei
sentinlentality
empfindsam
sensitive
Empfindung
sensation
empirisch
empirical
Empirismus
empiricism
Endabsicht
final intention,
final aim
Bnde
end
Endursache
final cause
Endzweck
final purpose
entdecken
discover
enthalten
contain, comprise
Enthusiasmus
enthusiasm
entriistet
indignant
entspringen
arise, originate,
spring, result
entwerfen
sketch
entwickeln
develop, unfold
Enzyklopiidie
encyclopaedia
Epigenesis
epigenesis
Erbauung
edification
Erde
earth
erdichtet
fictitious
Ereignis
event
Erfahrung
experience
Erfahrungs·
empirical. of
experience
erforscben
explore
erfreulich
gladdening
ergOtzen
delight, amuse
erhaben
sublime

GLOSSARY

erhalten

maintain, sustain,
preserve, obtain
erheben
elevate, raise, lift,
exalt
erheischen
demand
erkennen
cognize, recognize
Erkenntnis
cognition,
recognition
Erkenntniscognitive, of
cognition
erkUiren
explain, explicate,
declare
erUiutern
elucidate
Erorterung
discussion,
examination
erreichen
reach, attain,
achieve
Erscheinung
appearance
erwecken
awaken, arouse
erweitern
expand, extend
expansive
erweitemd
erwerben
acquire
erzeugen
produce
Ethik
ethics
Elhikotheologie ethicotheology
Evolution
evolution
exemplarisch
exemplary
Existenz
existence
Experiment
experiment
exponieren
expound
Exposition
exposition

F
fiihig
falsch
Familie
Farbe
fassen
Fatalismus
Fatalitat
Fehler
fein
Feld
Peldherr
Feldmefikunst
Figur

capable, able, fit
wrong, incorrect.
false
family
color
take in, grasp
fatalism
fatalism
defect
refined, delicate
realm
general
art of land
surveying
figure

Fleifi
Fliissigkeit
Folge
Folgerung
fordem
fordern
Form
formal
formlos
Forschung
Fortpflanzung
Fortschritt
Frage
Freiheit
Freude
Prevel
frevelhaft
Friede
ftohlich
Frohsein
Whlen
Furcht
furchtbar
flirchten
Fiirwabrhalten
G
Ganzes
Garten
Gartenkunst
Gattung
Gebardung
Gebet
Gebiet
Gebot
Gebrauch
Gedanke
gedeihen
Gedicht
gefallen
gefiillig
Gefiihl
Gegend
Gegenstand

46S

diligence
fluid
consequence,
result
consequence
demand
further, promote
form
formal
formless
investigation,
research
procreation
progress
question, issue
freedom

joy
sacrilege
wanton
peace
cheerful
gladness
feel
fear
fearful
be afraid
assent
whole
garden
horticulture
genus, race,
species
gesture
prayer
domain

command
use, employment
thought
prosper
poem
be liked
likable
feeling
region
object

466

GWSSARY

gehen auf

concern, apply to,
aim at
belong, pertain
gehoren
Gehorsam
obedience
Geist
spirit, intellect
Geistesintellectual
inspired
geistreich
occasion, opporGelegenheit
tunity, context
Gelehrigkeit
teachability
gemein
common, general
Gemeinschaft
community,
getting together
Gemeinsinn
common sense
Gemeinwesen
commonwealth
Gemiit
mind
Gemiitsmental, of (the)
mind
general
general
Genie
genius
Genufi
enjoyment
geography
Geographie
geometry
Geometrie
gesamt
total, entire
Gesang
song
task, occupation,
Geschiift
business
Geschichte
history
Geschicklichkeit skill
Geschlechter
sexes
taste
Geschmack
Geselligkeit
sociability
society
Gesellschaft
Gesetz
law
gesetzgebend
legislative
Gesetzgebung
legislation
Gesetzlichkeit
lawfulness
Gesetzmiifligkeit lawfulness
face, sight
Gesicht
Gesinnung
attitude
gesittet
civilized
Gestalt
shape
Gestikulation
gesticulation
gesund
sound, healthy
Gesundheit
health
gewagt
hazardous
Gewalt
dominance,
authority

Gewifiheit
gewohnlich
geziemen
Glaube
Glaubenssache
gleichartig
gleichformig
Gleichheit
gleichsam
Gliick
G1iickseligkeit
Gott
Gotter
Gotteslehre
Gottheit
gottlich
Gram
Granunatik
Gras
grafi1ich
Grenze
grofi
GroBe
Grotltes
grotesk
Grund
griinden
Grundlage
griindlich
Grundsatz
Gilltigkeit
Gunst
gut
gutmiitig

certainty
usual
befit
faith, belief
matter of faith
of the same kind,
homogeneous
uniform
equality
as it were
fortune
happiness
God
gods
theology
God, deity
divine
grief
grammar
grass
horrible, horrid
bounds, boundary
large, great
magnitude
maximum
grotesque
basis, ground,
reason
establish, supply a
basis for
foundation
careful, solid
principle
validity
favor
good
well-meaning

H
Handlung
Handwerk
Hang
Harmonie
hiilllich
Hauptstiick
Heautonomie
heilig
herrschen

action
craft
propensity
harmony
ugly, odious
chapter
heautonomy
holy, sacred
reign, prevail

GLOSSARY

hervorbringen
Heterogeneitiit
Heteronomie
heuristisch
Hindernis
hinreichend
hinzudenken
Hirngespinst
Hochachtung
Hochschatzung
hochst
hoher
humaniora
Humanitat
Hylozoismus
Hyperphysik
Hypothese
Hypotypose

I
Ideal
idealisch
Idealism us
Idee
Idol
Idolatrie
immanent
Imperativ
lnbegriff
inner
innerst
innig
Instinkt
intellektuell
Intelligenz
in telligi bel
Interesse
lntroduktion
intuitiv
Involution
irren

produce, bring
forth. give rise
to
heterogeneity
heteronomy
heuristic
obstacle.
hindrance,
impediment
sufficient
add in thought
chimera
deep respect
esteem
supreme. highest
higher
humanities
humanity
hylozoism
hyperphysics
hypothesis
hypotyposis
ideal
ideal
idealism
idea
idol
idolatry
immanent
imperative
sum total. sum.
set
inner. intrinsic.
internal
inmost
intense, deep,
intimate
instinct
intellectual
intelligence
intelligible
interest
introduction
intuitive
involution
err

467

J
jedermann
Jude

everyone
Jew

K
Karikatur
Kasualitiit
KategQrie
kategorisch
KausalKausalitat
kennen
Kenntnis(se)
Kennzeichen
klar
Klasse
Klassifikation
klassisch
klein
Kluft
Klugheit
kolossal
Kompetent
Komplazenz
Komposition
konnen
konstitutiv
Konstruktion
Kontemplation
Kontinuitat
Korper
kOrperlich
kosmologisch
Kraft
kriechen
Krieg
Kristallisation
Kritik
krumm
Kultur
kiinftig
Kunst
Kunstkiinstlich
kunstreich

caricature
casualism
category
categorical
causal
causality
be acquainted
with, know
acquaintance,
knowledge
mark
clear

class
classification
classical
small. little, slight
gulf
prudence
colossal
competitor
approbation
composition
be able to, can
constitutive
construction
contemplation
continuity
body
bodily, corporeal
cosmological
power. force
grovel
war
crystallization
critique
curved
culture,
cultivation
future
art
artistic
artistic. artificial
artistic. artful

468

GLOSSARY

L
Lachen
liistig
launig
launisch
l.eben
lebendig
l.ebensLebenswandel
lebhaft
leblos
l.egitimation
l.ehrart
l.ehre
l.ehrgedicht
leichtgIiiubig
l.eidenschaft
leisten
leiten
l.eitfaden
letzter Zweck
Liberalitiit
Liebe
lieblich
Liebling
liefern
Jiegen
Logik
LohnLust
Lustgartnerei
lustig
Luxus

laughter
irksome
whimsical
moody
life
alive
vital, of life
conduct
lively, vivid
lifeless
legitimation
method
doctrine, science,
theory
didactic poem
credulous
passion
accomplish
guide
guide
ultimate purpose
liberality
love
lovely
darling
supply
lie, reside
logic
mercenary
pleasure
landscape
gardening
cheerful, joyful
luxury

M
Macht
Made
Malerei
mangelhaft
Manier
Manierieren
mannigfaltig
Mannigfaltigkeit
Maschine
Maschinenwerk
Mail

might, power
maggot
painting
deficient
manner
mannerism
diverse, manifold
diversity, variety
machine
machinery
measure

Mafistab
material
Materialismus
Materie
materiell
Mathematik
Maxime
Maximum
Mechanik
Mechanismus
Meinung
Meinungssache
Meister
Melodie
Mensch
Menschenscheu
Menschheit
messen
Mefikunst
Metaphysik
Methode
Methodenlehre
Mikroskop
Milchstrafie
Mimik
mischen
Mififallen
Mifigeburt
Mifihelligkeit
mifilingen
Mitleid
Mitteilbarkeit
Mittel
Mittelmittelbar
Mitwirkung
Modalitiit
Modulation
Moglichkeit
Mohammedanismus
Momente
monarchischer
Staat
Moral
moralisch
Moralitat
Motion

scale, measure
material
materialism
matter
material
mathematics
maxim
maximum
mechanism
mechanism
opinion
matter of opinion
master
melody
human being, man
fear of people
humanity, mankind
measure
geometry
metaphysics
method
methodology
microscope
Milky Way
mime
mix, mingle
dislike
freak birth
discordance
fail
sympathy
communicability
means, average
mediating
indirect
cooperation
modality
modulation
possibility

Islam
moments
monarchy
morals, morality
moral
morality
inner motion

GLOSSARY

Musik
Muster
mystisch

music
model
mystical

N
nach

according to, in
accordance
with. in terms of
nachaffen
ape
nachahmen
imitate
derivative image
Nachbild
nachdenken
meditate
Nachdruck
emphasis
Nachfolge
following
nachforschen
investigate
Nachfrage
inquiry
nachmachen
copy
nachteilig
detrimental
Nahrungsnutritive
Naivitat
naivete
Natur
nature
Naturnatural. of nature
Nebenvorstellung supplementary
presentation
negativ
negative
Neigung
inclination
nichtig
idle
Nichtigkeit
nullity
nichts
nothing
Nomothetik
nomothetic
Normalidee
standard idea
notigen
compel
Notwendigkeit
necessity
Noumenon
noumenon
Nutzbarkeit
usefulness
NiitzIichkeit
utility

0
ober
Oberhaupt
Oberherr
Obersatz
oberst
Objekt
objektiv
Obliegenheit
Ohnmacht
Okkasionalismus

higher
sovereign
overlord
major premise
supreme
object
objective
obligation
impotence
occasionalism

ontologisch
Oper
Oratorium
Ordnung
Organ
organisiert
Originali tat
Ort
Ozean

469

ontological
opera
oratorio
order
organ
organized
originality
place, locus
ocean

P
Pantheismus
Paragraph
parteilich
pathologisch
peinlich
Pflicht
Phanomen
Phantasie
pharisaisch
Philosophie
Physik
Physikoteleologie
Physikotheologie
Physiologie
Planet
Plastik
Pneumatologie
Poesie
positiv
Postulat
prachtvoll

pantheism
section
partial
pathological
painstaking
duty
phenomenon
fantasy. fancy
pharisaical
philosophy
physics
physicoteleology
physicotheology
physiology
planet
plastic art
pneumatology
poetry
positive
postulate
magnificent,
splendid
pradeterminiert predetermined
Priidikat
predicate
Priiformation
preformation
praktisch
practical
Prastabilismus
theory of preestablished harmony
Predigt
sermon
prezios
precious
Prinzip
principle
problematisch
problematic
Produkt
product
Progressus
progression
Propiideutik
propaedeutic
Proportion
ratio. proportion
PrOfung
examination

470

GLOSSARY

Psychologie
piinktlich
Putz(werk)
Pyramide

Q

Qualitiit
Quantitiit
QueUe

psychology
punctilious
adornment
pyramid
quality
quantity
source

R
Rahmen
Rationalismus
Raum
Raumlehre
real
Realismus
Realitiit
Recht
recht
rechtfertigen
rechtmii3ig
rechtschaffen
Rede(n)
redlich
Rednerkunst
reflektierend
Reflexion
Regel
regelmii3ig
Regierung
Regressus
regulativ
Reich
rein
Reiz
Relation
Religion
Revolutionen
Rhapsodie
Rhetorik
Richtmafi
Robinsonaden
roh
Roman
Riicksicht
ruhig

frame
rationalism
space
geometry
real
realism
reality
rights, law, justice
right
justify
legitimate, rightful,
proper
righteous
speech
upright
oratory
reflective
reflection
rule
regular. orderly
government
regression
regulative
kingdom, realm
pure

charm, stimulus
relation
religion
revolutions
rhapsody
rhetoric
standard
Robinsonades
crude
novel
respect, concern
restful

Riihrung
riistig

emotion
vigorous

S
Sache
St.-Peterskirche
Satz
Siiulengang
schaffen
schal
scharfsinnig
schatzen
Schauer
Schauspiel
Scheinscheitern
Schema
Scherz
schicklich
Schicksal
Schlaf
schlechthin
schlechtweg
Schlund
SchluR
schmelzend
Schmerz
Schmuck
Schmiickung
schon
schone Kunst
schOne
Wissenschaft
Schonheit
schopferisch
SchOpfung
Schranke
SchulSchule
SchUler
schwiinnen
Schwiinnerei
Schwere
Schwung
Seele
Seelenlehre
Sein
selbst

thing. matter
St. Peter's Basilica
proposition
colonnade
create
insipid
acute
estimate
thrill
play, drama
illusory, seeming
founder
schema
jest
fitting
fate
sleep
absolutely
simply
abyss
inference
languid, tender
pain, grief
finery, decoration
decoration
beautiful, fine
fine art
fine science
beauty
creative
creation
limit, barrier
academic
school
pupil
rave
fanaticism
gravitation
momentum
soul
psychology
is
self

GLOSSARY

selbstandig
Selbstsucht
Selbsttatigkeit
Serie
setzen
SilbenmaR
Sinn
Sillnesempfindung
Sinnlichkeit
sinnreich
Sitten
SittenSittenlehrer
sittlich
Sittlichkeit
Skeptizismus
sofort
soli
Sophisterei
Sparsamkeit
SpaR
Spekulation
Spezies
Spezifikation
spezifisch
unterschieden
spezifisch
verschieden
spezifizieren
Spiel
spielend
Spontaneitiit
Sprache
Sprechen
Staat
Staatsmann
standhaftig
Starke
Stimme
Stimmung
Stoff
streben
streiten
streng
Stiick

independent
selfishness
spontaneous
activity
series
posit, consider, set
meter
sense
sensation proper
sensibility
ingenious
morals
moral
moralist
moral
morality
skepticism
immediately
ought, is (meant)
to
sophistry
parsimony
joke
speculation
species
specification
distinct in kind
different in kind
make specific
play, game
at play
spontaneity
language, speech
speech
state
statesman
steadfast
strength, fortitude
voice
attunement
material, matter
strive
quarrel, contend
strict, stern
component

studiert
Studium
Stufenordnung
StUmper
stiirmisch
Subjekt
subjektiv
Subreption
Subsistenz
Substanz
Substrat
Subsumption
Superstition
Symbol
Symmetrie
Sympathie
synthetisch
System

471

studied
endeavor
hierarchy
bungler
impetuous
subject
subjective
subreption
subsistence
substance
substrate
subsumption
superstition
symbol
symmetry
sympathy
synthetic
system

T
Talent
Tanz
Tatigkeit
Tatsache
tauglich
tauschendes
Diallele
tautologisch
Technik
technisch
Technizismus
Teil
TeilnehmungsgefiihL
Teleologie
teleologisch
Teleskop
Tetraktik
Theismus
Thema
Theologie
theoretisch
Theorie
Theosophie
Theurgie
Tier
tierisch
Ton

talent
dance
activity
matter of fact
suitable, fitting
vicious circle
tautologous
technic
technical
technic
part
feeling of

sympathy
teleology
teleological
telescope
tetradic system
theism
topic, theme
theology
theoretical
theory
theosophy
theurgy
animal
animal
tone

472

GLOSSARY

Tonkunst
Totalitiit
transzendent
transzendental
Trauerspiel
Traum
Traurigkeit
Trichotomie
Trieb
Triebfeder
trugen
Thgend
tun
tunlich

music
totality
transcendent
transcendental
tragedy
dream
sadness
trichotomy
impulse, urge
incentive, spring
be deceptive
virtue
do
practicable

U
nbel
iibereinkommen
Obereinstimmung
Obergang
iiberhaupt

evil, unwell
agree
harmony,
agreement
transition
in general, as such,
at all
uberlegen
consider,
deliberate
Oberlegenheit
superiority
iibermenschlich superhuman
iibernatiirlich
supernatural
iiberreden
persuade
iiberschwenglich transcendent,
excessive, highflown
ubersinnlich
supersensible
iibersteigen
exceed. surpass
iibertreffen
surpass
iiberzeugen
convince
ublich
customary
Uhr
watch
Umrifi
outline
umsonst
gratuitous
unabsehlich
immense
unangemessen
incommensurate,
inadequate
unaussprechlich unspeakable
unbedingt
unconditioned.
unconditionally
unbegrenzt
unbounded

unbestimmt

indeterminate,
undetermined
Unding
absurdity
unendlich
infinite
unerfindlich
inscrutable
unergriindlich
unfathomable
ungeheuer
monstrous
Ungeniigsamkeit insatiability
ungestalt
unshapely
ungestum
vehement
ungesucht
unstudied
unbelief
Unglaube
ungliubisch
incredulous
ungleichartig
heterogeneous
displeasure
Unlust
unmittelbar
direct
unmoglich
impossible
unrecht
wrong
Unsterblichkeit immortality
untauglich
unsuitable, unfit
unterhalten
entertain, sustain
Unterordnung
subordination
unterscheiden
distinguish
unterschieden
distinct, different
Untersuchung
inquiry
Unterweisung
instruction
unterworfen
subject, subjected
impracticable
untunlich
unverkenntlich unmistakable
unziihlig
innumerable
unzulinglich
insufficient
unzweckmaBig unpurposive
Urbanitiit
urbanity
archetype, original
Urbild
image
Urheber
author
Urmutter
original mother
Ursache
cause
origin
Ursprung
judgment
Urteil
(power of)
Urteilskraft
judgment

V
vague
Veriinderung
veranlassen

vague
change,variation
prompt, occasion

GLOSSARY

verantwortlich
Verbindlichkeit
Verbindung
Verbindungsverborgen
verbriimt
verdienen
verehren
Vereinbarkeit
verfehlt
Verfeinerung
vergeblich
VergnOgen
Verhiiltnis
verhiingen
Verkniipfung
verkiindigen
verlangen
Vermiltlung
Vermogen
vermuten
Vernunft
VernunftVemiinfteln
vemUnftelnd
Vernunftschlu13
verrichten
verschaffen
verschieden
verschonern
verschwenden
verschwendetisch
versinnlichen
Verstand
verstiindig
verstirken
Verstellung
versuchen

answerable,
responsible
obligation
connection, link,
combination
mediating
hidden. concealed
veiled
deserve
venerate
reconcilability,
compatibility,
unifiability
miscarried
refinement
futile. vain
gratification
relation(ship)
ordain
connection
proclaim
demand
mediation
power, ability

suppose, presume,
conjecture
reason
rational, of reason
reasoning, subtle
reasoning
reasoning
syllogistic
inference
accomplish,
perform
provide, procure
different. various
embellish
squander
extravagant
make sensible
understanding
intelligent. with
understanding
reinforce, increase
dissimulation
endeavor, try

473

verteidigen
verwandeln
Verwandtschaft
Verwechslung
Verweis
verwerflich
Verworrenheit
Verwunderung
venagt
Venierung

defend
transform
kinship, affinity
confusion
reprimand
reprehensible
confusedness
amazement
despondent
ornament,
decoration
Verzweiflung
desperation
Vielheit
multiplicity
Virtuosi
virtuosi
voJJfiihren
accomplish
vollig
completely, fully
Vollkommenheit perfection
Vollstandigkeit completeness
voraussetzen
presuppose
vorgeblich
alleged
vorlaufig
provisional
Vorsatz
resolve
vorschreiben
prescribe, enjoin
Vorschrift
precept
present
vorstellen
presentation
Vorstel1ung
Vorstellungsart way of presenting
prejudice
Vorurteil
excellence,
VorzOglichkeit
primacy,
distinction,
priority

W
wacJcer
wagen
wahlen

Wahn
Wahnsinn
Wahnwitz
Wahrheit
Wahrnehmung
Wahrscheinlichkeit
Warmematerie
wechselseitig
weilen
Weisheit

vigorous
venture
choose, select
delusion
madness
mania
truth
perception
probability
caloric
reciprocal
linger
wisdom

474

GLOSSARY

Welt
WeltWeltbestes

world
of the world
highest good in the
world
weltbiirgerlich
cosmopolitan
worldly
weltlich
Weltwissenschaft cosmology
Werkzeug
instrument
Wert
value
being, nature
Wesen
Widerspruch
contradiction
Widerstand
resistance
Widerstreit
conflict
Wille
will
Willensmeinung preference
power of choice
Willkur
chosen, arbitrary
willk urlich
actuality
Wirklichkeit
Wirkung
effect, action,
operation,
causation
Wissen
knowledge
Wissenschaft
science
wissenschaftlich scientific
Wohl
welfare
Wohlbefinden
well-being
wohldenkend
upright
Wohlgefallen
liking
wohlgesinnt
well-meaning
Wohlredenheit
excellence of
speech
Wohlsein
well-being
Wohlwollen
benevolence
wollen
will
Wollen
volition
Wunsch
wish
Wurde
dignity
WOrdigkeit
worthiness
WOste
wasteland, wilderness, desert

Z
Zabl
zahlen
Zeichen
Zeichnung
Zeit

number
number, class,
include
sign
design
time, period, age

zerstreut
zeugen
Zeugnis
Zierat
Zivilisierung
Zorn
Zucht
Zufall
Zufalligkeit
zufrieden
ziigellos
zugestehen
Zugleichsein
zugrunde legen
zukommen
zulangen
zulassen
zuletzt
zumuten
zureichend
Zusammenfassung
zusammengesetzt
Zusammenhang
Zusammensetzung
Zusammenstimmung
zusammentreffen
Zuschauer

sporadic
engender, generate
testimony
ornament
civilization
anger
discipline
accident, chance
contingency
content
unbridled
concede
simultaneity
presuppose, lay at
the basis, regard
as basis
belong to,
apply to
suffice
admit
ultimately
require
sufficient
comprehension
composite
coherence

combination
harmony,
agreement
concur, coincide
beholder.
spectator
state, condition
Zustand
Zutraglichkeit
benefit
Zwang
constraint
Zweck
purpose
zweckiihnlich
purposelike
Zweckbestimdestination for a
mung
purpose
Zweckbeziehung reference to a
purpose
unity of a purpose,
Zweckeinheit
unity in terms
of purposes
Zweckform
purposive form
purposive
zweckmafiig

GLOSSARY

Zweckverbindung
zweckwidrig

connection in
terms of
purposes
contrapurposive

Zweifel
Zweifelglaube
zwingen

475

doubt
skepticism
compel, force

INDEX

The roman numerals refer to the materials that precede the Kantian
text: Foreword, Preface, and Introduction. All references in arabic
numerals are to the pagination along the margin of the text, which is
the pagination from the Akademie edition on which this translation is
based. The unprimed numbers refer to volume 5 of that edition,
which contains the Critique of Judgment that Kant published; the
primed numbers refer to volume 20, containing the First Introduction,
which is included here as the Translator's Supplement. Although the
headings are arranged alphabetically, the material underneath any
one heading is ordered by affinity of topics, not by alphabetical or
page sequence. Works by Kant are indexed by their English titles;
references to other authors are given under these authors' names.
Abyss (Abgrund, Schlund), for
sensibility, the infinite as, 265, cf.
258, see also Sensibility, Infinitethe; man hurled back into, 452, see
also Chaos
Academic (Schul-), form, 307;
correctness, 235, 310, cf. 312, 355;
instruction, 318, cf. 304; see also
School
Accident (Akzidem), xxxiii, lxxiv,
393; substance as support of, 352,
see also Substance
Accident (Zufall), purposive form
interpreted as, 434, see also
Purposiveness; changes in

organisms due to, 420, see also
Organized (beings); and see
Chance- blind
Acting (or Action) (handeln.
Handlung), distinguished from
doing, 303; free, see Freedom of
the will; morally good. see Moral
(good)
Activity (Beschiiftigung), free (and
harmonious) of the mind (the
cognitive powers), 292, cf. 270, see
also Taste-judgments of.
Pleasure-in judgments of taste
Actuality (Wirklichkeit), contrasted
with possibility, 401-02.466, cf.

477

478

INDEX

Actuality (continued)
236, see also Possibility; of what
is given in intuition, 402, see also
Intuition (intellectual); cognition
of, not claimed in a hypothesis,
466, see also Hypothesis; and see
Purpose
Admiration (Bewunderung),
contrasted with amazement, 272,
365, ct. 245; for the order and
beauty of nature, 187, 301, 326,
478, 482 n. 105, d. 299, see also
Order, Beauty (in nature); of
nature in our reason, 363-64, see
also Man, Reason; object of the
highest, 262; of divine greatness,
263
Aesthetic (Asthetik), transcendental,
of (reflective) judgment, 269,
221'-32',249', cf. 247'
Aesthetic (iisthetisch), ambiguity of
the term, 221'-24' , see also
Aesthetics, Sensation; character of
a presentation, 188, see also
Presentation; judgments, their
matter is sensation, 226, see also
Sensation; judgments of sense, lv,
214,215,223,244,337,223' br.n.
36, 224'-26' ,229',248', see also
Agreeable-the; magnitude, in
Baumgarten and Meier,lxviii;
attributes, 315-16, cf. 312, see also
Attributes; comprehension, 254,

259-60, cf. 251, see also
Comprehension; quantity, liv, 215,
see also Quantity; reflective
judgments (about the beautiful and
subliIne), 169, 190,192,204,228,
260,267,270,288,290-91,350,366,
223' -26', 230' , 231' ,239',241',
243' , ct. 271, 221', see also Tastejudgments of, Beauty, Beautifulthe, Sublime-the, Judgments
(reflective), Reflection; reflective
power of judgment, 169-70, 192-94,
247, 267, 280, 290, 290 n. 15, 295,
300,339,348,350,353,247'-49' ,
see also Taste, Sublime-the,
judgment-power of (reflective),

Reflection; reflective power of
judgment, its maxims, 339, cf. 338,
see also Judgment-power of (as
such, its maxims); reflective power
of judgment is a special power,lxiv,
lxxviii, cii, civ, 193-94,243'-44',
246'-49', cf. 169-70,271, see also
Problem III, Critique (of aesthetic
judgment); and see Ideas,
Magnitude
Aesthetics (Asthetik), broad and
narrow senses of the term, xlix, cf.
247', see also Aesthetic
(listhetisch) (ambiguity of the
term), Sensation (ambiguity of the
term); whether an art, a science.
or critique,li, cf. 286,304,355
Aether (Ather) 224, 348 br. n. 25,

467
Affects (Af!ekte), 173.177 n. 18,
271-74incl.n. 39,276. 331-32,430
br. n. 24; contrasted with passions.
272 n. 39, cf. 275,430 br. n. 24, see
also Passions; vigorous and
langu.id. 272-73 incl. n. 39, 276:
play of, 273; language of, is music,
328, see also Music; affected, see
Mannerism
Agitation (Bewegilllg), mental, 258,
334, is what emotion involves, 328
br. n. 65. see also Emotion
Agreeable-the (dos Angenehme) ,
is what the senses lik.e (find
pleasurable) in sensation, 205, 208,
cf.lix-lx, 2CY7, 209, 213, 215, 244,
270 br. n. 36, 281 br. n. 3, 305, 306,
324-25,329, 330, 224',229',248',
see also Pleasure, Aesthetic
(iisthetisch) (judgments of sense);
is liked directly, 208, 217, cf. 205,
'1JJ7, 236, 224'; gratifies (is enjoyed
by) us, 2f1l, 208, 210, cf. 266,305,
see also Gratification, Enjoyment;
produces inclination,1iY7, cf. 210,
see also Inclination; does not
contribute to culture, 266, see also
Culture; agreeableness holds not
only for man but also for
nonrational animals, 210, see also

INDEX

Agreeable (continued)
Animals; is an incentive for
desires, 266, cf.1fJ7, 209. see also
Incentives, Desire-power of; is
connected with interest, lv, lx, 205,
207.209,cf.210,223,299,331.see
also Interest; judgments about it
are not free, 210; judgments about
it imply no univenality, liii, 212-15.
217,224,275,282,291,306,225' ,
cf. 278, 330, 337, 229', see also
Validity; greatest sum of, is
happiness. 208, see also Happiness;
contrasted with the beautiful,liv,
lv, W7, 209-10, 212. cf.liii, 325,
330,346, and the sublime, 266, see
also Beautiful-the. Sublime-the,
Pleasure; contrasted with the good,
207-10.213,266-67,cf.222,292,
see also Good-the, Pleasure;
transition from it to the morally
good, 298, cf. 433, see also Moral
(good), Transition; and see Art
(agreeable), Charm
Agreement (Beitritt, Einstimmung,
Einstimmigkeit, Obereinstimmung) ,
claim to everyone's, in judgments
of taste, see Taste-judgments of
Aim (Absicht), morally necessary.
484, see also Final purpose; and
see Intention
Algebra (Algebra), 251, cf. 352
Allegory (Allegoriu), in art, 312
Allison, Henry E., evii n. 108
Amazement (Verwunderung), 269,
272,365, see also Admiration
Ampliative (erweiternd), see
Expansive
Analogy (Analogie), 464 n. 64, in
exhibition, 352-53, see also
Symbol, Exhibition; between the
arts and expression in language,
320, see also Expression, Artfine; between lingering in one's
contemplation of the beautiful and
lingering over something charming,
222, see also Charm,
Contemplation; among the forms
of organisms, 418-19. see also

479

Organized (beings); cognition by.
see God; inference by, 463-65;
mathematical, 382, see also
Mathematics; and see Beauty.
Natural (purposes), Technic of
nature
Analytic (analytisch), truths
(judgments, etc.), xxxi, cf. 203' br.
n. 13; contrasted with synthetic,
xxxii, see also Synthetic; division.
contrasted with synthetic. 197 n.
43, see also Divisions; unity of
experience, contrasted with
synthetic, 203' n. 13, see also
Experience
Anatomy (Anatomie), 342-43, cf. 423;
comparative, 418
Anaxagoras.363
Ancients-the (die Alten). their
works, 282-83, cf. 232 n. 49, 305,
310, 355-56,363; their gods, 439,
cf. 447 but also 458, see also
Demonology
Anger (Zorn), as sublime, 272
Animals (Tiere), nonhuman,
compared with man, 355, 419, 430.
436 n. 30, 464 n. 64, cf. 210, 233,
see also Man, Song; nonhuman.
their inner purposes, 347, see also
Purpose, Organized (beings);
nonhuman, have artistic instinct.
442,464 n. 64, cf. 172,303,230'

n. 50; nonhuman, reflect, 211';
human beings as, see Man; mother
earth compared to a large animal,
419; see also Genera and
species
Announcement That a Treatise on
Perpetual Peace in Philosophy Is
Nearly Completed (Verkiindigung
des nahen Abschlusses eines
Traktats zum ewigen Frieden in der
Philosophie), 473 br. n. 93
Anthropology (Anthropologie).
empirical, 277, cf. 177 D. 18,230 '
n. 50; of the inner sense, rational
psychology as, 461, cf. 479, see
also Sense, Psychology; and see
Man

480

INDEX

Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point
of View (Anthropologie in
pragmatischer Hinsicht). xxix, 167
br. n. 4, 169 br. n. 8,212 hr. n. 22,
224 hr. n. 40, 231 hr. n. 47, 232 br.
n. 51,234 br. n. 55,235 br. n. 58,
240 hr. n. 66, 243 hr. n. 73, 244 br.
n. 2, 272 hr. n. 38, 272 hr. ns.
40-42,275 br. n. 44, 291 hr. n. 19,
294 hr. n. 21,297 hr. n. 29.301 br.
n. 31, 305 br. n. 38, 308 hr. n.40,
313 br. n. 46. 324 br. n. 60.330 br.
n. 68.331 br. ns. 71 and 73, 332
hr. n. 74, 335 br. n. 76, 336 br. n.
77,351 br. n. 31,354 hr. n. 40,380
br. n. 42,419 hr. n. 4, 430 br. n.
24. 433 hr. ns. 26 and 28,450 hr.
n. 42, 485 br. n. 107
Anthropomorphism (Anthropomorphismus), 353, 457 br. n. 54,
cf. 457. 459, 459 n. 57
Anthropophobia (Anthropophohie),
276, see also Man
Antinomy (Antinomie). xxxi, xxxviii,
341,344--45,385, why there are
three kinds, 345; of theoretical
pure reason, xxvi, xxxi, xxxviii,
lxxxix n. 89, ci, cii, cvi n. 107.341,
345-46. d. 471 n. 87; third, of
theoretical pure reason, xxxi, xxxix,
lxxxix n. 89, civ-cix, 175, cf.
195-96; of practical pure reason,
xxvi, cii, 341.345-46, cf. 458. 471
n. 87; of aesthetic reflective
judgment (taste), xxvii, lxii, xcvi n.
101, cix, 337-46, cf. 353, as "the"
antinomy of the third Critique,
xciv inci. n. 96, cii, 345, 385; of
aesthetic reflective judgment, its
solution involves the supersensible,
lxii. lxv, 340-46, and includes the
solution to the antinomy of
teleological judgment, xcvi, cf. ci;
see also Antinomy of teleological
judgment
Antinomy of teleological judgment
(Antinomie der teleologischen
Urteilskraft), xxvii,lxxxix, civ-cv,
386-415, as Kant presents it

initially, lxxxviii, xci, 386-88;
applies not only to objective but
also to subjective purposiveness of
nature and to the principle of
judgment as such, lxxxviii,
xciii-xciv, xcvii, ci, 386, see also
Purposiveness- nature's objective
and material, Purposivenessnature's subjective, Judgmentprinciple of; conflicts with the
third antinomy, civ-cix; alleged
solution of it by making the categories regulative (i.e., by making them
maxims), lxxxviii-xci, c, ef. cv-cvii,
387,389; alleged solution of it by
subordinating mechanism to
teleology. c, ef. 409-15,417-24, see
also Mechanism, Teleology; its
solution, xci-xciv, c, ci, civ-cv,
407-DS, cf. 412,429,218'
Antiparos. its grotto, 349
Antipathy (Antipathie) , 276
Aping (Nachiif!ung), 318, see also
Copying, Imitation
Apodeictic (apodiktisch), xxxvii, c,
237, 454,468, see also
Necessity
A posteriori, xxxi, 346,410, see also
Empirical
Appearances (Erscheinungen), xxvi,
xxxiv, xxxviii, xcv, 174, 189, 195,
250,255,408 br. n. 27, 209', cf.
405, see also Experience; nature
or the world as sum total of (or as
appearance, or as experienced, or
"world of' experience), xxvi, xxviii.
xxxii-xxxiv, xxxvi. xxxix, xliv, xlvi.
xlviii, lxx, lxxiii, lxxxviii, cv, cvi n.
107,167,195 n. 39,196,246,250,
255,268,386,409,416,209', ef.
351,412,435,464,476,208',see
also Nature, Understanding; human
beings as, i.e., as beings of sense,
xxxix, 195 n. 39, ef. 196,353,460,
465, see also Man; must be
(regarded as) based on something
supersensible, 344,345,412.413,
cf. xxxviii, 351. 409, see also

INDEX

Appearances (continued)
Supersensible-the; and see Thing
in itself
Apprehension (Auffassung), our
power of, is the imagination, xxxv,
287, cf. 279, see also Imagination;
may progress to infinity, 251-52,
see also Infinity; progressive, 254,
255,258, cf. 250; see also Tastejudgments of
Approval (Beifall), kinds of, 210; in
judgments of taste, see Tastejudgments of
A priori, xxx-xxxi, cf. 182, contrasted
with pure, xxx; intuition, concepts,
judgments, etc., see these
headings; see also Source
Archaeology (Archii%gie), of art,
428 n. 20; of nature, 419, 428 n. 20
Archetype (Urbild, Archetypon), 322,
355, cf. 408, 408 br. n. 27, of
beauty (taste), 232, 235, see also
Ideal; as used by nature, 234-35,
cf. 233, see also Technic of nature;
archetypal understanding, see
Understanding
Architect (Architekt), supreme, 410,
see also Architectonic,
Understanding (supreme); and see
Cause (intelligent, of the world)
Architectonic (Architektonik,
architektonisch), 438, cf. 226, 381,
understanding, 388, 420, see also
Architect, Cause (intelligent, of the
world)
Architecture (Baukunst), 225, 322,

323 n. 59
Aristippus, 370 n. 2B
Aristotle, 312 br. n. 45, cf. 215' n. 23
Arithmetic (Arithmetik, arithmetisch),
pure, 177 n. 18, 230', n. SO, see
also Mathematics; as estimation of
magnitudes by the understanding,
254, see also Magnitude; analogy,
382, see also Analogy; and see
Numbers, Algebra
Art (Kunst), is causality in terms of
ideas (of purposes), 311, 370, 373,
390,397, cf. lxvii, 193, 198,372,

481

240'.246' , 251', see also Causality,
Purpose; is production through
(practical reason's) freedom, 303,
cf. 374-75,234', see also Reason,
Freedom of the will; human, is
limited, 384; divine, 3117, cf. 438,
see also Cause (intelligent, of the
world); requires rules, 'Y.J7. d. 196';
distinguished from nature, 303, ef.
181,359,383, see (llso Nature;
nature as, see Technic of nature;
distinguished from science, 3()3-.f)4,
304 n. 35, cf. 317,355, see also
Science; distinguished from craft,
304; work. of, contrasted with a
machine, 219', see also Machine;
useful, 313; of land surveying, 173,
303,198'; free. contrasted with
mercenary, 304,321; free, does
need SORle constraint, 304, cf. 310,
see also Art-fine; the seven free
arts,304; aesthetic, contrasted with
mechanical, 305, 313, 318, 350, cf.
304, 306, 310, 328-30, see also
Instrument; agreeable, contrasted
with fine, 305, 325, 332, 336, 350,
see also Art-fine; of persuasion,
see Oratory
Art-fine (schOne Kllnst), in l..eibniz,
Wolff, Baumgarten, Meier, xlviii,
I; in Hutcheson, Hume, Burke, Iii;
is production of the beautiful, 344,
see also Beautiful-the; its
essential feature is purposive form,
325-26, cf. 225: is purposive on its
own, 306, cf. 317-18,322, see also
Purposiveness; interest in, 301, see
also Interest: is judged in terms of
its beauty, by taste, xxiv, 299,355,
cf. 232, ~13, 319, 251', see also
Beauty, Taste; its beauty is a
beautiful presentation of a thing,
311, cf. 312. see also Presentation;
is judged also for its perfection,
311, d. 229, see also Perfection;
its standard is the reflective power
of judgment, nl, 310, cf. 319, 320,
and the subject's (supersensible)
nature, 344, see also ludgment-

482

INDEX

Art-fine (continued)
power of, Man; interest in the
beautiful in it is no proof of moral
goodness, 298, see also Moral
(good), Virtue; can describe even
ugly things beautifully, 312;
sublimity in, see Sublime-the; its
production requires some rules,
3CY7, 310, cf. 304, some science,
305,355, and an intentional
purpose. lxvii. 252, 306-07, 310,
311,322. cf. 236 n. 60,317. but
these must not show, lxvii, 306-07 ,
321,cf.242,309,313.317-18.344.
350,355, 375, 251', see also Rule,
Science. Purpose, Intention; is not
a product of science. 350-51. cf.
317; must be free art, 321, see also
Art; has manner but not method,
318-19,355. see also Manner,
Method; must look like (beautiful)
nature, lxvii, 306-07 (see also
Imitation). as beautiful nature
looks like art. lxvii, 306. cf. 311;
gets its rule through aesthetic
ideas, 351, see also Ideas
(aesthetic); its production requires
imagination, understanding. spirit,
and taste, 320 (see also these
headings). and, in particular,
genius, lxvii, 307-08, 350-51, cf.
309. see also Genius; and inspired
art, 319; its works should be
models, Le., should be exemplary.
lxvii. 308. cf. 232, 235 n. 57. 282-83,
286. 309-10. 312,318, 355-56. see
also Genius; the artist must keep
in view a certain ideal. 355; role
of taste in producing, lxvii,312-13.
319,353; connoisseurs of. 300;
makes us civilized, 433, see also
Civilization; aesthetic value of the
various fine arts,lxviii. 326--30;
makes reason dominant in us, 433,
see also Reason, Dominance;
cultivates us, 326, see also Culture;
its objects must show themselves
as having some dignity, 336; should

be connected with moral ideas,
326, see also Ideas, Beauty (its link
to morality); sketch of the division of, lxviii, 320-26 incl. n. 58;
visual, 225, 321-24, 329-30, its
essential feature is design, 225, cf.
325-26,330; plastic. 317, 322, cf.
234' , 251'; of color, 324. see also
Colors; of speech, 232 n. 49, 310.
320-21,328, see also Speech; of
the (beautiful) play of sensations.
225,321,324-25,331-33, see also
Music; combination of the
various fine arts, 325-26
Article (Mikel), of faith. 469 n. 81.
see also Faith; important, for
morality, 230' n. SO, see also
Morality
Articulation (Artikulation), 320
Artistic (Kunst-). instinct in animals,
442, 464 n. 64; understanding, 441,
see also Understanding. Cause
(intelligent, of the world);
perfection in nature, 251' , see also
Pc~on; and .see Art
Assent (Beistimmung. Bei/ail), claim
to everyone's, in judgments of
taste. see Taste-judgments of
Assent (Furwahrhalten), in
philosophy must be based on
matters of fact, 475, see also
Philosophy, Fact-matters of;
theoretical, its degrees, 463-66, ct.
467-68; practical, 469-73; to God's
existence, as based on teleology,
461-66 (see also God), and on
morality, 467-74, see also Faith,
God; free, 469 n. 81, 472
Association-laws of (Assoziationsgesetze), the (reproductive,
empirical) imagination's, 240, 269,
314.352, see also Imagination; in
music, 328, see also Music
Assumption (Annahme) , see
Hypothesis, Faith
Attitude (Gssinnung), moral, 301,
444.446,452,459,481-82, see also
Moral; moral, its corruption by

INDEX

Attitude (continued)
oratory, 327, see also Oratory;
religious, 481-82, see also Religion
Attributes (Attribute), aesthetic,
315-16, cf. 312, contrasted with
logical,315
Attunement (Stimmung), of the mind,
to moral feeling, 445-46, see also
Moral (feeling); of the cognitive
powers, see Harmony; of the imagination, 247, see also Imagination;
in music, 324, 329, see also Music;
and see Sublime-the (what, properly speaking, is and is not sublime)
Autocracy (Autokratie), of matter,
see Matter (Materie)
Autonomy (Autonomie), of the
mind's higher powers, 196; of
understanding, 196,225', cf. 241,
215', see also Understanding; of
reason, 196-97,225', see also
Reason; of reflective judgment,
389,225',cf. 185. 196,385. see
also Judgment-power of,
Heautonomy; of taste, 282, 350, ef.
281, see also Taste; imagination
does not have, 241, see also
Imagination; of virtue, 283, see
also Virtue; and see Heteronomy,
Legislation
Batteux, Charles. 284
Baumgarten. Alexander Gottlieb.
xlviii-Ii, lxviii, lxxii, 227 br. n. 42,
304 br. n. 37
Beautiful-the (das SchQne), use of
the adjective 'beautiful,' xxiv, Iiv,
cf. xlvii, see also Beauty;
according to other philosophers,
see Beauty; is what, without a
concept, is liked universally, !iv,
211,212,219,cf. 210.231.247. 290,
344,346,366, and with necessity,
236,240, cf. 247; is liked directly,
226-27.244,353, i.e., without any
interest, lv, 205, 210, 267, cf. 244.
247,267,271. but as we merely
judge (contemplate. reflect on) it.

483

lv, 190.204,267,292,306;
concerns form. see Beauty,
Charm; is subjectively purposive,
see Beauty, Purposivenessnature's SUbjective; is the
exhibition of an indeterminate
concept of the understanding. 244,
see also Exhibition; has a basis
outside ourselves, 246; contrasted
with the agreeable and the good,
Iiv-Iv, 209-10, 212-13, 221, 226-30,
241,244.266-67,346, cf. 190,224,
268.325. see also Beauty,
Agreeable-the, Good-the;
contrasted with the sublime, 192,
244-47,266-78,249', see also
Sublime-the; in art, see Artfine; in nature, characterized, see
Beauty; in nature, Kant's main
concern regarding beauty, liv; in
nature, is patent to experience,
291, cf. 349; ideal of, see Beauty;
interest in, lxv-lxvi, 205 n. to, 221,
223, cf. 271,275, specifically,
empirical interest, 296-98, and
moral interest, 296-303, see also
Interest; in nature (but not in art),
a direct interest in it is a mark of
a good soul, 298, cf. 303, see also
Virtue; beautiful objects contrasted
with beautiful views of objects,
243, cf. 311; colors and tones can
be beautiful only if pure, 224, see
also Colors, Tone; charms are
compatible with, 223, 225, 244-45,
see also Charm; contemplation of,
analogy between lingering on it
and lingering over something
charming, 222; deduction
concerning, 279, see also
Deduction (of judgments of taste);
there can be no science of, 304,
354-55, cf.lxxxiii n. 85, see also
Science; keeps the mind in quiet
contemplation, 258, cf. 222, 247,
see also Contemplation; prepares
us to love something without
interest. 267, cf. 271; contributes

484

INDEX

Beautiful (continued)
to culture, 266, cf. 326, 380 n. 43,
see also Culture; as used for the
sake of the good, 230, cf. 300-01;
is the symbol of the morally good,
lxv, 353, see also Beauty, Moral
(good); and see Taste-judgments
of, Pleasure- in judgments of taste
Beauty (SchOnheit), in Leibniz, Wolff,
Baumgarten, Meier, xlviii-I, cf.
227-28,284-86,304,340,341,
346-51, 3S4-55, 226'-29'.248'; in
Hutcheson, Hume, Burke,li-liii,
lxix, 269 br. n. 34, 277-78, 285 br.
n. 7, 238', cf. 237,239,281-82,284,
288,339,341,345-47,350,239',
241'; predicate of, lvi, 215, 219; is
attributed to nature itself, 249'-SO',
cf. 245; we talk as if it were a
property, xxiv, xlvii, liv, 211, 212,
218, cf. 266, 285, 289; is not a
property, Iiv, lvi, 282, 347, cf. lxvi,
228, 288, 290, see also Reality;
contrasted with perfection (the
good), 226-31, 241.311-12, 340,
226'-29', cf. 341, see also
Perfection, Beautiful-the; artistic,
judging it involves assessing the
thing's perfection as well, 311, cf.
229, see also Art-fine; alleged, of
geometric (or other regular)
objects, 241-44,365-66; is
nothing beyond a relation to the
subject's feeling,liv, 218; requires
a purposiveness without a purpose,
241, see also Purposivenessnature's subjective; is (based on)
a formal subjective purposiveness,
226,228,245,361,cf.193,359,
366; is the form in the reciprocal
subjective purposiveness of the
cognitive powers, 286; is intrinsic
subjective purposiveness, 249'; its
standard is sought only within us,
350; concerns only form, 230, 244,
253,279-80,cf.xcvin.l0l,I90,
223-24,227,245,247,293,299,359,
375, see also Charm; is the
purposiveness that a form has in

appearance, 249'; is the expression
of aesthetic ideas, 320, cf. 244, see
also Ideas; holds only for beings
both animal and rational, 210, cr.
279, see also Being, Man;
empirical criterion of, 231-33, cf.
lii-liii, 237; archetype of, 235, cf.
232, see also Archetype; ideal of,
lxvi-lxvii, 231-36, cf. 230, 270, has
two components, 233, see also
Standard idea; only man admits of
an ideal of, lxvii, 233, 235, cf. 270,
viz., the expression of the moral,
235; interest in, see Beautiful-the;
in nature, is nature's harmony with
the free play of our cognitive
powers, 380, cf. 245,319,320,344;
in nature, is an analogue of art,
375, see also Art-fine, Technic of
nature; in nature, is the exhibition
of the concept of formal subjective purposiveness, 193, see also
Purposiveness- nature's subjective,
Exhibition; in nature, contrasted
with beauty in art, 299-300, 311-12,
cf. 229'; in nature, as superior to
beauty in art, 299-300, cf. 301; in
art is a beautiful presentation of B
thing, 311, cf. 312, see also Artfine; considered as an objective
purposiveness, 380, cf. 246,291,
see also Purposiveness,
Purposiveness-nature's objective
and material; sensible, 272-73, see
also Sensible; alleged intellectual,
271,366, see also Intellectual; free
(vague, independent), contrasted
with accessory (fixed), lxvi, lxvii,
229-33,243,245,246, see also
Formations; its links to the "three"
supersensibles, lxi-lxvi, xcvi, see
also Deduction (of judgments of
taste), Supersensible-the; its link
to morality, lxi-lxvi, lxxi, cf.
ciii-civ, 297, 300-02, 351-54,
356,445,459, see also Morality;
as symbol (analogue) of morality,
lxv, ciii, 351-54, 356, 459,
cf. 267; admiration for, as similar

INDEX

Beauey (continued)
to religious feeling, 482 n. 105,
see also Admiration, Religion;
and see Taste, Taste-judgments
of, Pleasure- in judgments of taste
Beck, Lewis White, xix n. 1, xxi, lxix
n. 58, cv n. 106, cvi n. 107, cvii
n. 108
Being (Wesen), of sense, man as, see
Appearances; worldly, 353, cf. 393,
451, see also World; rational, see
Rational (beings), Man; of our
reasoning, contrasted with being
of reason, 468, see also Reasoning;
necessary, see Necessity; original
or supreme, see God, Cause
(intelligent, of the world); supreme,
why the expression is not capitalized, 273 br. n. 43; supremely
real, 475, cf. 476, 476 br. n. 99;
organized, see Organized;
extraterrestrial, 467, 467 br. n. 76
Belief (Glaube), contrasted with faith,
467 br. n. 75; see also Faith,
Unbelief
Benefit (Zutraglichkeit), contrasted
with usefulness, 367
Benevolence (Wohlwollen), 276
Bernard, 1. H., xxi
Blumenbach, Johann Friedrich, 424
Body (Korper), in metaphysical and
in transcendental terms, 181, see
also Transcendental; science of
bodies, 416; heavy bodies, their
trajectory, 363, see also Motion;
and mind or spirit, 331-35,467-68,
cf. 278, 324, see also Spirit,
Health; enjoyment and
gratification as pertaining to, see
Enj oyment, Gratification;
animate, some monarchies as
similar to, 352; organized, see
Organized
Breaking (Brechen), of head, neck.
and heart, 334
Brief Outline of Some Reflections
Concerning Fire (Meditationum
quarundam de igne succincta

485

delineatio), 224 br. n. 40, 348 br.

n.2S
Burke, Edmund, Iii, lxix, 269 br.

n.

34,277-78,312 br. n. 45,238'
Business (Geschii!t),see Occupation
Butts, Robert E., Ixxxix n. 90, xc n.
91, cvin.107
Caloric (f-Winnematene), 348, 348 br.
n.25,349
Camper, Peter, 304, 428
Caricature (Karikatur), 235 n. 57
Cassirer, Ernst, xxix
Casual ism (KasuaJitiit), concerning
natural purposes. 391
Categorical imperative (lcategorircher
lmperativ), xliii, is a purely
formal law, xliv; is a rational idea,
xlv; :S-ee also Moral (law)
Categories (Kategorien), are a priori
concepts of the understanding,
xxxiii, see also Concepts,
Understanding; are understanding's
most abstract concepts, xxxvi, cf.
177 n. 18; belong to the form of
all thought, 485 br. n. 107, ct.
xxxiii, see also Thought; are
ontological predicates, 181, cf. 385;
as transcendental predicates
(concepts of nature}, 179, 182, see
also Transcendental, Nature; are a
priori concepts of the synthetic
unity of the manifold of intuition,
288, cf. 203' n. 13,211' n. 21, see
also Imagination; are constitutive
and determinative, rather than
regulative, xci, cv-cvi inel. n. 107,

203' n. 13, cf. xc n. 91, xciii, 385,
see also Constitutive.
Determinative, Regulative;
schematized, xxxvi, see also
Schema; are the universal concepts
of nature, 187, see also Nature; are
forms that we contribute to nature
as appearance (experience), xxviii,
xxxiii, xxxiv, xxxvii, xliv, xcv, cf.
210', see also Appearances;
underlie the universal laws
(synthetic a priori principles) of

486

INDEX

Categories (continued)
nature. xxxiii. xxxvi-xxxvii. Ixxvi.
180,182-83,211' n. 21, cf. 288,
463-64. 242' -43' ,see also Natural
(laws), Understanding, Synthetic a
priori, Principles; four headings of,
xxxiii, liv, 203 br. n. 2, 247, d. 244,
266-67; require a deduction, 288,
see also Deduction; can give rise
to theoretical cognition only if
applied to objects of possible
experience (objects of sense),
482-84, cf. xxxvii-xxxviii, see also
Cognition, Experience, Immanent;
as used in our practical cognition
of God, 482-85, 485 br. n. 107. see
also Cognition, God; laws based
on the, our perceptions'
concurrence with them arouses no
pleasure, 187; the concept of
purposiveness is not a category,
219'-20', see also Purposiveness;
transcendental definition by means
of, 177 n. 18, cf. 230' n. 50; see also
Causality, Substance
Catc, Marcus Pordus, 327 br. n. 64
Causal (Kausal-), relation, contrasted
with logical relation of ground and
consequent, xxxvi, see also Cause
(as such), Causality; laws,
universal, see Natural (laws).
Causality; laws, particular. see
Natural (laws), Particular in nature;
necessity as conRicting with
freedom or with nature's
purposiveness, see Antinomy
(third, of theoretical pure reason),
Antinomy of teleological
judgment; series, initiation of, see
Freedom of the will; series,
ascending and descending, see
Cause
Causality (KausaJitiit), category of,
xxxiii, xxxv, xxxvi, cvii, 351 br. n.
31,483, cf. 183, see also
Categories; schema of, xxxvi, cf.
183, see also Schema; in terms of
natural laws, its principle, xxxi,

xxxiii, xxxvi. lxxvi, cvii, 181, 183,
222 br. n. 35; in terms of natural
(mechanical) laws (the concept of
nature), 172, 195, 195 n. 39, 360.
390,397,408,411,457.219',235',
240', cf. 392, 197', 199', see also
Natural (laws), Nature,
Mechanism; in terms of efficient
causes, 360, 372, cf. 457, see also
Cause, Mechanism; in terms of
efficient causes, its compatibility
with the causality in terms of final
causes as found in man, see
Nature, Antinomy (third, of
theoretical pure reason), and cf.
195 n. 39; in terms of efficient
causes, its compatibility with the
causality in terms of final causes
as found in nature, see Natural
(purposes. concept of, its
possibility), Antinomy of
teleological judgment; of
understanding, 398, see (lIsa
Understanding; through (in terms
of the concept of) freedom
(through the will, power of choice,
practical reason), 172, 195, 195 n.
35,222,368,435,447,448 n. 39,
475,197',cf.373,396,403,455,
457, 465, 474, see also Freedom of
the will, Will, Reason, Cause
(intelligent, of the world); in terms
of ideas (rational concepts), 372.
373. 390, 236', cf. 177 n. 18,396,
230' n. SO, see also Ideas (rational);
in terms of intentions, 396, 236' ,
240' , cf. 395, 397, 434, see also
Intention; in terms of purposes
(final causes),lxxix-Ixxx, 359-61,
372,375,376.378,387,390,391,
397.408,410-13,424,426,435,
219',232',233' ,236' , cf. 455, 251',
see also Purpose, Cause, Technic
of nature, Teleological judgments,
Teleological principle, Cause
(intelligent, of the world); in terms
of purposes (final causes) is not
sufficient for natural science but

INDEX

Causality (continued)
must be combined with
mechanism, see Natural (science),
Mechanism
Cause(s) (UrsachelnD, as such, concept of, 183, cf. 351 br. n. 31; concept of, how it can be supported,
342; as meaning only 'basis: 195,
195 n. 39, cf. 483; first, xxxi, see
also Causality (through freedom),
Cause (intelligent, of the world);
real and ideal, 372-73; efficient,
xxxiii, xljv, lxxiii, cvii, 360, 372-73,
417,448,219', cf. 413, see also
Causality (in terms of natural laws),
Mechanism; efficient, form a descending series, 372; final, niv,
lxxi, Ixxiii,lxxvii, lxxxi,lxxxvi, 360,
372-73,377,379,380,387,389-91,
397,408,413,414,420,426,427,
429,439-40,444,448, 234',cf. 181,
see also Purpose, Teleological judgments, Causality; system of final
causes, 444, see also Nature (system
of); final, are put into things by us,
220' n. 27, cf. 429, 235'; final, form
a series that both ascends and descends, 372; final, principle of, see
Teleological principle; intelligent
(supreme), of the world (in terms of
purposes or intentions), i.e., original being, lxxxiv, xcix, c-cii. cv,
cviii, 389, 392-95, 397-401, 409-16,
420-26, 434, 435, 440, 465-66, cf.
303,381,388,420, 236', 237', see
a/so God, Supersensible-the (as
basis of nature's purposiveness, our
understanding's concept of it),
Teleology, Understanding,
Intelligence; this cause as acting
in terms of the final purpose.
434-35,441,443,445.446,448,454,
see also God. Final purpose
Cerf, Walter, xxi, 229 br. n. 46
Certainty (GewijJheit). 465-66;
apodeictic, see Necessity
Chance-blind (blinder Zufall), as
explaining nature's technic and

487

mechanism, according to Epicurus,
393, cf. 434; the principle that
nothing happens by chance, 376;
as upsetting, 458; games of chance,
see Play; see also Accident

(Zufall)
Chaos (Chaos ).lxviii, 246,452. cf.
cviii, 256, 261,263, 265, 269, 419,
427-28, 430, see also Might,
Misery, War
Characterizations (Charaklerismen).
352
Charlevoix, Pierre FranQOis de, 204
br. n. 9
Charm (Reiz), belongs to the matter
of liking, 223, 294,326, cf. 293,299,
305,326 (see also Agreeable-the).
and (hence) must be distinguished
from beauty (the beautiful), 212,
222-26,236,244,245 br. n. 4,278.
293,294, cf. 299. see a/so Tastejudgments of (erroneous),
Pleasure-in judgments of taste;
lingering over, analogy between
it and lingering in one's
contemplation of the beautiful,
222; is compatible with the
beautiful, 223, 225, 244-45, d. 222.
380, but not with the sublime. 245,
d. 271; of colors and tones, 225,
297,302, cf. 347; of music. 328-29,
is universally communicable, 328;
of beautiful nature, 299, 302, 347,
380, cf. 297; transition from it to
moral interest. 354. cf. 297, see also
Transition
Chemistry (Chemie), 173, cf. 349
Choice, power of (WilIkiir), see Will
Christianity (Christentum). 472 n. 90.
see also Religion
Cicero, 327 n. 63
Cipher (Chif/reschri/t), through which
nature speaks to us figuratively in
its beautiful forms. 301
Civilization (Zivilisierung. Gesittung),
297,319. 433,cf. 262,274
Civil society (burgerliche
Gesellschaft) , see Society

488

INDEX

Class (Klasse), higher and lower, 432
Classical (klassisch), models, 282, cf.
310, see also Following; authors,
see Ancients- the
Classification (Klassifikation),
contrasted with specification,
214' -15', see also Judgmentprinciple of
Clear and distinct (klar und deutlich),
xlviii, xlix-I, 228,226', 226' n. 43,
d. 204, 238, see also Confusedness
Cognition (Erkenntnis), in Leibniz,
Wolff, Baumgarten, Meier,
xlviii-xlix, lxviii; two senses of the
term, xli; its relation to knowledge,
see Knowledge; its a priori sources,
182, see also Cognitive power;
final aim of all, 168, cf. 206, 257,
344, 353, see also Cognitive powers
(all our higher), Vocation, Ultimate
purpose, Supersensible-the,
Practical; rational, possibility and
system of, 195, cf. 171, see also
Critique, Philosophy; analytic and
synthetic, xl; a priori, xl, 167,363,
202', cf. 171,174, see also A priori;
empirical, xl, 183,331, ct. 217,396,
406,483,202'-03',222',224', is
identical with experience, xl, 203'
n. 13. see also Experience;
empirical, equated with synthetic
(empirical) judgment, 203' n. 13,
cf. 224', see also Judgments
(empirical). Empirical; empirical,
as such,lix, 217, 218, 238-39, 281,
290,292,224', cf. lviii, 184, 192,
286,329, see also Judgmentpower of (as such); empirical, its
subjective conditions, 238, 290,
292, 295,329, cf. 233' , see also
Judgment-power of (as such);
empirical, is universally
communicable, lx, 217,218,
238-39,290,290 n. 15, see also
Communicability - universal;
theoretical (cognition of nature).
xl-xli, lxxx, 167, 171, 174, 195,280,
351. 466,467,475, 204', 206' ,222',

cf. lxxxviii, 176, 178,215,280,342,
469,470,474,199',206', see also
Theoretical; theoretical, must
involve some intuition (possible
experience), xcii, 351. 406, 473, cf.
175.342,466-68, see also Intuition;
theoretical, its limits, xv, xvi,
xxx-xxxix, xlvi, 467, 474, 475, cf.
417, see also Critique (of pure
reason). Ideas (rational).
Understanding (man's, its
peculiarity); theoretical, contrasted
with practical, xl-xli, 280, 467, cf.
215,469,470,206'; practical, as
unconditioned, 195, see also
Unconditioned; practical, objects
of. xli-xlii, xlvi; by analogy, see
God; teleological. see Teleological
judgments; the three kinds of
cognizable things, 467; see also
Cognitive power
Cognitive power(s)
(Erkentnisllermogen,
Erkenntniskraft, l-kriifte 1). one of
the mental powers in general, 167.

168,177,196,198.345,205',206',
245'-46', see also Power; its two
domains, 174. cf. 467, 208', see also
Domain; understanding singled out
as legislating to it, 167-{)8, 196, 198,
207'.244'-46', see also
Understanding; lawfulness as its
principle. 198.245'-46', see also
Lawfulness; as such. see Cognition
(empirical. as such); limits of. 175,
183,398, 401-{)3. cf. 467, see also
Critique; must not be used without
principles, 385; mediation between
it and the power of desire, see
Pleasure, Power; lower, see
Sensibility; the mental powers in
general are based on, 245'. cf. 198.
see also Power; the three higher,
lxxxvi-lxxxvii, 345, 201', cf. 405
(see also Understanding,
Judgment-power of [as a
cognitive power], Reason), as
forming a system, lxxxvii, 201'-()4',

INDEX

Cognitive power(s) (continued)
242',244', ct. 177,178, 196-98, see
also System; mediation among the
higher, see JUdgment-power of
(as mediating the transition
between understanding and
reason); all our higher, (are to)
harmonize with the (moral)
supersensible, 344. 353, cf. 168,

206,255,257,341, see also
Cognition (final aim of all),
Vocation, Ultimate purpose,
Supersensible- the, Practical;
higher, their urbanity, 329;
peculiar character of our,lxxx,
397-410, cf. 417,422, see also
Understanding; involved in
judgment, their expansion, 329, see
also Expansion; harmony of (i.e.,
of imagination and understanding),
see Judgment-power of (as such),
Pleasure-in judgments of taste;
free play of (i.e., of imagination
and understanding) see Tastejudgments of; free play of (i.e., of
imagination and reason), see
Sublime-the; see also Cognition
Cohen, Ted, 216 br. n. 30
Coherent (zusammenhiingend),
experience, see Experience; see
also System
Colonnades (Siiulengiinge), 226
Colors (Farben), nature of, 224,
324-25; alleged beauty of, 224, cf.
349; belong to charm, 225, see also
Charm; pure and mixed, 224-25;
in nature, 302, 347, 349; in art,
225-26; art of color, 324-25; as
belonging to objective sensation,
206, see also Sensation; the seven,
302, as producing a mental
attunement to certain ideas, 302,
cf. 354, which varies among
people, 212, see also Sensation
Colossal (kolossaI) , 253
Columbus, Christopher, 304 n. 35
Combination (Zusammensetzung), of
the manifold of intuition is

489

performed by the imagination, see
Imagination
Common sense (Geme;ns;nn), see
Sense
Commonwealth (Gemeinwesen), 355,
465, see also State
Communicability-universal
(allgemeine Mitteilbarkeit), of
thoughts, 295; of empirical
judgments, lx, 238, cf. 191,284; of
cognition. see Cognition
(empirical); of conviction, 238; of
a sensation, 291-93. as the cause
of the sensation's being valued,
297; its involvement of an interest,
275,296,297; that it involves an
interest could be established
empirically. 218; of a pleasure
implies that the pleasure is
reflective, 306; of a feeling
presupposes a common sense, 239.
see also Sense (cornmon, as senrus
communis); of the pleasure and
the harmony involved in judgments
of taste, see Pleasure-in
judgments of taste, Taste; of pleasure in the sublime, 275. 292; of
moral feeling, 292; of charm, 328
Completeness (Vollstiindigkeit), is
quantitative perfection, 227, cf.
168,228',242'; principle of, 168,
cf. 314; see also Totality
Composition (Komposition), 225. 305,
325, see also Music
Comprehension (Zusammen!assung).
251 br. n. 14, of the manifold of
intuition is performed by the
imagination, see Imagination;
logical and aesthetic, 254. cf. 251;
aesthetic. in estimating
magnitudes. soon reaches its
maximum, 252, see also
Magnitude; in the intuition of a
whole, 257, cf. 252, 258-59;
aesthetic and intellectual. 259-60
Concepts (Begriffe), xxxvi, xci, 484,
are determinate thoughts, 314, 329,
see also Thought, Determination;

490

INDEX

Concepts (continued)
in a judgment constitute its
content (what belongs to the
cognition of the object), 287, see
also Judgments, Cognition; differ
in kind from intuitions, 226' n. 43,
see also Intuition; are
presentations of the synthetic unity
of the manifold of intuitions, 287,
288, see also Presentation,
Imagination; deal with the mere
possibility of things, 402; involve
an analytic universal, 407, see also
Universal; their realm. territory,
domain, and residence. 174, cf.
176-79; a priori, on the range of
their application depends the
range of philosophy, 174, see also
Philosophy; a priori, of the
understanding, see Categories;
pure, 167, 181, see also Pure;
ontological, 421, 440,443,475, cf.
181; constitutive, see Categories,
Understanding, Constitutive;
regulative, .fee Ideas (rational),
Regulative; are needed to turn
empirical intuitions into
determinate objects (and
determinate cognitions), xl, 189. cf.
247' see also Determination,
Cognition; expansion of,
xxxiv-xxxvi, xl, 246. 466, cf. 386,
see also Expansion; empirical,
categories form part of, xxxv, cf.
177 n. 18; empirical, their
acquisition, xxxiv-xxxv, xl,
lxxvi-lxxvii, 187,292, 208', 211' •
213',220',235'; empirical,
establishing their reality, 351, see
also Reality; empirical, their
territory (but not domain), 174, see
alsu Nature (concept[sl of);
transcendental. see
Transcendental; immanent and
transcendent, see Immanent,
Transcendent, Understanding,
Ideas (rational); rational (concepts
of reason). see Ideas (rational);
J

problematic, 397, 402, see also
Problematic; reasoning, contrasted
with rational (correctly inferred),
337 br. n. 2, 396, see also
Reasoning; negative, 406 br. n. 26,
cf. 406, 460, 474, see also Reality;
power of. see Understanding,
Reason; of nature. contrasted with
concept of freedom, 171-76,
178-79,195-97,474-76,478-79,
1ff7' , cf. 184, 199', see also Nature,
Freedom of the will; of nature and
concept of freedom, transition
between their domains, see
JUdgment-power of (as
mediating between understanding
and reason); moral, 222, cf. 471 n.
90, see also Ideas (moral); clear
and distinct, xlviii. xlix-I, 226', 2'11>'
n. 43, cf. 228, ~ee also Clear and
distinct, Confusedness; determinate
and indeterminate, 339-41. cf.lxii,
340 br. n. 6,220',223', see al~o
Taste-judgments of; reflective and
determinative, 181,404,219'-20',
see also Judgments (reflective),
Judgment-power of (reflective),
Reflection; objective, 328, 223';
numerical, see Numbers; analysis
of, xxxi, xxxii, xl, see a/so Analytic;
construction of, xxxv, 232 br. n. 51,
283,343,364-65, 198' n. 6, cf. 241,
468,232'; exhibition of. see
Exhibition; expression of, 352-53,
see also Expression; reality of. ~ee
Reality; our insight is limited to
what we can produce in terms of
them, 384, see also Insight; there
is no transition from them to the
feeling of pleasure, 211, cf. 229'
but also 366, see also Pleasure,
Transition
Confusedness (Verworrenheit) ,
cannot constitute a difference in
kind between judgments. 226', cf.
228, see also Clear and distinct; of
a presentation, see Presentation;
of a judgment, see Judgments; of

INDEX

Confusedness (continued)
the concept of perfection. see
Perfection
Constitutive (konstitutiv), xxxiv, see
also Determinative; contrasted with
regulative. xxxviii, see also
Regqlative; concepts, see
Categories, Understanding;
principles, see Principles
Construction (Konstruktion), of
concepts, see concepts
Contemplation (Kontemplation,
Betrachtung, Beschauung), is
intuition or reflection, 204. see also
Intuition, Reflection; in a judgment
of taste involves indifference to the
• object's existence, 209, d. 242, see
also Taste-judgments of; restful,
of the beautiful, 247,258, d. 209,
222,267,299, see also Beautifulthe; reasoning, characterizes the
pleasure we take in the sublime in
nature, 292. cf. 267, see also
Sublime-the; quiet. in admiring
divine greatness, 263
Contingency (Zufalligkeit), in
judgments of taste, 191; in a
human being's organization, liii.
345-46; in empirical nature and its
forms. see Particular in nature.
Lawfulness (of the contingent),
Purposiveness. Natural (purposes.
concept of. its possibility); implied
in a purpose, see Purpose;
physical, of a morally necessary
act, 403, see also Moral (law)
Continuity (Kontinuitiit), in nature's
forms. see Particular in nature.
Judgment-power of (its maxims)
Contradiction (Widerspruch),
principle of, xlviii, 197 n. 43,466;
seeming. see Antinomy; strict,
lxxxix n. 90; contrasted with
disparateness, 391
Contrapurposiveness (Zweckwidrigkeit).lxix-Ixx, cviii, 242,245.
326,379,439,cf.420,447,451.see
also Sublime-the, Chaos

491

Conviction (Oberzeugung), contrasted
with tendency toward it, 463;
contrasted with persuasion. 461-63.
477, see also Persuasion; universal
communicability of, 238, see also
Communicability-universal; lack
of, in skepticism, 472. see also
Skepticism
Copying (Nachmachen), 302,309, can
result in aping, 318, see also
Imitation
CosmolOgical proof (kosmoiogischBr
Beweis), see God (cosmological
proof for the existence of)
Cosmology (Weltwissenschaft), 416
Cosmopolitan (weltburgerlich),
attitude, 316; whole. 432-33
Craft (Handwerk), distinguished from
art, 304, see also Art
Cramer, Konrad, xxx n. 6
Crawford, Donald W., lxi, lxvii n. 55,
277 br. n. 49
Creation (SchOpfung), 455, cf.
453, 454; proper sense of the tenn,
448 n. 39; see also Final
purpose
Creative (schOpjerisch), whether the
imagination is, see Imagination;
see also Originality, Fantasy
Credulity (Leichtgiiiubigkeit), 472
Critique (Kritik), xv, xxx. xxxviii,
176,194.472,239', contrasted with
doctrine, 170,176.194,417,201'.
205'. 207' , 242'. 248' , see also
Doctrine, Philosophy; has no
domain as regards objects, 176. see
also Domain; usually consists of
elementology and methodology,
354, cf.1xxxiii n. 85,199 br. n. 45,
see also Methodology; contrasted
with dogmatic treatment. 395, cf.
392 n. 6, see also Dogmatic; of
pure reason, 167, 168, 195'.202',
241' , cf. 176, 179, 183 br. n. 28,
194,482,201', see also Critique oj
Pure Reason, Reason; of practical
reason, see Critique of Practical

cr.

492

INDEX

Critique (continued)
Reason. Reason: of judgment,
168-70, 193,289,244',246'-51', cf.
397, 205' , 239' , 242' , see also
Critique of Judgment; of
judgment, as uniting the three
Critiques in a system, see Cn'tique
0/ Judgment; of judgment, its
questions, 168. and its problem,
289; of judgment. its completeness,
244', see also Critique ofJudgment
(its unity), Completeness; of
judgment, as critique of reflective
judgment, 251' , is divided into the
critiques of aesthetic and of
teleological judgment, xxiii, 193,
248'-49', d. 247', 251', see also
Judgment-power of (as such); of
aesthetic judgment, xxiii, xxvii,
xlvii-lxxi, xcvi n. 99,192,193,
201-356,cf.I94,239',241',247'
(see also Aesthetic [tisthetlschl
[reflective power of judgmentU, is
the essential part of the Critique
of Judgment, cii. 193, cf. 169-70,
244' , see also Aesthetic
(iisthetisch) (reflective power of
judgment is a special power),
Problem III; of aesthetic judgment
is divided into the critiques of taste
and of intellectual feeling (the
sublime), 250',251', see also Taste,
Sublime-the; of taste, its most
important part, 169. see also
Critique (of aesthetic judgment);
of taste. essential tasks it has, 227,
278, cf. 168, 170, 191,289; of taste,
its key, 216, its principles
elucidated, 294, its dialectic, 337,
its lack of a methodology, 354-55.
cf. lxxxiii n. 85, 199 br. n. 45; of
taste, as subjective but
transcendental, 286, 336, and as
science rather than art, 286, cf. Ii
n. 34; of taste, empiricist, 346, see
also Beauty (in Hutcheson, Hume,
Burke), Taste-judgments of,
Empiricism; of taste, rationalistic,
346,347, see also Beauty (in

Leibniz, Wolff. Baumgarten.
Meier), 'Taste-judgments of.
Rationalism; of teleological
judgment, xxiii-xxv, xxvii, xlvii,
lxxi-cix, lxxvi n. 78. 170 br. n. 10,
193,357-485, cf. 205',241', could
have been treated as an appendix
to theoretical philosophy, 170, cf.
194. see also Teleological (power
of judgment. is not a special
power), Philosophy
Critique of Judgment (Kritik der
Urteiiskra/t), xv-xvii, xix-xxi,
xxiii-xxix, xxxvii n. 13, xlvii, xlix,
Ii. lxiv. lxxiii, Ixxviii. lxxxv-lxxxvi,
xciv, xcvi n. 99, cii. cvi n. 107,167
br. n. 4, 183 br. n. 28, 204 br. n. 9,
224 br. n. 40, 229 br. n. 46, 232 br.
n. 51,291 br. n. 19,309 br. n. 43,
see also Critique (of judgment); its
unity, xvi, xix, xxiii. xxvi, xcvi n.
99, cf. 244', see also Problem Ill;
as uniting the three Critiques in a
system, xix, xxiii. xxvi, xxvii. xlvii,
lxiv, lxxxvi-cix, 176-79,246', cf.
205',241'.242', see also
Judgment-power of (as mediating
the transition between
understanding and reason).
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness, its
concept ... unites the three
Critiques in a system)
Critique of Practical Reason (Kritik
der praktischen Vernun/t), xv, xvi,
xix, xxiii. xxvi. xxix, xxxix-xlviii,
lxiv, lxxxiv-lxxxvi, xciv. c n. 105,
ci. cii, civ. cviii, 177 n. 18,207 br.
n. 13, 220 br. n. 33, 222, 233 br. ns.
52 and 53, 245 br. n. 5,291 br. n.
19,335 hr. n. 76. 341, 345 br. n. 19,
351 br. n. 31.392 br. n. 7,430 br.
n. 23. 442 hr. n. 36. 450 br. n. 42,
451 br. n. 45,457 br. n. 54,475 hr.
n. 96, 480 hr. n. 101. 481 br. n. 103,
202', 229' , 230' n. 50. 230' br. n.
51
Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der
reinen Vernun/t), xv, xvi, xix. xxi,

INDEX

Critique of Pure Reason (continued)
xxiii, xxvi, xxviii, xxx-xxxix, xl ns.
16-21, xli n. 22, xlii, xlii n. 25, xliv,
xlvi-xlviii, xlix, Ii, lvii n. 43, lx, lxiv,
Ixxii n. 63, lxxiii, lxxiii n. 67, Ixxiv
ns. 72-73,lxxv n. 77, Ixxxiii n. 85,
lxxxv, lxxxvi, xc, xciv, xciv n. 96,
c-cii, civ, cv-cvi, cviii, cix, 167, 168,
175, 179 br. ns. 23-24,203 br. ns.
2 and 4, 218,232 br. ns. 50-51,234
br. n. 55, 236 br. n. 61, 240 br. n.
66, 248 br. n. 8, 250 br. n. 10, 253
br. n. 17,259 br. n. 26,279 br. n.
1, 288, 289 br. n. 13, 337 br. n. 2,
341,343 br. n. 13,345 br. n. 19,351
br. n. 29,353 br. n. 37, 354 br. n.
40, 368 br. n. 25,381 br. n. 45,385
br. n. 1,388 br. n. 2,401 br. n. 17,
403 br. n. 21, 405, 406 br. n. 26, 436
br. n. 31, 442 br. n. 36, 450 br. n.
42,456 br. n. 51,457 br. n. 54,460
br. n. 60, 463, 464 br. n. 65, 465 br.
n. 68, 466 br. n. 71, 467 br. n. 75,
468 br. n. 78,470 br. n. 85,473 br.
n. 93,475 br. n. 96,476 br. ns. 97
and 99, 480 br. n. 101,481 br. n.
103,482,208',211'br. n. 19,220'
br. n. 29, 223' br. n. 34,237' br. n.
56, see also Critique (of pure
reason)
Crusius, Christian August, xlii
Crystallization (Kristallisation),
348-50, ef. 419 see also
Formations
Culture (or Cultivation) (Kultur), as
nature's ultimate purpose in man,
cvii, 431, see also Ultimate
purpose; consists in producing in
a free rational being an aptitude
for purposes generally, 431, cf. 430,
see also Purpose; of skill and
discipline, lxxxiv, 431-34; of the
mental powers (the mind), 306,
329,355; of the cognitive powers,
264, ef. 293, 458; of taste (aesthetic
judgment), 170,225,264, cf. 265,
356,244'; of moral feeling, 299,
356, cf. 266, as propaedeutic to
establishing taste, 356, ef. 265, see

493

also Propaedeutic; of the mental
powers as propaedeutic to fine art,
355; the beautiful contributes to it,
266, 380 n. 43, cf. 326. and so does
taste, 319, but the agreeable does
not, 266; fine art contributes to it,
326,329, cf. 306.328,355, but
music contributes less to it than to
enjoyment, 328; in relation to the
sublime, 265-66; agitations
pertaining to, 273; talents serving,
433; science and 8rt as the less
necessary ingredients in, 432; hlgh,
harmony between it and a free and
undemanding nature, 356; its
progress, 319, to the point of
luxury, 432
Dance (Tanz), 225, 325
Darwin, Charles, 423 br. n. 11
Decadic (Dekadik). and tetradic
systems, 254
Decoration (Verzierung.
Schmiickung, Schmuck), 323, cf.
226
Deduction (Deduktion), means
justification (legitimation), lix, '1:19,
280; of the categories. 288. is
divided into metaphysical and
transcendental, 288 br. n. 11, see
also Transcendental; of the
principle (or concept) of judgment,
182. 184, is transcendental, 182; of
pure aesthetic judgments must be
directed to the beautiful, not to
the sublime, in nature, 279; of
judgments about the sublime, is
provided by their exposition, lxxi.
279-80. see also Exposition; of
judgments of taste, !ix-lxi, lxxxvii,
279-336 (esp. 289-90), its problem,
287-89. and its method, 280-81; of
judgments of taste, how much it
includes, lxi-bvi; of judgments of
taste, is easy, lxi-lxii, 290, but
perhaps not yet sufficiently clear,
346, cf. 170; ofjudgments of taste,
requires that beauty be linked to
the supersensible underlying

494

INDEX

Deduction (continued)
nature's subjective purposiveness,
lxii, lxv, 340. 346, cf. 350. see also
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness), Antinomy
(of aesthetic reflective judgment);
as equated with explanation, 411,
see also Explanation
Definition (Definition),
transcendental, 177 n. 18,230' n.
SO, see also Transcendental; as
involving exhibition, 343, see also
Exhibition
De i'gne, see Brief Outline . ..
Deism (Deismus), 353
Deity (Gottheit), see God
Delusion (lWJhn), 275,459, see also
Fanaticism, Madness, Mania
Democritus, 391
Demonology (Diimonologie), 444,
459, cf. 439,447
Demonstration (Demonstration),
means (schematic) exhibition of a
concept in intuition, 343, cf. 342,
352, 352 n. 32. 366, see also
Exhibition; elegance of, 366; of
concepts of reason, 342, see also
Ideas (rational); as the tenD is used
in logic, 343. cf. xxxvii
De mundj intelligibilis . .. , see On
the Form and Principles . ..
Derivation (Ableitung), 279 br. n. 1;
mechanical, 409, 412, see also
Mechanism; of products from final
causes. see Teleological principle;
theological. 381. see also
Theology; of the particular from
principles, power of, 201' • see also
Reason; and see Explanation
Descartes, Rene, xlviii, I. lxxii, 464 n.
64
Design (Zeichnung), free, 200; is the
essential feature of visual fine art,
225, cf. 330, see also Art-fine; a
la grecque. 229,229 br. n. 46
Desire-power of (Begehrungs·
lIermogen). is one of the mental
powers in general, lxxxvii, 167. 177.

197.198, 205'..Q6', 245'-46'. see
also Power; is the power of being
the cause. through one's
presentations. of the actuality of
the objects of these presentations,
177 n. 18,230' n. 50, cf. 360,
369-70. 394 br. n. 7, 206', see also
Presentation. Purpose; insofar as
it (at least) can be determined
through concepts (principles), is
the will, xlv, 172. 182,206, 220. ct.
209.443. see also Will; it applies
to freedom, 198. and to morais.
246', and its principle is obligation
(purposiveness that is also a law).
245'-46' , see also Freedom of the
will, Causality (through freedom).

Moral, Reason; higher and lower.
xlv, lxxxvii-lxxxviii, 178-79, as
dealing (respectively) with the good
and the agreeable. 209, cf. 443, and
as both involving a pleasure,
lxxxvii. 178-179, d. 209,272 n. 39.
206' , 228' , and an interest. 204. see
also Pleasure. Interest, Reason,
Inclination. Good-the,
Agreeable-the; higher. can be
determined (legislated to) by
reason (its constitutive principles,
its moral law), xlv. 168. 169, 178-79.
190. 196-97.209-10,353,207'. cf.
lxxxviii. 182. 198.443. 272 n. 39,
485, 206' .225', 245'-46' ,see also
Determination, Legislation,
Reason, Will. Moral (law);
antinomy concerning, 345. see
also Antinomy (of practical pure
reason)
Desires (Begehrungen, Begierden),
futile, 177 n. IS. 230' n. SO. see also
Desire-power of
Desperation (Verzweijlung), is
sublime if it is indignant but not if
it is despondent, 272, see also
Misery

Determination (Bestimmung), as
meaning (a predicate describing)
an attribute, xxxv, 483; theoretical.

INDEX

Determination lcorltinued)
xci n. 95, xcviii, cf. xxxv, xl, 288,
211', 222' , 246'; of genera, to form
species, 215'; complete, of what
exists and what exists necessarily,
476, see also Necessity; practical,
xli, lv, xci n. 95, xcviii, cv, d. 354,
457, 206', 207', 246', see also Will;
regarding judgments of taste, lv-lvi,
cf. 219, 221, 222', 223'.223' br. n.
33,224'-26' ,229', see also Tastejudgments of, Pleasure-in
judgments of taste; as meaning
vocation, see Vocation; see also
Determinative, Reality
Determinative (bestimmend), xxxiv,
see also Determination; contrasted
with reflective, see Judgments,
Judgment-power of, Judgmentprinciple of, Reflection: see also
Principles
Dialectic (Dialektik), consists in the
opposition of judgments making
an a priori claim to universality,
337, see also Validity; how many
dialectics Kant had planned for the
third Critique. 251'; of aesthetic
judgment is a dialectic not of taste
but of the critique of taste, 'J'}7, see
also Critique; of teleological
judgment. 385, as a dialectic of
reflective judgment (in general).
386. d. 387, see also Antinomy of
teleological judgment. Teleological
(power of judgment. is not a
spec::ial power); oratory as, 327
Diderot, Denis, 277 br. n. 47
Difference in kind (speziJische

Verschiedenheit, spezifischer
Unterschied), 226' n. 43, see also
Heterogeneity
Dignified Tone, see On the
Dignified Tone . ..
Dignity (mlrde), of the humanity in
us, 273, see also Humanity; objects
of fine art must show themselves
as having some, 336, see also
Art-fine

495

Direct and indirect (II.nmittelbar,
mitte/bar) , 208 br. n. 15
Discipline (Zucht. Disziplin),
lxxxiv, 432. 433, see also
Genius

Discovery According to Which . ..•
see On Q Discovery According to
Which ...
Discursive (diskursiv), contrasted with
intuitive. 352 n. 32, 402. 406-08, cf.
484. see also Understanding (man's
and intuitive)
Disgust (Eke/), rests on nothing but
imagination, 312; ugliness that
arouses it obliterates artistic
beauty, 312. cf. 326
Dislike (MijJfallen), see Displeasure,
Liking
Displeasure (feeling of, or dislike)
(Unlust, MijJfallen), is a
presentation containing the basis
that determines the subject to
change the state consisting of
certain presentations into their
own opposite. 220, see also
Presentation. Determination; in the
sublime, see Sublime-the; see
also Pleasure
Dispute Among the University s
Schools (Streit der Fakultiiten), 331
br. n. 71, 481 hr. n. 103
Disputing (disputieren) , contrasted
with quarreling, 338
Distinctness (Deutlichkeit), logical
and aesthetic, 226' n. 43, see also
Clear and distinct
Divisions (Einteilungen ), analytic and
synthetic, 197 n. 43; scientific and
mechanical, 247' • see also Science;
in philosophy almost always tum
out tripartite, 197 n. 43, see also
Philosophy
Doctrine (Doktrill. Lehre), contrasted
with critique, See Critique; of
elements and of method. see
Elementology, Methodology; see
also Science

496

INDEX

Dogmatic (dogmat/Sch), 391. cf. 397,
472, 482. contrasted with critical,
395, d. 392 n. 6,396-401;
empiricism and rationalism, see
these headings
Doing (Tun), distinguished from
acting, 303
Domain (Gebiet), of concepts, of the
cognitive powers, of philosophy.
see these headings
Dominance (Gewalt). 260, cf. 262.
269,271,433. see also Might
Doubt (Zweifel), considered
sacrilegious, 462, cf. 480, see also
Skepticism
Drama (Schauspiel), 325, cf. 284, 238'
Dreams (Traume ), 380
Dreams of a Spirit-Seer
(Traume eines Geistersehers). !xxii
n. 63,394 br. n. 8,467 br. n. 77,
484 br. n. 106
Duration (Dauer), 484
Duty (Pflicht). law of, 471 n. 87, see
also Moral (law); is based on the
moral law, 471 n. 87. d. 403, see
also Moral (law); why acts
conforming to moral laws must be
presented by us as duties, 403, see
also Presentation; implies objective
practical necessity, 403, 470, 471,
see also Necessity; implies ability
to carry it out, 455 br. n. 48, cf.
450; pressure of many duties, 445;
violation of, 445; its object is the
final purpose, 470, cf. 458, 481, but
duty is not based on the final
purpose, 471 n. 87, see also Final
purpose; fulfillment of, consists in
the form of the earnest will. 451,
cf. 471 n. 87, see also Will;
reverence for, 452, see also
Reverence; our moral need to
think that in performing it we do
so toward a divine being as well,
446; toward GOd, contrasted with
duty toward man, 481 br. n. 104;
cognition of, as divine command,
is religion, 481, see also Religion;
pure practical cognition that aims

at compliance with, 470, see also
Cognition; our concept of it if we
applied it to a theoretically
determined concept of the deity,
481, d. 485, see also God; act
done from, its lawfulness presented
as sublime or beautiful, 267, see
also Presentation; and see
Obligation
Dynamical (dynamisch), sublimity,
see Sublime-the
Earth (Erde), theory of, 428 n. 20;
history of, 427-28; mother,
compared to a large animal, 419
Eberhardt, Johann August, see On a

Discovery ...
Ectype (Ektypon), 322. cf. 408, 408
br. n. 27
Edification (Erbauung). 273, cf. 274
Educt (Edukt), 371 br. n. 31,
contrasted with product, 423, cf.

371
Elegance (Eleganz). of a
demonstration, 366, see also
Demonstration
Elementology (Elementarlehre),
contrasted with methodology,
Ixxxiii n. 85, 354
Ellington, James W.• xxi, xxxvii n. 13
Emotion (Riihrung), 226, 245, 326,
328 br. n. 65, cf. 335, 482 n. 105;
spirited and tender, 273; belongs
to sublimity, 226, 245, cf. 247, 274,
but not to beauty, 223-24,226, 278,
cf. 294, see also Taste-judgments
of (erroneous)
Empirical (empirisch), J{J(X, xxxi, cl.
410, see also Experience;
contrasted with transcendental,
277-78, cf. 203', see also
Transcendental; judgments, see
Judgments; laws in nature, see
Natural (laws. particular);
cognitions, see Cognition; interest,
see Interest; judgments of taste
and teleological judgments as
partly, see Taste-judgments of,

INDEX

Empirical (continued)
Teleological judgments; see also
Empiricism, Anthropology,
Psychology
Empiricism (Empirismus), dogmatic,
xxx, xxxii, xxxix, xlii, xlvi, xlvii,
li-liii, lxxiv-lxxv, lxxxvii,
critique of taste according to it,
346-47, see also Beauty, Tastejudgments of; and see Empirical
Encapsulation (Einschachtelung) ,
theory of, 423; see also Organized
(beings)
Encyclopaedia (Enzyklopiidie), of all
the sciences, 416, see also Science;
encyclopaedic introductions,
241 '-42'
End (Ende), as meaning purpose,
425, see also Purpose, Final
Purpose, Ultimate purpose
End of All Things- The (Das Ende
aller Dinge), 484 br. n. 106
Enjoyment (GenufJ), pleasure (liking)
of, 292, 306, is gratification, 297,
see also Gratification, Pleasure; is
intense gratification. '1ff7; seH-, 329;
agreeableness as being (belonging
to), 208, 266, cf. 213,274,291-92.
305, see also Agreeable-the; as
based on sensation. 213, 292, 297,
303, 305, 306, 326, ef. 328, see also
Sensation, Aesthetic (listhetisch)
(judgments of sense); inclination
to, 433, ef. 2CJ7, see also
Inclination; man always wants
more of it, 430, see also Happiness;
equated with well-being and with
happiness, 434 n. 29,442, see also
Well-being, Happiness; how, if it
is man's sole aim, this affects life's
value, 208. 434 n. 29,477. ef. 207,
209n.17.268.442,443.449.see
also Value; as conflicting with the
development of our humanity, 433,
see also Humanity; bodily and
intellectual. 442, cf. 273-74,
331-36; heavenly (mystical), 209 n.
17; contemplation as, 477. ef. 433.
see also Contemplation; pleasure

4CJ7

of. contrasted with pleasure in the
beautiful and sublime, 292, 306, see
also Pleasure-in judgments of
taste, Sublime-the; music as, 328,
329, see also Music; obligation to
it is an absurdity, 209 n. 17;
pleasure of, contrasted with the
pleasure involved in moral feeling,
292, see also Moral (feeling);
transition from it to moral feeling.
297, cf. 354, see also Transition;
forcing others to enjoy a perfume,

330
Enlightenment (Auj1cliirung), 294, 294
n.22
Ens. see Being
Entertainment (Unterlwltung), social,

213,305,331
Enthusiasm (Enthusiasmus.
Begeisterung), is an affect that may
accompany the idea of the good.
271-72, cf. 273, 275, see also
Affects; involves an unbridled
imagination, Z75, see also
Imagination; is comparable to
madness, 275; is aesthetically
sublime. 272, ct. 274; contrasted
with fanaticism, Z75, cf. 363-64; of
the Jewish people for its religion,

274
Epicurus, 277, 331, 334, 391, 393
Epigenesis (Epigenesis), 423, 424, cf.
410. 419-20, see also Organized
(beings)
Equality (Gleichheit), among people,
355, cf. 432
Error (Irrtum). in a judgment of taste,
see Taste-judgments of (erroneous)
Estimation (Schiitzung), of
magnitudes, see Magnitude; moral,
of oneself, 262, see Self; see also
169 br. n. 9
Ethicotheology (Ethikotheologie) ,
436, cf. 442, 485; see also God,
Theology (moral)
Ethics (Ethik) , theological, is
impossible, 485; see also Morality
Euler. Leonhard, 224
Evil (base. ube/), what we try to resist

498

INDEX

Evil (continued)
is, 260; imposed on people by fate,
276. cf. 452; prayers asking for the
deflection of, 177 n. 18, see also
Prayer; human being, morally
ought to be denied happiness, 443,
cf. 273, see also Final purpose;
deeds, as suggesting a wise
reference to a purpose, 448 n. 39;
problem of, 451, cf. 451 br. n. 46,
see also Contrapurposiveness;
fictitious, 273; see also Misery,
Good-the
Evolution (Evolution, Auswicklung),
theory of, 423 inel. br. n. 11, 424,
cf. 418. 419 br. n. 4, 419 n. 5,423
br. n. 12, see abo Organized
(beings)
Examples (Beispiele), contrasted with
schemata, 351, see also Schema;
in fine art, see Art-fine, Genius
Exhibition (Darstellung), reason for
using this term, 175 br. n. 17; how
it comes about, xxxv-xxxvi. cf. xlv,
220' • see a/so Imagination,
Intuition; is aesthetic (i.e., sensible)
presentation, 250, cf. 254, see also
Presentation; consists in placing
beside a concept an intuition
corresponding to it, 192,232 br. n.
51, cf. 342-43, 351 incl. br. n. 31.
401,468.484; imagination as the
power of. xxxv, 232, 244, 279, 287,
cf. 245, 257, 258.314-15, see also
Imagination; judgment as the
power of, 192,220',233', cf. 250,
352, 232'; understanding as the
power of, 224'. d. 484; a priori
(pure),xxxv-xxxvi,342,468; in
concreto, its subjective conditions,
249; in nature and in art, 192-93,
cf. 342-43; demonstration (in proof
or definition) as. 343, see also
Demonstration; of magnitudes, see
Magnitude, Sublime-the; of the
infinite, 254, 274, see also Infinitethe; of rational or aesthetic ideas,
see Ideas; schematic and symbolic
(direct and indirect), 232 br. n. 51,

351,351 br. n. 31, 352, see also
Schema, Symbol; logical, 315
Existence (Existenz, Dasein), 209 br.
n. 16, as a reality, 476, see also
Reality; something existent, how
given, see Sensation; necessary,
see Necessity; see also
Determination
Expansion (Erweiterung), of a
concept, xxxiv-xxxvi, xl, 246, 466,
cf. 386; aesthetic, of a concept,
315; of laws of the understanding,
386; of an idea, 175; of the
imagination, lxx, 249, 256, 257 br.
n.23,259,268,269,cf.252,265,
see also Sublime-the,
Imagination; of small things, to the
magnitude of a world, 250; of
(theoretical) cognition (theoretical
knowledge), 175,246,459,463. cf.
461, 470, see also Cognition,
Knowledge; of the cognitive
powers involved in judgment, 329,
see also Judgment-power of (as
such); of the mind, 255, 326; of the
soul, 274; of reason, 474; see also
Expansive
Expansive (erweiternd) , reason for
using this term, 460 br. n. 58;
principles for the determination of
the will, 171, see also
Determination, Will; knowledge,
460; judgment, 460; see also
Expansion
Experience (Erfahrung), is the same
as empirical cognition (of nature),
xl, 203' n. 13, cf. 182. 288, see alJo
Cognition (empirical); is empirical
cognition as synthetic judgments,
203' n. 13, see also Synthetic;
judgments of, contrasted with
judgments of perception, 288 br.
n. to, cf. xxxiv, see also
Perception; is identical with
empirical nature, 209' • cf. xxxiv,
lxx, xcii, 183,208'; "world" of.
see Appearances; consists in
turning empirical intuitions into
determinate objects, xxxiv, liv, see

INDEX

Experience (continued)
also Intuition; does not require
reason, 233', cf. xxxviii; possible
(possibility of), xxxiii, xxxvii-xxxix,
174,182-84,191,195,466,467,468
n. 79, 484, 203',208',217',243',
cf. 467, see also Ideas (rational);
reality of the idea of freedom can
be established in, xliii-xliv, 468, cf.
222, see also Freedom of the will,
Reality; coherence of, 184, 185,
203' ,204', 209' , 217', cf. 183, 386,
see also System, Lawfulness.
Unity; whole of, 183, 217', see also
Nature (system of); as a system in
terms of transcendental laws (the
categories), 183, 203', 208',211' n.
21. see also Categories, Nature
(system of); analytic and synthetic
unity of, 203' n. 13; as a system for
the power of judgment, 208', cf.
210', see also Judgment-principle
of, Judgment-power of (its
maxims). System; as a system of
(possible) empirical cognitions,
386, 208'-09' , 217' , cf. Cognition
(empirical); as a system of empirical (particular) laws (of nature),
180, 183, 203' , 209' , 211' n. 21, cf.
359,203' n. 13,217',232',235',
243'. see also Natural (laws),
Nature (system of), Lawfulness (of
the contingent), Particular in
nature, Judgment-principle of;
one's own and other people's, 468,
469; commonest, 187, 188;
methodical, is observation, 376, cf.
235'; teaches us only what things
are, not what they are meant to be,
240', cf. 359, 234', see also Is; its
role in judgments of taste and
teleological judgments, see Tastejudgments of, Teleological
judgments; see also Empirical
Experiments (Experimente). art of
doing, in chemistry, 173; proof by
means of, 461; are forever unable
to exhibit aether. 467
Explanation (Erklarung), is distinct

499

and determinate derivation from
a principle, lxxvi, 412, see also
Derivation; contrasted with
examination,412; a priori and
empirical, 410, 237'; objective and
subjective, lxxix, lxxix n. 83,379,
413, see also Teleological
judgments, Mechanism. Organized
(beings); mechanical, see
Mechanism; physical, 424 (see also
Physical), contrasted with
psychological, 238' , see also
Psychological; in teleology, see
Teleological; tautologous, 410; of
nature by hypothesizing a God,
470; as equated with deduction,
411, see also Deduction
Expound (exponieren), 343, cf. 342,
see also Exposition
Exposition (Exposition), 279 br. n. I,
equated with examination, 412, ct.
278; transcendental and empirical
(physiological), 277-78; of aesthetic
judgments about the beautiful, 346,
provides no deduction, 279, unlike
exposition of aesthetic judgments
about the sublime, lxxi, 280; see
also Expound
Expression (Ausdruck), of concepts,
352-53; of thoughts and of
intuitions, 321-22; sensible. of
thoughts in jest, 332; in speech, as
analogous to art, 320, cf. 317; in
music, 328; of aesthetic ideas, lxvii,
317,322,355, is beauty, 320, cf.
244, see also Ideas (aesthetic); of
ideas of reason, 327, see also Ideas
(rational); boldness of, 318: as
containing the schema for a
concept, and as containing merely
a symbol for our reflection, 352,
cf. 316, see also Schema,
Symbol; corporeal, 324, see also
Body
Extraterrestrial beings. see Rational
(beings)
Face (Gesicht), perfectly regular, 235
n. 57, see also Regularity

500

INDEX

Fact-matters of (Tatsachen), are
objects of concepts whose objective reality can be proved. 468. cf.
467,469, see also Reality; can he
the basis for theoretical and for
practical cognition, and for
knowledge and faith, 475, see also
Knowledge, Cognition, Faith; all
assent in philosophy must be based
on, 475, see also Assent
(Fiirwahrhalten); even (the idea of)
freedom is among the, 468. 474, cf.
Freedom of the will; fact of reason,
see Moral (law), Freedom of the

will
Failure of All ... , see On the
Failure of All .. .
Faith (Glaube), contrasted with
belief, 467 br. n. 75; practical, xlii,
471-72 incl. n. 90, d. 467, 469; is
moral. 470-72; pertains to practical
cognition, 475. but not to
knowledge, xlii. xlvi, 467 br. n. 75.
471-72. cf.lxxxiv. 467. 470. 475. see
also Cognition, Knowledge;
matters of. 467. 467 br. n. 75.
469-71. see also Final purpose,
God, Immortality of the soul;
matters of. contrasted with articles
of faith. 469 n. 81, with historical
faith, 469. d. 472. and with
credulity, 472. see also Unbelief;
is needed to make the moral way
of thinking steadfast. 472. see also
Way of thinking
Family (Familie). of the (higher)
cognitive powers. 177, see also
Cognitive powers (the three higher)
Fanaticism (Schwiirmerei), 275, cf.
364,459,230' n. SO. contrasted
with enthusiasm, 275, cf. 363-64.
see also Enthusiasm; as
comparable to mania, 275; see also
Raving
Fantasy (or Fancy) (Phantasie). 243,
273.324, cf. 177 n. 18,229,276,
309,411,230' n. 50; imagination
as engaging in, 243, see also

Fiction; reason as engaging in, 411;
see also Originality
Fatalism (FataUsmus, Fatalitiit) ,
concerning purposiveness in
nature, 391, 392, d. 276
Favor (Gunst), is the only free liking,
210. cf. 380 n. 43. see also
Pleasure; of nature, 380, 380 n. 43
Fear (Furcht) , in Burke, 277, cf.lxix,
277 br. n. 50; object of, is what we
try. but are unable to, resist, 260;
pathological, 481, see also
Pathological; contrasted with
respect, 355, cf. 264 (see also
Respect), and with reverence, 264,
481. see also Reverence; makes us
unable to judge the sublime in
nature, 261, cf. 263; nature
(presented) as arousing, 260, 263,
cf. 261, 264, see also Sublime-the
(the dynamically sublime),
Presentation; of people, 276; of
God. 263, 264, contrasted with
God's fearfulness, 260-61, see also
God; is what gave rise to gods
(demons), 447, see also
Demonology
Feeling (GefUhl), is subjective. xxiv.
viz., subjective sensation as
distinguished from objective. 206,
see also Pleasure. Sensation
(ambiguity of the term); of
pleasure and displeasure, see
Pleasure, Displeasure. cf. Liking,
Dislike; as receptivity and as
individual feeling, 223' br. n. 33,
224' br. n. 39,229' br. ns. 46-47;
regarding the agreeable and the
good, see Pleasure. Agreeablethe. Good-the, Moral (feeling);
regarding the sublime and the
beautiful. see Pleasure, Sublimethe, Beautiful-the, Beauty,
Taste-judgments of, Pleasure-in
judgments of taste; for beautiful
nature, 303; refined, 266, see also
Refinement; intellectual. 335 br.
n. 76, cf. 250',251', see also

INDEX

Feeling (continued)
Pleasure, Sublime-the, Intellectual; religious, 482 n. IDS, see also
Religion; moral, see Moral
(feeling), Respect; o~ sense, 306;
of the inner sense, 228, cf. 291 br.
n. 19,296, see also Sense; of life,
see Life; of health, 331, 332, see
also Health, Well-being; of the
bodily organ, 277-78; see also
Sympathy
Fiction (Dichten), imagination as
engaging in, 240,243,321, cf. 273,
326,327,467; see also Fantasy,
Poetry, Novels
Final (End-), cause,see Cause; aim,
intention. see Aim, Intention;
purpose, see Final purpose
Final purpose (Endzweck), is
unconditioned (highest, absolute),
xlv, lxxxiii, 435, 436 n. 30, 441, 443,
448,449,cf.378,426,431,449,see
also Unconditioned: requires no
other purpose as a condition of its
possibility, 434, cf. 367-68, see also
Purpose; it, or its appearance in
nature, ought to exist, lxiii incl. n.
SO, 195-96, cf. 176,458, see also
Appearances; is enjoined on us by
the moral law, see Moral (law);
idea of. is made determinate by the
moral law, Ixxxiv. 455, cf. 447. and
hence has objective practical
reality. 456,469, cf. 453, see also
Determination. Reality; is not the
basis of duty. 471 n. 87. see also
Duty; of creation (the existence of
a world), 434-37,455,477, is the
highest good. xlv. Ixiii n. SO,lxxxiii,
435,450,451,453, cf. 441, viz.,
man (any rational being in
general), 435-36, 442. 469, cf. 444,
447, as a moral being, 435, 436 n.
30,443,450 n. 44. cf. 444, i.e .• a
being under moral laws, 445, 448,
448 n. 39,449-50, cf. 444, 470,
specifically, the happiness of
rational beings in proportion to

501

their morality (virtue), 436 n. 30.
450.451.453,471 n. 87, cf. xlv,
lxxxiii. see also Good-the
(highest), Virtue, Happiness,
Rational (beings in general); of
creation, as distinguished from the
final purpose of rational beings,
453-55, 458, 471 n. 87, cf. 477; is
cognized practically, xli-xlii, xlvi,
lxxxiv, 455, 456. 469, 470, 474, 481,
cf. 378 (see also Cognition), and a
priori, 436, cf. 447, 456. but is not
known. xlii. xlvi, cf. 470-72, 199',
see also Knowledge; is a matter of
faith. xlii. xlvi, lxxxiv, cf. 469,470,
see also Faith; as completing the
chain (hierarchy) of purposes in
nature, xlv, Ixxxiii,lxxxiv, 390,
434-35. 443,cf. 440, 442,444.445,
454, see also Purpose, Teleology;
cannot be in nature (manifested in
experience), xlvi,lxxxiii, 378, 426,
431,435,437,441,454,485.cf.378.
429.433. 434 n. 29,443.450,456,
see also Ultimate purpose (of
nature); involves the supersensible,
378, see also Cause (intelligent, of
the world), God; idea of, only
reason can have and use it, lxxxiv,
441,453-55, cf. 429, 452; is infinite.
481; can only be approached (by
beings of sense), xlvi. 484, cf. 446,
see also Being; must be regarded
as achievable. xxvi, xlvi. 469, 470,
472 n. 90, cf. 435. 453, 454. 456.
457, see also Ought (implies
'can'); achieving it presupposes
immortality and God, xli, xlvi,lxiii.
444.450-53. cf.lxxxiv, 196,447-48,
455-58, 4(,(). 469-72 incl. n. 87,474.
481-82.485. see also Immortality
of the soul. God, Syllogistic
inference
Finery (Schmuck), impairs genuine
beauty. 226; as included in
painting in the broad sense, 323
Fire-Reflections Concerning. see
Brief Outline . ..

502

INDEX

First Introduction to the Critique of

Judgment (Erste Einleitung zur
Kritik der Urteilskraft), xvi, xvii,
xix-xxi incl. n. 2, xxvi, xxix, 291 br.
n. 19, 193'-251'
Flowers (Blumen), are free natural
beauties,229,cL2Qry,215,216,233,
236 n. 60,281,285; beautiful, an
ideal of them is impossible, 233,
see also Beauty (ideal of);
intellectual interest in, 299, see also
Interest; used in landscape
gardening, 323, or as ornaments,
297; sensation of smell from, 282,
291; their beauty's origin can be
accounted for without teleology,
347-49, cf. 364; artificial, 299: see
also Song (of birds)
Fluid (Fliissigkeit) , true, 348, cf. 349
Following (Nachfolge), contrasted
with imitation, 283, 309 br. n. 43,
318,319, cf. 309 br. n. 43, see also
Imitation
Force (Kraft), motive, 390, 457,483,
cf. 419, see also Mechanism,
Natural (laws); locomotive, of the
soul, 457, see also Soul;
psychological, 177 n. 18, cf. 230'
n. 50; motive, contrasted with
fonnative, 374; fonnative, 374, 419,
423-24, cf. 371, contrasted with
fonnative impulse, 424; generative,
420. see a/so Generation; vital,
226,245,274,278,333,cf.244,331,
see also Life; moving, of the
presentation of morality, 274, see
also Presentation; oratorical, 462,
see also Oratory
Foreign (auswiirtig), see Principles
Form (Form), of thought, see
Categories, Logic; of intuition, see
Intuition; of an object, consists in
the object's being bounded, 244;
universal, of nature (experience),
see Categories; particular, in
nature, see Particular in nature,
Purposiveness; of purposiveness,
see Purposiveness; in relation to

beauty, see Beauty,
Purposiveness-nature's subjective,
Pleasure-in judgments of taste,
Taste-judgments of; in art, see
Art-fine; lack of, in the sublime,
see Sublime-the; in organisms,
see Organized (beings),
Purposiveness-nature's objective
and material; supersensible, see
Reason, Supersensible-the,Intuition (intellectual); in morality, see
Moral (law), Categorical imperative; see also Formal, Lawfulness,
Unity, Coherence, System
Formal (formal), features (what is
fonnal) in the presentation of a
thing, 21:1, cf. 224, see also
Presentation; rules of judging as
such (i.e., formal conditions of the
power of judgment), 290, see also
JUdgment-power of (as such);
purposiveness, see Purposivenessnature's subjective, Tastejudgments of, Beauty; moral law
as, see Moral (law); see also Form
Form and Principles. . .• see On the

Form and Principles . ..
Fonnations (Bildungen), free, in
nature, 347-50, 217', cf. 419,426
Formless (form/os), objects, see
Sublime-the

Foundations of the Metaphysics of
Morais (Grundlegung zur
Metaphysik der Sitten), xxix, 233
br. n. 53, 430 br. n. 23, 200' n. 9
Frame (Rahmen), of a picture, 226
Freak births (MijJgeburten), 423
Frederick the Great, 315
Frederick William II, xxix
Freedom (Freiheit), of the
imagination, see Imagination; in
the play of the cognitive powers
(imagination and understanding).
see Thste-judgments of; political.
355,432,433, cf. 249; see also
Freedom of the will
Freedom of the will (Freiheit des
Willens. der Willkiir), traditional

INDEX

Freedom of the will (continued)
doctrine of, 473, d. xlii; is needed
for morality, xxxix, xli, xliv, 473,
475, cf. 479, see also Moral (law);
is freedom from the necessity
(influence) of nature, xl, xliv, xlvi,
civ-cix, cf. 176,195,195 n. 39, 264,

268-69,326,435,443,453, see also
Natural (laws); is (regarded as)
supersensible, xxxix, xliv, xlvi, lxiii,
lxx, lxxxiv, lxxxv, lxxxviii, cv, 195,
222,271,435,474,cf.2SO,254,273,
275,291,436 n. 30,473; concept
of, its domain is the supersensible.
175-76, cf. 195, see also Domain;
concept of, the supersensible it
contains practically, l'ee
Supersensible-the (as contained
practically in the moral law); cannot be an object of experience,
195', see also Experience; concept
of, contrasted with concept(s) of
nature, 171-76, 178-79, 195,474,
475, see also Nature; concept of,
is inscrutable, 275, cf. 404,468;
concept of, as provided by
speculative philosophy is only
negative, 474, cf. 404,406 br. n. 26,
see also Speculative, Ideas
(rational); principle of, 479, cf. 195
n. 39, see also Moral (law); nature
and, (gulf and) mediation of the
transition between them, see
Judgment-power of (as mediating
the transition between
understanding and reason),
Transition; is to make a difference
in nature, lxxxviii, cvi n. 107, 175,
176, 195, cf. 448 n. 39, 468,474,
475,484; is transcendental, 343, see
also Transcendental; is
autonomous (nomothetic), xliv,
448, cf. 283,354, see also
Autonomy, Nomothetic,
Legislation; law(s) of, 195 n. 39,
'}fJ2', cf. 479, see also Moral (law);
is the will's harmony with itself
according to universal (practical,

503

moral) laws of reason, 354, cf. xliv,
195,195 n. 39,237, 268-69, 271,
453,474, see also Will. Reason,
Moral (law); is a (special) causality,
xliv, lxx, ciii, cvii, cviii, 195,403,
404,435,468,cf.271,326,453,474,
475. see also Causality, Will; as a
causality "postulated" by reason,
475; considered as formal condition of an intelligible world, 404,
see also Intelligible, World; is a
power of choice that bases its acts
on reason, 303, see also Will, Reason; purpose(s) of, 346, 430, see
also Causality, Purpose, Final purpose; is pure practical reason, 195
n. 39, see also Reason; concept of.
is reason's alone, 178; is a matter of
fact, lxxxiv, 468, 474, cf. 475, i.e., a
fact of reason, xliv, cf. 280, 403, see
also Fact-matters of; can be cognized and known (practically), xl,
xli, xlvi. lxxxiv, 206', cf. 468,484,
see also Cognition, Knowledge;
idea of, is the only idea of the
supersensible which proves its
reality in nature, 474, cf. 475, see
also Reality. Ideas (rational); as
basis for practical cognition of immortality and God, 474, ct. xli, xlvi,
see also Immortality of the soul,
God; and see Freedom
Future (kiln/tig), life. see Ufe,
Immortality of the soul
Games (Spiele) , 306, see also Play;
of chance, see Play
Garden (Garten), Marsden's pepper
garden, 243; see also Landscape
gardening
Garve, Christian, 277 br. n. 48
Genera and species (Gatturlgerl urad
Arten), in nature. order among
them, see Judgment-principle of;
of organisms, their order. 418-19
(see also Nature Isystem of)), and
their preservation, 371-72. see also
Generation

504

INDEX

General (Feldherr). is aesthetically
superior to the statesman, 262-63,
see also War
General (general), contrasted with
universal, 213, see also Universal;
validity of a judgment of taste, see
Taste-judgments of
Generation (Zeugung, generatio),
kinds of, 419 n. 5; among trees,
371, see also Procreation, Educt;
and see Organized (beings), Force
Genius (Genie), origin of the term,
308; is the ability to exhibit
aesthetic ideas, 344, cf. lxvii-lxviii,
350-51, see also Ideas (aesthetic),
Exhibition; involves spirit, lxvii,
316-18, cf. 319, 320, see also Spirit;
is needed for producing fine art,
lxvii, 307-08, 311, 313, 317, 350-51,
355, see also Art-fine; is needed,
besides taste, for judging fine art,
xxiv, 311, see also Taste; provides
fine art with rich material, 310, cf.
317,319-20,326,329,334, while
fine art's form is provided by the
school, 310, cf. 318, see also
Academic; poetry depends on it
especially much, and depends least
on (the school's) precepts or on
examples, 326, ct. 314. see also
Poetry; himself does not know by
what rule he connects and then
expresses his ideas, Ixvii. 308, 317,
see also Spirit; nature favors him,
318, cf. 344, in favoring one of his
mental powers over the others, 235
n. 57; involves imagination and
understanding in a certain happy
(317) relation, 316-18, ct. 313-15,
319; is a talent for fine art, 309,
311,317, rather than for science,
317, cf. 308, 310, a talent that is
original, 308, 310, 318, 319, and
that (or nature through it) gives its
own rule to fine art, Ixvii. 307-11.
319,344,cf.318,350-51,355,see
also Talent; its products must be
models (must be exemplary),

308-10,318, cf. 355, see also Artfine; is incompatible with a spirit
of imitation, 308, cf. 318, 355, see
also Imitation; may allow deformities in a work, 318; geniuses write
things that break one's neck, 334;
must be disciplined by taste,lxvii,
319, cf. 312,313; it, rather than
taste, should be sacrificed in case
of conflict, 31~20; without taste,
and vice-versa, 313; has a
boundary, 309; cannot be
communicated to others, 309; his
example gives rise to a school, 318;
contrasted with great scientific
minds, 308-Q9
Geography (Geographie) , 469
Geometry (Geometrie. Raum[ehre,
MejJkunst), describes (nature's)
space, xxxii, 237' , see also Space;
shows the possibility of synthetic
a priori propositions, xxxii, cf.
xxxiii, 198' n. 6, see also Synthetic
a priori; its concepts can be
exhibited a priori, xxxv, cf. 197 n.
43,366 n. 23,468, see also
Exhibition; figures or objects of,
xxxii, lxxvii, 370 n. 28, 447, 228',
have formal objective
purposiveness, lxxvii, 362-66,366
n. 23, 447, 228', see also
Purposiveness; figures or objects
of. as alleged examples of beauty,
241-42,365-66; pure, is sublime,
198' n. 6; applied, distinguished
from pure, 172-73,303,198',198'
n. 6, see also Land surveying-art
of; geometric figures drawn in the
sand, 370, 370 br. n. 28,228',228'
br. n. 45; geometric analogies, 282;
geometric locus, 362; ancient
geometers, 363, cf. 283; Plato
turned away from his school
anyone ignorant of, 363; Newton's,
309; see also Mathematics
Gesture (or Gesticulation)

(Gebiirdung. Gestiku[ation), 320,
324

INDEX

Gladness (Frohsein), 261
God (Gott), traditional doctrine of,
473, cf. xxx, xxxi. xlii, xlviii,
lxxii-lxxv, see also Spinoza;
concept of (assertion of the
existence of) is not contradictory,
453, cf. xxxi, xxxix, xlvi, 471 n. 87;
lifeless or living, 392 n. 6; gods, see
Demonology; concept of, as
squandered on every intelligent
being with many great properties,
438; concept of. its introduction
into natural science, 381. cf. 416.
470; concept of, as completing our
knowledge of nature, 476; as
belonging to the supersensible
outside us, 474, cf. xxxix, see also
Supersensible-the; is not an
intuitive understanding with its
intellectual intuitions, xcii, cf. c.
see also Understanding (intuitive).
Intuition (intellectual),
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature'S purposiveness, reason's
concept of it): attempt at
theoretical cognition (theoretical
determination of the concept) of,
xxxix, lxxxiv, 395.456, 457, 459-60,
463-66,47Q-84,cf.416.438,
440-42: existence of. speculative
arguments for it are weak, 451, see
also Speculative; ontological proof
for the existence of, lxxii,lxxiii.
475-76, d. 473; cosmological proof
for the existence of,lxxiii,lxxiv,
475-76, cf. 473; eternity (and
omnipresence) of, 484; as first
mover, 483; teleological proof for
the existence of, lxxiii-lxxv, lxxxv,
398-401.436-42.445,456,461-66,
473,476-80,cf.381,405-06.410.
447,454.455,470. see also Cause
(intelligent, of the world),
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness, our
understanding's concept of it);
teleological proof for the existence
of. why it seems convincing,

505

477-78. see also Conviction; idea
of. gets (only) some theoretical
determination through teleology,
lxxxv, 437-38. 440. 470. 476. cf.464
n. 64. see also Determination,
Teleology (its relation to theology);
idea of. receives insufficient determination from teleology for a theology. 470, 479,480; is not merely
an intelligent cause of the world
in terms of purposes, xcix. 438-39,
441,444.465.476,477,479-83. d.
437.461-62,466,470.473. see also
Cause (intelligent. of the world).
Causality (in terms of purposes);
in the full (determinate. moral)
sense of the term. xxvi-xxvii.
ci,441,444-47,45O.4S5-56.
462,463.470.476.478,479.481.
cf. xlvi, 263, 439, 474 br. n. 95, see
also Theology. Religion; is infinite
intelligence. 441, see also
Intelligence; perfections of,lxxii.
444, 481,cf. 438,447,461-62.480.
484; "all" perfection of. substituted
for "much," 438. see also God
(teleological proof for the existence
of); wisdom and glory of, 448
n. 39. 457, see also Wisdom; as
moral author of the world (in tenns
of the final purpose), xlvii,lxxxiv,
ci, cit. 438, 444-47. 450. 453.455,
463.470.476.478.479. cf. lxxiii.
lxxxiv,cviii. 382,426,448n. J9,&ee
also Final purpose; idea of. is
made determinate through the
moral law (and the idea of the final
purpose), xxvi-xxvii, lxxxiv, 437,
441,444,447,457. cf. 438 see also
Moral (law). Final purpose,
Determination, Reality; as supreme
basis (sovereign) of the (moral)
kingdom of purposes, 444; idea of,
is made detenninate through the
analogy with the idea of freedom.
lxxxiv-lxxxv, 351 hr. n. 31.456 br.
n. 52,473-74, ef. 353 hr. n. 35. 437.
456. 457 br. D. 54, 464 n. 64.465.

506

INDEX

God (continued)

479,481,484-85, see also
Determination, Reality, Analogy;
idea 0(, not as he is in himself but
as he relates to the final purpose,
lxxxv, 456-58, 463, 465 n. 69,
482-84, d. 351 br. n. 31, 438,456,
459,466,481; as needed to make
nature cooperate with practical
reason's aim, xlvi, lxiii, ci, 452, 453,
455,471 n. 87, cf.lxxxviii, 196,346,
353,444, see also Final purpose;
we have practical (a priori)
cognition of, xli-xlii, xlvi, lxxxiv,
167 br. n. 2, 456,472,474,482.
484-85. cf. xli n. 23,438.450-51,
455,470,473 br. n. 93.478,485 br.
n. 107, see also Cognition
(practical); our cognition of, is
symbolic, 353, d.351 hr. n. 31 (see
also Symbol), i.e., it is cognition
by analogy, 353 hr. n. 35,484-85,
485 hr. n. 107, cf.lxxxiv-Ixxxv, 351
br. n. 31,437.456.456 br. n. 52,
457 br. n. 54, 464 n. 64,465.
473-74,479,481, see also Analogy;
we do not have knowledge of, xlii,
xlvi, lxxxiv, 167 br. n. 2, cf. xli n.
23,351 hr. n. 31.467,470,472,475,
see also Knowledge; is a matter of
(rational) faith, xlii, xlvi, lxxxiv, 469,
470,475, cf. 467 hr. n. 75,471-72,
see also Faith; existence of. as a
postulate, see Postulate; moral
proof for the existence of, lxxxiv,
436, 442-85, cf. xlvi, see also
Final purpose; moral proof for the
existence of, is independent of the
teleological proof, 444, 477-79, cf.
446,447; moral proof for the
existence of, preparation for it, ci,
477-78, see also Propaedeutic (to
theology), Teleology (its relation
to theology); moral proof for the
existence of, what kind of validity
it has, 450 n. 44, 453-58, d. 461,
482, and what its benefit is, 459-61,
cf. 451-52; nonexistence of, effects
of believing in it, 451-52, cf.

459-61; fear of, 263. 264.
contrasted with his fearfulness (and
sublimity), 260-64, see also Fear;
fitting mental attunement and
behavior regarding. 263, cf. 273,
see also Religion; our obligation
to, 481, cf. 446.481 br. n. 104, see
also Duty
Good-the (das Gute), knowing it is
identical with willing it, according to Wolff, xlii, xlviii; is that to
which we attribute an objective
value, 210, cf. 215, 226; holds for
every rational being as such, 210,
see also Rational; involves the con·
cept of a (determinate) purpose,
207-QS, 221,226,cf. 214,244,see
also Perfection, Purpose;
judgments about it are cognitive,
215,228, cf. '1J1). 221. and not free,
210; is the object of the will, 208,
209, cf.1IJ7, see also Will;
judgments about it determine our
liking for (pleasure in) an object,
215, see also Determination,
Pleasure; is what (by means of
reason) we like through its mere
concept, '}fff, 241, cf. 213,244,346,
see also Reason (practical); our
liking for (pleasure in) it is interested, 207-10, cf. 222.230.241.
228', see also Interest. Desirepower of; our liking for it is a pure
practical liking. 209 (see also
Pleasure), and has an intellectual
basis, 222, viz., a concept, 214; is
presented as the object of a
universal liking, 213, see also
Presentation; judgments about it
have logical universality, 215, cf.
213, see also Validity; contrasted
with the agreeable, 207-10, 213,
266-67, cf. 222, 292 (see also
Agreeable-the, Pleasure), and
with the beautiful (and sublime).
207-10,213-15,221-22,226-28,
241,266-67,346, cf.liv, see also
Perfection, Beautiful-the,
Pleasure; as united with the

INDEX

Good (continued)
beautiful, 230; indirect contrasted
with direct (i.e .. intrinsic,
unconditioned, absolute), 207-09,
cf. 226-27, see also Moral (good);
moral, see Moral (good); highest,
xlv, lxiii n. SO, lxxxiii, 208, 435,441,
444,450.451.453. 199'. cf, 436 n.
30,443,471 n. 87, is a happiness
of rational beings that
harmoniously accompanies their
compliance with moral laws, 451,
d. 450, 453, see also Final
purpose; highest. is a matter of
faith, 469, cf. 199', see also Final
purpose, Faith
Governments (Regierungen), 274-75
Gram, Moltke S., 167 br. n. 4
Grammar (Grammatik), 232 n. 49,
see also Language
Grass (Gras), blade of, our inability
to explain even it in mechanical
terms, 378, 400, 409, cf. 368, see
also Mechanism, Organized
(beings)
Gratification ( Vergnugen ), is pleasure
(liking) in (based on) sensation,
270, 330, see also Sensation; as
pleasure (liking) of enjoyment, 'N7,
see also Enjoyment, Agreeab\ethe; intense, as (pleasure of)
enjoyment, 207, see also
Enjoyment: can reach the level of
an affect, 331, see also Affects;
produces an inclination, 207, see
also Inclination; the agreeable
produces, 207, cf. 208, see also
Agreeable-the; consists in a
feeling that one's life is being
furthered generally, 330-31, see
also Life (feeling of); rests on the
feeling of being well (healthy), 331,
cf. 442, see also Health, Wellbeing; contrasted with pain, 223,
266, 270, 277, 331, 338, see also
Pain; is basically bodily sensation,
334-35, cf. 277,331; in laughter,
335, its bodily concomitants, 334,
see also Laughter; can be caused

507

by ideas, 330; as combined with
other liking or disliking, 331, 331
br. n. 73; as everyone's aim, 206;
see also Presentation
Gravitation (Schwere), 36J
Great (grojJ), see Magnitude
Gregor, Mary J., xv-xvii, xxi
Grief (Betrobnis. Schmerz), 276;
profound, may yet be liked, 331;
sympathetic, 273, see also
Sympathy; and see Pain,
Sadness
Grotesque (grotesk), 242
Guide (Leitfaden), for the reflective
power of judgment (for the
investigation of nature, for
coherent experience), 185,376,
379,386,389,398,399,410,417,
see also Judgment-principle of;
concerning our vocation, 432, see
also Vocation; impulses as, 432
Guyer, Paul, lvii n. 44, lxi, 216 br. n.

30
Haden, James, xxi inel. n. 2
Happiness (Glilckseligkeit), is the
highest physical good, 450, see also
Good-the; equated with the sum
of pleasure, with well-being and
enjoyment, 434 n. 29.442, cf. 443,
see also Pleasure, Well-being,
Enjoyment; precepts (theory) for
attaining it, 173, 196'; is the
greatest sum of what is agreeable,
208, cf. 209, see also Agreeablethe; is the natural purpose of the
sum of all our inclinations. 434 n.
29. see also Inclination; consists
of the sum of all those of man's
purposes that can be achieved
through nature, 431. cf. 430, see
also Purpose; is the matter of all
of man's purposes on earth, 431,
see also Matter (Materie); is man's
subjective (subjectively necessary)
purpose, 443, 200' n. 9, cf. 430,
450; man as making it his ultimate
purpose, 436 n. 30, see also
Ultimate purpose; is a mere (and

508

INDEX

Happiness (continued)
a wavering) idea formulated by
man himself. 430; is problematic
from a theoretical point of view,
453; see also Problematic; is a
purpose having an empirical
condition, 436 n. 30, 453, cf. 173,
430. 196': is not an unconditioned
good (has no absolute value), 209,
442, cf. 434 n. 29. see also
Unconditioned: contrasted with
human rights, 273: is not the final
purpose of creation, 436 n. 30, see
also Final purpose; in proportion
to virtue. is the final purpose, see
Final purpose; worthiness to be
happy, is virtue, xlv, 450. see also
Virtue; is in principle possible
through nature (mechanism), 436
n. 30, see also Mechanism; could
in principle have been nature's
ultimate purpose,436 n. 30, but cf.
430; is not nature's ultimate
purpose, 431, cf. 436 n. 30, see also
Ultimate purpose; is not a purpose
of nature directed to man in
preference to other creatures, 436
n. 30. cf. 430, see also Man,
Misery; permanent, of a people,
433
Harmony (Zusammenstimmung.
Harmonie, Ubereinstimmung), or
unity of the cognitive powers
(imagination and understanding) is
the lawfulness inherent in the
empirical use of judgment, 190, see
also Judgment-power of (as such,
its subjective conditions); of the
cognitive powers (imagination and
understanding) with regard to
judging beauty, see Tastejudgments of, Pleasure-in
judgments of taste; in music, 329,
332, see also Music; of nature with
our cognitive powers, see
Purposiveness- nature's subjective,
Purposiveness- nature's objective
and material; of beings, its
derivation, according to Plato, 363

Health (Gesundheit), 208, 262, 273,
331-32 incl. br. ns. 71 and 73. 334.
379,380, cf. 335, see also Wellbeing; feeling of, 331, 332; when
regarded as a small concern,

262
Heautonomy (Heautonomie) , of (the
legislation by) the power of
judgment, 185, 225' , see also
Judgment-principle of (is
subjective); and see Autonomy
Heterogeneity (Ungleichartigkeit.
Heterogeneitiit), of nature's
empirical (particular) laws. 187,
188, 386, 209', 210'; of natural
forms, 203' , 209', 213', cf. 464-65;
between the principles of
mechanism and teleology, 377. 412;
of mathematical rules. 365; see also
Judgment-principle of (is a
heuristic maxim)
Heteronomy (Heteronomie), of
empirical laws, 353: of taste, 282.
350, see also Autonomy; of the
determinative power of judgment.
389; of reason, 294
Heuristic (heuristisch ). principles, see
Teleological principle, Judgmentprinciple of
Hierarchy (Stufenordnung), of rnera
and species, lvii, lxxvii, 213 ,cf.
180.185 (see also Genera and
species). of nature's empirical
(particular) laws. of natural forms,
see Judgment-principle of (is a
heuristic principle), Nature (system
of). Lawfulness (of the contingent),
System
Hippel. Theodor Gottlieb von. 330
br. n. 70
History (Geschichte), 469, ct. 472:
historical sciences, 305; historical
faith, see Faith; see also Natural
history
Holiness (Heiligkeit). 283; holy will.
en. 105; see also Sacred thrill
Homer, 309
Horrible (or horrid) (griifllich), 245,
253

INDEX

Horticulture (Gartenkunst), 225, cf.
242. 243, 323, 323 n. 59
Humanities (humaniora), 355
Humanity (Menschheit. Humanitiit).
means both the universal feeling
of sympathy and the ability to
engage universaJly in very intimate
communication, 355. cf. 297. see
also Sympathy; in man, its
development. 433; in man, its
dignity, 273, ef. 335. as not .reduced
by nature's might, 262; in man, is
the only thing in the world that
admits of the ideal of perfection.
233; its ultimate purpose is the
morally good. 298, see also
Ultimate purpose; and see Man,
Vocation
Hume. David. xxxi. xxxii, xlii. xliii. Ii,
lxxiv-lxxv, 285, 320 n. 55.420.438
br. ns. 32-33,455 br. n. 49
Humility (Demut), 264; false. 273
Hutcheson, Francis. Ii, Iii
Hybrids (Bastarde), 423-24
Hygiene (Diiitetikl. 173.196'
Hylozoism (Hylozoismus). 374, 392,
394-95
Hyperphysics (Hyperphysik). 423, cf.
391,392. see also Supersensiblethe
Hypothesis IHypothese), 463. 466;
if something is to serve as a
hypothesis then its possibility
must be certain, 466 cf. 394;
concerning the origin of species
of organisms, 419 n. 5, see also
Organized (beings); concerning
nature as a whole, 233, see also
Nature (as a whole); God as, to
explain nature. 470, see also
God
Hypotyposis (Hypotypose),351-S2,
457 br. n. 55, is exhibition, 351, see
also Exhibition

Idea for a Universal History from a
Cosmopolitan Point of View {Idee
zu einer allgemeinen Geschichte

509

in weltburgerlicher Absicht), 432
br. n. 25,433 br. n. 27
IdeaJ (ldeai). means the presentation
of an individuaJ being as adequate
to a rational idea, 232, see also
Ideas, Presentation: of beauty. see
Beauty; of perfection, 23Jj as
needed for the production of fine
art, 355
Ideal (idealisch), purposiveness, 188,
see also Purposiveness-nature's
subjective: mechanism, xciii. see
also Mechanism; and see
Idealism
Idealism (ldealismus), concerning the
(aesthetic) purposiveness of nature
and of art. 346-51, see also
Purposiveness- nature's SUbjective;
concerning the objective material
purposiveness (final causes) in
nature, 391-94. 439-40, see also
Purposiveness- nature's objective
and material; concerning objects
of sense as appearances, 351: 19th
century, xvi
Ideas (Ideen). broadest sense of the
term,342; there are two (basic)
kinds of, aesthetic and rational
(ideas of reason), 342, cf. xxxviii,
but both kinds have their principles
in reason, 344, d. 204. see also
Reason; aesthetic, are intuitions,
342, cf. 314. 316 (see also
Intuition), that prompt much
thought, lxviii, 314. 315. cf. 316.
326, 329; aesthetic. try to approach
an exhibition of rational ideas. 314,
cf. 315; aesthetic, are
unexpoundable presentations of the
imagination. 343 (see also
Presentation. Imagination), i.e.•
presentations of the imagination to
which no (determinate) concept
(concept of the understanding) is
adequate, lxviii, 314-16, 342, 343,
355,cf.329;aesthetic,cannot
become cognitions, 342, cf. 317.
see also Cognition; aesthetic, are
essentially distinct from rational

510

INDEX

Ideas (continued)
ideas of determinate purposes, 351,
d. 329,350; aesthetic, are the
counterpart of rational ideas, lxviii,
314; aesthetic, arouse a liking, 350;
aesthetic, the ability to exhibit them
is genius. 344, cf. lxvii-Ixviii (see
also Genius. Exhibition). and
genius's spirit, lxvii-lxviii, 313-14.
see also Spirit; aesthetic, their
expression is beauty, 320, cf. 244.
see also Beauty. Expression;
aesthetic, in fine art. 323. 350 (see
also Art-fine), specifically, in
music, 328-29, 331-32; aesthetic,
in jest. 332, cf. 334-35; rational
(ideas of reason) or "intellectual,"
314, cf. 316, are (pure) rational
concepts (concepts of reason).
xxxviii, 232. 342, 351. 453 (see also
Rational, Reason), as distinguished
from concepts of the
understanding, 341, cf. 402 (see
also Concepts. Categories), from
aesthetic ideas, 342. and from
ideal, 232, see also Ideal; rational,
contrasted with concepts of the
understanding. 342, see also
Understanding; rational, transcend
nature (experience, understanding,
our theoretical cognitive power).
xxxviii. lxviii, 167, 175,265,342.

401.cf.257,456,459,468,473,see
also Transcendent,Supersensiblethe: rational, cannot become
(theoretical) cognitions. 342, cf.
175, see also Cognition; rational,
our imagination cannot exhibit
them (schematically, in our
sensible, rather than intellectual,
intuition), xlv,lxviii,lxx, 245, 257,
268.314-15,342,343.351,468, cf.
175,252,265.405,463,467,469.
see also Imagination, Exhibition,
Intuition, Sublime-the; rational.
are indemonstrable, 342, see also
Demonstration; rational, their
reality cannot be assured
theoretically, 469. cf. 175, see also

Reality: three pure rational, 474,
only one of which (the idea of
freedom) proves its objective
reality in experience (nature), 468,
474, cf. 175, 300, see also Freedom
of the will, Reality; rational, are
regulative rather than constitutive,
xxxviii, xlvi. cv, 167-68, 168 br. n.
5. 401. 405,cf. 175,396,404,
457-59. see also Regulative;
rational. are absolute unities of
presentation, 377, see also
Presentation; rational, guide the
understanding by a principle of
completeness, 168. see also
Completenes.'l. Totality; further the
aim of all cognition, 168, cf. 175,
see also Cognition (final aim of
all); rational idea of a nature in
itself, i.e., of the supersensible, 268,
cf. 175. see also Thing in itself,
Supersensible-the; moral, 235,
265,326.335,356,479,482 br. n.
105. cf. 256, 292, their
development, 356, their visible
expression, 235. see also Beauty
(ideal of); moral, as made sensible.
356. and as connected with fine
art. see Art-fine; religious, 273,
d. 416. see also Religion, God; as
involved in the sublime. see
Sublime-the; of purposes, 383,
399. of a causality distinct from
mechanism, 389, of a whole, 373.
408, of nature as a system in
terms of purposes, 379 (see also
Nature [system of!), as underlying
final causes on which we base
the possibility of organized
things, 426, see also Purposes,
Natural (purposes), Organized
(beings). Teleological judgments;
involving a social interest, 273,
see also Interest; standard idea.
see Standard idea; Platonic.
363
Idol (Idoi) , 459 n. 57. see also
Idolatry

INDEX

Idolatry (Idolatrie, Abgotterei), 459,
459 n. 57, see also Superstition
Imagination (Einbildungskraft,
Einbildung), is a cognitive power,
314, viz., our (active) power of
sensibility (intuition), 354, cf. 314,
321, see also Sensibility; is our
power of (structuring) intuition(s).
xxxv, 190,287,292,314,343, cf.
315-16,342, see also Intuition; is
our power of exhibition. xxxv, 232,
244. 287. cf. 245,257.258,279,
314-15. 198' n. 6, but see also
Exhibition; apprehends what
(manifold) is given in intuition,
xxxv, lvii, lviii, lxii, lxx, 189-90. 227,
240.243,251-59.279,291,
220'-21',223',224',233', see also
Apprehension; comprehends (that
manifold), 248 br. n. 8, 251-60 incl.
br. n. 14, ef. 329 but also 220';
combines that manifold (the
particular), xxxv, lv, 217. 238, 241,
253-54, 'l2,7. cf. lxx. 268; induces
the understanding to provide that
manifold with unity in concepts,
238, see also Understanding; as
such. its form, Ivii; whether
creative, 243 br. n. 73,314-15 incl.
br. n. 48, see also Creative; as
productive (spontaneous), 240, 240
br. n. 66, 243, 243 br. n. 73, 314,
cf. 269,317. see also Ideas
(aesthetic); as reproductive,
233-34, 240, 240 br. n. 66, 243 br.
n. 73, 352,cf. 269, 314. 33O,see
also Association-laws of; as
giving determination to space. 365;
its relation to understanding (as
other cognitive power), 190. 192,
241,244,277,286,287,295-96,
314-21. 342,366.220',223',see
also Understanding, ludgmentpower of (as such, its subjective
condition); free play between it
and the understanding, see Tastejudgments of; free lawfulness of,
240, d. 241-44. see also
Lawfulness; freedom of, 241, 287.

511

296,317,350,354; is unbounded
as far as progressing is concerned,
255. 257, 274, cf. 250. 265, see also
Magnitude, Infinite-the; its
might, 256, 269, cf. 235; its
momentum, 315; as unbridled and
ruleless, 275, stirred or restrained.
199'; engages in fantasy and fiction.
see Fantasy, Fiction; is very active
when we dream, 380; ideal of, 232,
see also Ideal; its expansion by the
sublime, lxx, 249, 256, 257 br. n.
23,259,268, 269.cf. 252,265,see
also Expansion; as attuned
mathematically or dynamically,
247, see also Sublime-the;
feeling of its inadequacy for
exhibiting a rational idea, 256-60.
265,268,269, cf. 252, 255, see also
Sublime-the, Ideas (rational); as
instrument of reason, 269, cf. 235;
its vocation, 257, see also
Vocation
Imitation (Nachahmung), contrasted
with following. 283, 309 br. n. 43,
318, 319; mechanical, 318;
taste cannot be acquired
by imitating someone else's,
232, cf. 282-83; and copying,
309, see also Copying; when it
becomes aping, 318; learning is
nothing but, 3()8, cf. 309; of nature,
301. ef. 243, 299, see also Copying;
spirit of, is the opposite of genius.
308, ef. 318, 355, see also Genius;
genius's examples do not arise from
it, yet must serve others for this,
308
Immanent (immanent), contrasted
with transcendent, see
Transcendent; concept, 342,397,
cf. 237'; principle, 403; use of
reason, 235'; see also
Understanding
Immortality of the soul
(Unsterblichkeit der Seele). is
something supersensible within us.
474, ef. 471 n. 87. see also Soul;
idea of. is not contradictory, 471

512

INDEX

Immortality of the soul (continued)
n. 87; cannot be proved
theoretically, 4(j(j, 473-74, 479, cf.

460-61,471-72, see also
Psychology, Pneumatology; is an
assumption required for the
achievability of the final purpose
enjoined on us by the moral law,
xli, xlvi, 460-61, 471 n. 87, cf. xxvi,
lxxxviii, 452, 473-74, 479, see also
Final purpose; is a postulate, see
Postulate; is cognized practically,
xli, xlvi, lxxxiv, 474, cf. 471 n. 87
(see also Cognition), but is not
known, xlii, xlvi, 467, 472, 475, cf.
470, see also Knowledge,
Psychology; is a matter of
(rational) faith, xlii, xlvi, lxxxiv, 469,
470, cf. 467 br. n. 75, 471-72, see
also Faith
Imperatives (Imperative), kinds of,
200' n. 9, cf. 200' br. n. 10;
hypothetical and categorical, xliii,
see also Categorical imperative
Impressions (Eindriicke), of sense,
206, 224, 321, 324. see also
Sensation
Impulse - formative (Bildungstrieb),
424
Inaugural Dissertation, see On the
Form and Principles . ..
Incentives (Triebfedern). of the mind.
271; of nature. 172. cf. 379. see also
Inclinations; the agreeable as, 2(j(j;
for the development of talents
serving culture, 433; moral (or
moral springs), 462, cf. 446
Inclinations (Neigungen), are
incentives of sense (detennined by
sense impressions), xlv, 206, see
also Sensation, Detennination; are
produced by the agreeable, 11J7, cf.
210, see also Agreeable-the; our
natural predisposition is quite
purposively adapted to their
satisfaction, 433, cf. 430 br. n. 24;
the natural purpose of their sum
is happiness, 434 n. 29, see also

Happiness; discipline of, lxxxiv,
173,432,433, cf. 196', 199'; use of.
200' n. 9; taste as catering to, in
empirical interest in the beautiful,
298, cf. 211, see also Interest;
refined, 297, 298, see also
Refinement; inclination to society,
297. cr. 296, see also Sociability;
in animals may arise from
reflection, 211', see also Animals
Incredulous (ung/iiubisch), 472
Indigenous (einheimisch), see
Principles
Inference (SchlufJ), syllogistic, 463-64,
as the relation between God,
freedom, and immortality of the
soul, 473 hr. n. 93; by analogy,
463-64, see also Analogy;
teleological,436
Infinite-the (das Unendliche),
contrasted with infinity, 254 br. n.
19, see also Infinity; is absolutely
large, 254, see also Magnitude;
relation to it statable in numbers
is impossible, 254, see also
Numbers; ability to think it as a
whole, 254; exhibition of, 254,274,
see also Exhibition: as given, 254;
of supersensible intuition as given,
255. see also Intuition
(intellectual); inability to take it in,
contrasted with impossibility of
thinking it as given. 259; sensibility
as looking outward toward it, 265;
for sensibility it is an abyss, 265;
the infinitely small, 250
Infinity (das Unendliche.
UnendlichkBit), contrasted with the
infinite, 254 hr. n. 19, see also
Infinite-the; numerical series (the
power of numbers) as progressing
to, 251, see also Numbers;
apprehension may progress to,
251-52, see also Apprehension;
imagination as striving toward, 250,
see also Imagination; idea of, is
involved in intuitions of sublime
natural appearances, 255, see also

INDEX

Infinity (continued)
Sublime-the; comprehended is
the proper unchangeable basic
measure of nature, 255
Insight (Einsicht), theoretical
cognition is, but practical is not,
xli, see also Cognition; complete,
is possible only in terms of
mechanism, lxxx, 384, cf. 387,410,
see also Mechanism, Teleological
judgments; supposed masterpiece
of,310
Insipid (abgeschmackt), 276, cf. 273
Inspiration (Eingebung) , 308, 312, see
also Spirit
Instinct (Instinkt), in nonhuman
animals, contrasted with reason,
464 n. 64, cf. 172,303,442,211',
see also Animals; in man, 430, 230'
n. 50, see also Man
Instrument(s) (Werkzeug[e]), of an
intelligent cause of the world,
mechanism as, see Mechanism;
parts of a watch as, 374. see also
Watch; needed by geometry, 198'
n. 6, see also Geometry; of art,
374; organs as being, 373, ct. 375
Intellect. see Understanding
Intellectual (intellektuell, Geistes-),
intuition, see Intuition;
comprehension, see
Comprehension; concept (idea),
314,316, see also Ideas (rational);
as meaning supersensible, see
Supersensible-tbe; as meaning
moral. 271. cf. 222, see also Moral;
feeling, see Feeling; liking
(pleasure), 197, 230, 271, 366, see
also Pleasure; purposiveness, see
Purposiveness; interest in the
beautiful, see Beautiful-the;
beauty or sublimity, see Beauty,
Sublime-the; estimation of
magnitude, 255, see also
Magnitude; power of judgment,
295,300; power, 196, see also
Reason; community with the
origin of all things, in Plato, 363

513

Intelligence (Intelligenz), man as, 233
incl. br. n. 52,271, cf. 275, see also
Man. Spirit, Soul; the world whole
as an intelligent substance, 421. see
also Spinoza; the supreme cause
of the world (original being) as an,
444,455, see also Cause
(intelligent, of the world); God as
an, 484, cf. 446, that is supreme
(infinite, moral), 438, 441, 446, see
also God
Intelligible (intelligibel), means
supersensible, xxxiii; see
Supersensible- the
Intention (Absicht), is the concept a
cause has of the purpose it
pursues, xxv incl. n. 4, xcii, xcviii,
~f. xxv n. 5, 383, 398, 408; thought
of, is implicit in the concept of any
(even a natural) purpose, lxxxii, see
also Purpose, Natural (purposes);
of nature, 383, 391, 234' , 240', cf.
393, 398, see also Purpose,
Technic of nature; of the cause of
organisms, 397-400, 425-26, 240'
(see also Cause [intelligent, of the
world]), is thought by analogy with
the causality of our understanding,
398, see also Organized (beings),
Causality, Understanding; final,
440-42, cf. 447, see also Final
purpose; and see Aim
Interest (Interesse), is the liking
(pleasure) we connect with (the
presentation of) an object's
existence, 204, 1ffl, 296, cf. 209,
221, see also Presentation: taking
an interest in a thing is identical
with willing the thing, 209; either
presupposes or gives rise to a need,
210, cf. 204,223,271,300; in the
agreeable, see Agreeable-the; of
inclination, 210, see also
Inclination; in the good, see
Good-the; moral, 298, 300, 301,
354, 459 (see also Moral),
transition to it from charm, 354,
cf. 297, see also Charm, Transition;

514

INDEX

Interest (continued)
of reason, 210, 223, 300, cf. 271;
in the beautiful, see Beautifulthe; in the beautiful in nature, but
not in the beautiful in art, is a
mark of moral goodness, 298; in
fine art, 301; as not involved in
aesthetic reflective judgments
about the beautiful and sublime,
see Taste-judgments of,
Pleasure-in judgments of taste,
Sublime-the; interesting sadness,
276
Introduction (Einleitung,
Introduktion), propaedeutic and
encyclopaedic, 241'-42' , see a/so
Propaedeutic, Encyclopaedia
Intuition (Anschauung), means
(roughly) visualization, xxxii, xxxiii;
ours, is a receptivity (is passive),
xcii, cf. 206,405 hr. n. 25, see also
Sense, Sensibility; ours, is (resides
in) sensibility (is sensible intuition),
xxxii,xcii,340,4{)1,402,405incl.
br. n. 25, 406 incl. br. n. 26, 418,
484,222' n.23,226'n.43,247',see
also Sensibility; differs in kind from
a concept, 226' n. 43; is a
presentation of the imagination,
314, cf. 343 (see also Presentation),
i.e., of our power of intuition, see
Imagination; manifold of, its
combination, 287, cf. 407, see also
Imagination; its connection with
concepts, see Exhibition; is needed
for determining a concept, 339, cf.
287, 3S 1, see a/so Determination,
Reality; is needed for cognition (by
any understanding), xcii, 406, 247' ,
cf. 175,188-89, 192,206,468,see
also Cognition, Understanding;
ours, objects count for it only as
appearances, 405. 405 br. n. 25, cf.
189, see also Appearances; forms
of, xxviii, xxxii-xxxiv. 189,342-43,
365, 405 br. n. 25, cf. 183, see also
Space, Time; matter of, is given
in sensation, xxxiv, Ux, xcv, cf. 189,
224,294, see also Sensation; a

priori (pure), xxxii, xxxiii,
xxxv-xxxvi, xl, xci. xcv, 183, 342,
364, cf. 475, 202', see also Pure;
empirical. xxxiii-xxxvi, xl. 342, cf.
351, see also Perception; inner and
outer, xxxvi. d. 237'. see also
Sense; inner. an aesthetic idea as,
314, see also Ideas (aesthetic); as
the material used by genius in
exhibiting a concept, 317. cf. 314,
see also Genius; in aesthetic
judgments about the beautiful, see
Taste-judgments of; is
inadequate to exhibit an idea of
reason (schematically), see Ideas
(rational); any, is either a schema
or a symbol, 352. see also Schema,
Symbol, Exhibition (schematic and
symbolic); empirical, is either an
example or a schema. 351;
intellectual, xcii-xcvii, c, ci, cv,
cviii, 402. 405 inel. hr. n. 25. 406
b~n.26,407,418,ef.255,388.see

also Understanding (intuitive),
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness, reason's
concept of it); pure, in Plato, 363
Intuitive (anschauend, ;ntuitiv),
understanding, see Understanding;
not to be contrasted with symbolic,
351, see also Exhibition (schematic
and symbolic), Intuition
Involution (Involution, Einwicklung),
theory of, 423 incl. br. n. 11, cf.
418; see also Organized (beings)
Is (Sein) , 403, see also Ought; and
see Experience
Islam (Mohammedanismus), 274, see
also Religion
Jest (Scherz), 332, cf. 305, 334, see
also Laughter
Jews (Juden), 274, see also Religion
Judgment - power of (Urteilskraft),
also rendered as 'judgment,' xxiii.
167 hr. n. 4, cf. 287, see also
Power; distinguished from
(individual) judgments, xxiii, 167
br. n. 4, see also Judgments; is the

INDEX

Judgment-power of (continued)
ability to judge, 287, cf. xxiii, 167
br. n. 4, see also Judgments; as not
an independent cognitive power,
202', cf. 208', see also Judgmentpower of (as a cognitive power [in
its own right]); does not legislate
to object.'l, 385, seB also
Legislation; produces no cognition
on its own, 242'; forms no separate
part in the system of (doctrinal)
philosophy, 168, 179,205',242',
246', 248', cf. 170, 177,201',202',
see also Philosophy; is a function
of understanding, lvi, xcviii, 221',
223' , cf. 406-07, see also
Understanding; is what we mean
by sound understanding, 169, cf.
Ix. 293. see also Understanding;
applies understanding'S concepts
(laws), 169, 179. cf. 385, 201', see
also Understanding; in general is
the ability to think the particular
as contained (subsume it) under
the universal. 179,406, cf. 169,
209', see also Universal; adapts the
imagination to the understanding,
319, cf. 329, see also Imagination,
Cognition; its procedure, 292; as
power of exhibition, see
Exhibition; transcendental, 179,
183,339,385, cf. 223', see also
Transcendental: a priori, see
Judgment-principle of, Judgments
(a priori); empirical, 292, cf. 407,
see also Judgments (empirical);
empirical use of, manifests
lawfulness, 190, see also Harmony.
JUdgment-power of (as such. its
subjective condition); logical,
290-91.247'. see also Judgments
(logical); logical. its maxim,
294-95; intellectual, 267. 295, 300.
see also Judgments (intellectual);
determinative, 179-80, 183,186,
188,360,361,379,385,388,389.
395,396,398,408,412.413,416,
429, 454, 455, 457, 463, 211' , 212' ,

217'-18',220',248', see also

515

Judgments (determinative),
Determination; reflective, 179-80,
183-84,186,188-90,192,249,360,
375,379,385,386, 388,389,39S.98,
408,412,413,416,429,454-58,463,
479, 209'-18',220' ,243' ,248' , see
also Judgments (reflective),
Reflection; reflective, as
Beurteilungsvermogen, 169 br. n.
9, 211'; theoretically and
practically reflective, 456. cf. 447,
454; reflective, its aesthetic and
logic, 249' , see also Aesthetic
(Asthetik); aesthetic, see Aesthetic
(iisthetisch), Art-fine; aesthetic,
as discipline of genius, 319, see aLro
Genius; teleological (which is
logical), see Teleological,
Teleological judgments; as (qua
reflective) a (higher) cognitive
power (in its own right),
lxxxvi-lxxxvii,167-69.177, 198,
345,353,417,201',202',208',225',
226',229',233',242',245'-46', cf.

196-97,405,243', see also
Cognitive power; needs (is capable
of, is entitled to) its own critique,
168-70,205',242'-44',248', d.
246'-47', see also Critique,
Critique of Judgment; as such (i.e.,
as reflective), its subjective (formal)
condition (its form) is the harmony
of the cognitive powers
(imagination and understanding),
lvii, lx, lxxxvii. 290, 290 n. 15,341,
220'-21',223'-25', cf. 190, see also
Cognition (empirical), Tastejudgments of, Sublime-the; as
such (Le., as reflective), its
subjective condition (harmony) can
only be felt, lxi, 219, 228, 239, 291,
296, cf. 217,295,223'-26' (see also
Feeling), is the same in everyone,
lx, lxxxvii, 190,191,218,290,225 ' ,
cf. 239 (see also Pleasure-in
judgments of taste, Sublime-the),
and has an optimum, lxi, 238-39;
has its own (indeterminate)
concept,lvi.lxiv, xcviii, 169, 181.

516

INDEX

Judgment-power of (continued)
182,184,193,196,197,248.
204'-05',216',218',220',221', cf.
202' .203' n. 13, 243', 244' ,248',
see also Purposiveness-nature's
subjective, Purposiveness-nature's
objective and material, Tastejudgments of, Sublime-the; its
"technic" (in a broad sense
including both teleology and
aesthetics), 219'-21', cf. 197,198,
281,350,201',237', see also
Technic of nature: needs. and has,
its own a priori principle, see
Judgment-principle of; legislates
a priori, 179-81,225', cf. 185, viz.,
to feeling (pleasure and
displeasure, liking and disliking),
lxxxvii. 168-69, 196,208',225'.
245'-46', i.e., it has autonomy, 389,
225', cf. 281, 282,350,385 (see also
Autonomy), but in so legislating
it gives a law only to itself (see
Judgment-principle of [is
subjective!), i.e., its autonomy is
only a heautonomy, 185, 225'; its
maxims, 182, 184, 186,385-91,
210',213', cf. 185,187,188,339,
376,379,398,412-14,437,461,
219', see also Particular in nature,
Maxim; is dialectical, 337, see also
Dialectic, Antinomy, Antinomy of
teleological judgment; points to a
supersensible, lxxxviii, 247', cf.
344-45,244'-45', see also
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness), Antinomy,
Antinomy of teleological judgment,
Deduction (of judgments of taste);
as mediating the transition between
understanding and reason (nature
and freedom, theoretical and
practical philosophy), xix,
lxxxv-lxxxvii, xcvii-cii, 168, 175-79,
195-98,298,202',207'.242' ,
244'-46', cf. xvi, xvii, see also
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness). Power,

Taste (permits a transition from
sense enjoyment to moral feeling),
Transition; its play in laughter, 335,
see also Laughter
Judgment-principle of (Prinzip der
Urteilskraft). the power of
judgment needs it (as a heuristic
maxim) in order to discover in
nature empirical laws and thus a
cognizable order (orient itself in
nature), lvi-lvii, lxxvi-lxxvii, 177,
180, 183-88, 193,385-86,203'-05',
208'-16' incl. n. 21. cf. 359, 406,
232', 235', see also Natural (laws,
particular), Experience (as a
system of empirical laws),
Lawfulness (of the contingent),
Judgment-power of; the difficulty
of finding it, 169, cf. 170; is not
tautologous (or analytic). 211' n.
21, see also Analytic; is not
cognized a priori in nature, 186.
214'; is not empirical (based on
experience) but a priori, 177, 182,
183, 185. 186, 193. 196,288.202',
204' , 210'. 211' • 211' n. 21, 213',
214',225',242'-44'.248', cf. 385,
203' , 205' , 209', though it can be
confirmed by observation, 186; is
not subject to doubt because of the
possibility of faulty subsumption
under it, 291, see also Tastejudgments of (erroneous); is
transcendental, 180-82. 184,
193-94,209',210',211' n. 21,213',
214', 242',cf. 185,286,414,see
also JUdgment-power of,
Transcendental; is cognitive, 184,
cf. 169; requires a transcendental
deduction. 182, cf. 184, see also
Deduction; is not a prescription (is
not legislated) to nature, 180,
185-86, 225'. cf. 184, 103' n. 13, see
also Judgment-power of,
Legislation; is not determinative,
243'; is not fit by itself for
theoretical or practical use. 176,
204', cf.lxxvii, 200'-01',218',225',

INDEX

Judgment-principle of (continued)
243'; does not form a special part
in a system of philosophy, 168, see
also Judgment-power of (forms
no separate part in a system of
philosophy), Philosophy; is
reflective, lvii, lxxvii, cf. lvii n. 44;
is a principle of the reflective
power of judgment, lvii, 180,
184-86,193,385,211'-16',225',
243',244',248', cf. 181, 188, 197,
224', 234' (see also Judgmentpower of [reflective!), and as such
is not sufficient for natural science,
lxxvii, cf. 417, see also Natural
(science); is a principle for
subsuming the imagination as such
under the understanding as such,
287, cf. 233', see also
Subsumption, Pleasure-in
judgments of taste; is a
presupposition (assumption),
lvi-lvii, lxxvii, 183, 185, 186,
209'-11',211' n. 21,213'-15',cf.
193,212', 243', 248'; is subjective,
i.e., the power of judgment gives
it only to itself (as a maxim for its
own use), 177, 180, 183-86.286,
288,385,386,204'.205',210',214' •
219',225'-26',234',244'.248', cf.
203' n. 13, see also Heautonomy;
is the assumption that nature is
lawful (systematic, hence
cognizable), even in the contingent,
lvi-lvii, lxxvii, 179-80, 183-85, 187,
204', 210'-12',cf. 180,404,~,

217',233',242'-43', see also
Lawfulness (of the contingent); is
the assumption that empirical
concepts can be found for
everything in nature, 211' • cf. 213',
see also Concepts (empirical, their
acquisition); is the assumption that
nature in (the diversity of) its
empirical (particular) laws is
purposive for our power of
judgment (understanding, cognitive
power), lvi, 180, 181, 184-87, 193,

517

202',214',215', cf. 194, 196,209',
211' n. 21, see also Purposivenessnature's subjective, Particular in
nature; is the assumption that
nature makes its universal laws
specific in a way that (is systematic
and hence) is purposive for our
power of judgment (understanding,
cognitive power), lvii, 186,
214'-17',242'-43', cf. lviii, 180,
188, 202', 211' n. 21, 213', see also
Natural (laws), System; expresses
itseU in maxims, 182, 184-86,385,
210', see also Judgment-power of
(its maxims), Particular in nature;
permits (and prepares us to make)
teleological judgments,
Ixxvii-Ixxviii. 218' • cf. 193-94. 248',
see also Teleological judgments,
Teleological principle; its full
range, lxxviii, 244'; makes nature's
supersensible substrate
determinable. 196, see also
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness)
Judgments (Urteiie), distinguished
from power of judgment, xxiii, 167
br. n. 4, cf. 287, see also
Judgment-power of, Power;
analytic and synthetic, see
Analytic, Synthetic, Synthetic a
priori; a priori, xxx n. 6, xxxii,
xxxiii. xxxvi. 288, cf. xxxi, see also
Propositions, Principles, A priori;
synthetic a priori, see Synthetic a
priori; empirical, xxxiii. xxxiv, xxxv,
lvii,191, 287-88, 212', see also
Judgment-power of; empirical,
are universally communicable,Ix,
238. 191,248,284, see also
Communicability- universal;
empirical, equated with empirical
cognitions, 203' n. 13, cf. 224' , see
also Cognition (empirical),
Experience; of perception and of
experience, 288 br. n. 10;
cognitive, lvi, 203, 221, 237, 288,
221'. 223' , cf. 287, may be

cr.

518

INDEX

Judgments (continued)
theoretical or practical, 209, 280,
see also Cognition; logical, 203-04,
215, 228, 244, 284-86, 347, 223' , cf.
169-70, 193, 249, see also
Judgment-power of; logical, based
on aesthetic judgments, 215, 285;
intellectual. 366, cf. 227' , 247', see
also Judgment-power of,
Intellectual; constitutive, xxxiv, see
also Constitutive: determinative,
xxxiv, lv, 244, 249, 331, 404, 405,
223' , see also Determination,
Judgment-power of, Principles;
objective, 281, 285, 223', 247' , cf.
237-38; reflective, lv, lvi, 244, 288,
405, 220' , 221' , 223', see also
Judgment-power of, Reflection,
Principles; reflective, are either
aesthetic or teleological, see
Aesthetic (iisthetisch) (reflective
judgments, reflective power of
judgment), Teleologicaijudgments,
Teleological (power of judgment);
reflective, as Beurteilungen. 169 br.
n. 9, ef. 211'; divided into
theoretical, aesthetic, and
practical, 226',246', see also
Problem III; aesthetic (or
subjective), see Aesthetic
(iisthetisch); pathological aesthetic,
231', i.e., (aesthetic) judgments of
sensation, 288, or "of sense," see
Aesthetic (iisthetisch); formal
(aesthetic), 288, i.e., aesthetic
reflective (see Aesthetic
[iisthetisch]. Judgment-power of),
specifically, judgments of taste,
about the beautiful, and judgments
about the sublime, see Tastejudgments of, Beautiful-the,
Beauty, Sublime-the; practical
aesthetic, 231'-32'; practical, 280,
226',246', cf. 231'-32', see also
Propositions, Principles, Practical;
moral, see Moral; theoretical,
xxxvi, 248, 284,288,226', 246', see
also Propositions, Principles,
Theoretical; singular, Iiv,lix, lxii,

191,215,244,281,285,289,339,
340,341; problematic, m, see also
Problematic; distinct and
confused, 226', see also Clear and
distinct, Confusedness; reasoning,
contrasted with rational, 337 n. I,

see also Reasoning
Justification (Recht!ertigung), is what
'deduction' means, lix, 279, see also
Deduction; procedure, KanQ
appeal to systematicity as, see
System
Kabir, Humayun, xxi n. 2
Kingdom (Reich), of purposes, 444,
see also Purpose
Knowledge (WlSsen), strict and weak
senses of the term, xxxi-xxxiv;
meaning of the term in Leibniz and
Wolff, xlviii, and in Baumgarten
and Meier, xlix; is assent that is
adequate objectively (i.e., adequate
to convince everyone), xl, xli, see
also Assent (Filrwahrhalten); how
related to cognition, xl-xlii, 167 br.
n. 2,467,467 br. n. 75,469,470,
472,475, see also Cognition; faith
does not involve, see Faith;
theoretical, xxxvii, xl, xli, 463, see
also Cognition (theoretical);
theoretical, its bounds,
xxxvii-xxxviii, see also Cognition
(theoretical, its limits); theoretical,
is impossible by n:ason (in the
narrow sense of the term),
xxxviii-xxxix, see also Reason; of
nature and beyond, xxxi, xxxviii,
xlii, see also Cognition
(theoretical); new, xl, see also
Expansion; a priori, of nature (the
world), by understanding, xxx,
xxxiii, xxxvii, see also Cognition
(a priori, theoretical),
Understanding; empirical, of
nature (the world), xxxi, see also
Cognition (empirical); empirical,
of the lawfulness of nature's
particular, xxxvii, see also
Lawfulness; practical, xIi-xliV, see

INDEX

Knowledge (continued)
also Freedom of the win, Moral
(law); our desire for, 479; 'know'
distinguished from 'can,' 303; see
also Science
Landscape gardening (Lustgiirtnerei).
323.323 n. 59, cf. 225.242, 243
Land surveying-art of
(FeldmejJkunst).171.303, 198'
Language(s) (Sprache[nJ). ancient
(dead) and scholarly, 232 n. 49.
305.310; of affects. is music. 328,
see also Music. Affects; and see
Speech
Large (grojJ). see Magnitude
Laughter (Lachen) , 332-34, cf. 305.
335-36. see also lest
Lawfulness (GesetzmiijJigkeit,
Gesetzlichkeit). means regularity.
order, lvi; as principle of the
cognitive power. 198.245'-46';
inherent in the empirical use of the
power of judgment. 190. see also
Harmony, Judgment-power of (as
such. its subjective condition),
Judgments (empirical); of the
understanding. 241. 287. 318, 319.
cf. 198, 245'-46' • see also
Understanding; nature's a priori.
246'. see also Nature. Natural
(laws, universai). Understanding;
free, of the understanding, 241;
free. of the imagination, 240. ef.
241-44, see also Imagination;
without a law. 241. see also
Purposiveness-nature's subjective
(as judged aesthetically); of the
contingent. xxxvii. lvi, lxxvii. c. civ,
179-80.183-85,187,404.406-07.
204'.210'-12',228'.243' (see also
Purposiveness-nature's subjective,
Purposiveness-nature's objective
and material). i.e.. lawfulness
among (unity of. system of)
nature's empirical (particular) laws.
xxxvii. lvi-lvii, xciv. xcv. 179-80.
183.246.386.413,208'-11'.211'
n. 21, 214'-17'.242'-43'. see also

519

Natural (laws). Nature (system of),
Particular in nature. Experience (as
a system of empirical laws).
Judgment-principle of. System;
nature's. in natural purposes. 359.
see also Natural (purposes),
Purposiveness-nature's objective
and material; inner (moral). 447,
cf. 267, 448, 229' • see also
Legislation. Moral (law); moral,
presented as aesthetic, '1iJ7. see also
Presentation
Laws (Gesetze), involve (some)
necessity. xxxii, 180. 183. 184, cf.
179, see also Necessity; contrasted
with rules (which mayor may not
be necessary), c. civ, 183, cf. 213,
see also Rules, Lawfulness;
lawfulness without a law, 241. see
also Purposiveness-nature's
subjective (as judged aesthetically),
Lawfulness; contrasted with
precepts, 172, see also Precepts;
transcendental, Ivii,1xxvi. 179.
203' • 208' , 209', 242', see also
Transcendental; metaphysical, lvii,
lxxvi. see also Metaphysical; moral
(practical. laws of freedom), see
Moral; theoretical. 404. see also
Natural (laws); natural. see Natural
(laws); empirical (particular.
contingent). see Natural (laws),
Lawfulness: mechanical
(mechanistic). see Mechanical; of
motion, xxxvii. lxxii, lxxx, 186,
390-93. 237'; chemical. 349;
teleological, 409. see also
Teleology. Teleological principle;
of association, see Associationlaws of; see also Principles.
Legislation
Legislation (Gesetzgebung) ,
theoretical. is legislation to nature
by the understanding in terms of
the categories (concept of nature).
see Natural (laws, universal),
Understanding. Categories;
theoretical. contrasted with
production. xcii. xciii; practical

520

INDEX

Legislation (continued)
(mora!), is practical reason's
legislation to the will in terms of
the moral law (concept of
freedom), see Reason (practical),
Will, Moral (law), Freedom of the
will; mediation between theoretical
and practical, see Judgmentpower of (as mediating between
understanding and reason),
Transition; or "nomothetic,"
natural and moral, compared with
civil, 448, see also Nomothetic;
and see Laws, Autonomy,
Determination
Legitimation (Legitimation), see
Deduction
Lehmann, Gerhard, xx
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, xxviii,
xxxi, xxxiii n. 10, xlii, xlviii-I,
lxxii-lxxiii, 227 br. n. 42
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, 277 br.
n. 47, 284, 476 br. n. 100
Liberality (Liberaiitiit), see Way of
thinking
Life (Leben), Kant's narrow definition
of the term, 394 br. n. 7, cf. 426;
what it is without bodily feeling.
according to Epicurus, 277-78. cf.
461; dreamless sleep as complete
extinction of, 380; principle of,
278; feeling of, 204, 277, cf. 244,
278,331. is affected by all
presentations, 277, see also Wellbeing, Pleasure, Presentation; force
of, see Force (vital); cannot spring
from what is lifeless, 424; of
matter, 392, 392 n. 6,394, see also
Hylozoism; analogue of, 374;
necessities of, 432; when regarded
as a small concern, 262; value of
man's, see Value; future, 452, 460,
cf. 461, 473, see also Immortality
of the soul; lifeless or living God,
392 n. 6
Liking (Wohlgefallen), reason for
using this term, 207 br. n. 14;
means the same as '(feeling of)

pleasure,' lv, lxix, 292, d. 205,
209-10,218,221,223,236-37,244,
269, hence see Pleasure
Linne (Linnaeus), Carl von, 427, 215'
n.24
Locke, John, Ixxiv. 352
Logic (Logjk), xxviii, xxxi, 171,239,
279 br. n. 1,281,343,195',204',
211' n. 21,230' n. SO, d. 337 n. I,
351; of reflective judgment, is
teleology, 249', cf. 192, see also
Teleology. Purposiveness (nature's
teleological); and see Logic
Logic (Logik), xli n. 24,171 br. n. 13,
215 br. n. 27,232 br. n. 51, 294 br.
n. 21,341 br. n. 8, 343 br. n. 14,
355 br. n. 41.461 br. n. 61,464 br.
n. 67,465 br. n. 70,466 br. n. 71,
467 br. n. 75, 472 br. n. 91, 475 br.
n. %, see also Logic
Logical (iogisch), possibility, 466 br.
n. 72, 476 br. n. 99, see also
Possibility; contradiction, see
Contradiction; objective necessity,
182, see also Necessity; validity.
189, 214, 215, see also Validity;
quantity of aesthetic reflective
judgments, see Taste-judgments
of, Sublime-the; judgments,
power of judgment. see Judgments,
Judgment-power of; presentation
of nature, 192, cf. 249 ,see also
Presentation. Purposiveness
(logical), Teleological judgments;
attributes, 315; exhibition, 315;
comprehension, 254, see also
Comprehension; system, its form,
214'-16',seealso System;
estimation and judging of
magnitude, see Magnitude
Love (Liebe), 271. 277, cf. 267.299,
380; self-, 470
Luxury (Luxus), 432; in science, 433;
taste as, 237'
Machine (Maschine), contrasted with
an organized being, 374, 464 n. 64,
cf. 352, but also 235' , see also

INDEX

Machine (continued)
Organized (beings); people as
influenced like machines, 327 n.
63; machines of pe[suasion, 327;
world as, 388, cf. 439; some monarchies as similar to, 352; see also
Watch, Mechanism
Madness (Wahnsinn), contrasted with
mania, 275; enthusiasm as
comparable to, 275, see also
Enthusiasm
Magnitude (GrojJe), as multiplicity
of the homogeneous together
constituting a unity, 248; concept
of, can be given in the a priori
intuition of space, 342, see also
Intuition (a priori and forms of);
mathematical properties of, their
exhibition, 468, see also
Exhibition; having some, 248-49,
cf. 342; numerical, 259, see also
Numbers; aesthetic, in Baumgarten
and Meier, Ixviii; absolute, lxx,
248-49, 268, 269, distinguished from
comparative, 248 incl. n. 7, 250, d.
254, see also Totality; absolute,
carries with it a disinterested and
universally communicable liking,
249. see also Sublime-the;
absolute, is sublimity, 250, cf. 251,
see also Sublime-the: absolute,
not to be found in nature
(appearances), lxx, 248, 250, 257,
268, but only in man's vocation,
269, cf. 258,262, and in the use his
power of judgment makes of
certain objects, 250, cf. 255-56,
258, see also Sublime-the (what,
properly speaking, is and is not);
aesthetic and logical judging of,
249; logical estimation of, is
mathematical, 251, 254, cf. 169 br.
n. 9; aesthetic and mathematical
estimation of, 251-57,259, cf. 169
br. n. 9,249; aesthetic estimation
of it does, but mathematical does
not, have a maximum, 251, cf. 255;
pure intellectual estimation of, 255,

521

cf. 257; imagination's role in
estimating (or exhibiting),lxx-lxxi.

249-58.262,265-69.274, see also
Imagination, Exhibition; of a
world, 250; of virtue, liberty,
justice, and correctness, 249, cf.
lxx; certainty as a, 466
Maggot (Made), cannot be explained
both mechanistically and
teleologically, 411-12. see also
Organized (beings)
Man (Mensch). as appearance (being
of sense), see Appearances; as
thinking being, 460. see also
Nature (outside us and within us);
as animal, 210. 233, 368, 432, 433,
452, cf. 335. see also Animals,
Health; his inner organization, 379,
see also Organization; bis instincts.
430, 230' n. SO. see also Instinct;
as influenced like a machine. 327
n. 63; as a means. 427, 431, 434 n.
29. d. 380.428. 430.443. see also
Nature (system of); as not favored
by nature over other animals. 427.
428,430,452, cf. 432,433, see also
Animals, Chaos, Evil, Misery;
inequality among people, 432;
dissimulation as his second nature.
333; as frail by nature, 264; the evil
in, 443, see also Evil; as
noumenon, see Noumenon. Thing
in it..elf, Supersensible-the (as
basis of subjects); as intelligence.
see Intelligence, Spirit, Soul; his
supersensible self as his second
nature. 275, cf. 280, 314,344; his
thinking nature (self). 460, 461, see
also Nature (outside us and within
us); his cognition of himself as
subject, 206, see also Sense (inner);
as rational animal, 368, cf. 210,
419, see also Rational (beings); his
humanity. see Humanity; alone as
admitting of an ideal of beauty,
233, see also Ideal; as lord of
nature insofar as be is able to set
himself purposes. 431, cl. 419, see

522

INDEX

Man (continued)
also Purpose; the assumption that
he was meant to exist, 368, 369,
378; as ultimate purpose of nature
(creation), see Ultimate purpose;
as moral being, 435, 436 n. 30, 443,
450 n. 44, 469 n. 81; his existence
has the highest value within it, 435,
d. 436 n. 30, see also Value;
without him creation would be
gratuitous, a mere wasteland, 442;
under moral laws is the final
purpose of creation, see Final
purpose, Vocation; his future life,
see Immortality of the soul; see
also Misanthropy,
Anthropophobia, Anthropology
Mania (Wahnwitz), contrasted with
madness, 275; fanaticism as
comparable to, 275, see also
Fanaticism
Manifold (das Mannigfaitige), of
intuition, its apprehension,
comprehension, and combination,
see Intuition, Imagination,
Comprehension, Combination
Manner (Manier), 313, contrasted
with method, 318-19, 355; the
whimsical, 335, see also Whimsical
Mannerism (Manierieren), is one kind
of aping, 318, cf. 319, see also
Aping; and see Manner, Imitation
Marsden, William, 243
Master (Meister), and his examples
(models), their role in fine art, see
Art-fine, Genius; supposed
masterpiece of insight, 310
Material (material, materieJi), the, in
sensation, see Sensation; nature,
see Nature; purposiveness, see
Purposiveness (nature's
teleological); see also Matter
(Materie), Real
Materialism (MateriaJismus), in
psychology, 460-61, see also
Psychology
Mathematical (mathematisch),
properties of magnitudes, 468, see
also Geometry; analogy, 382;

estimation of magnitude, see
Magnitude; sublimity, see
Sublime-the; ratio of vibrations
in music, 325. cf. 329, see also
Music; and see Mathematics
Mathematics (Mathematik), pure. can
deal with the possibility of things
but not with their existence, 366
n. 23; division in it is based on the
intuition corresponding a priori to
the concept, 197 n. 43; in music,
329,363, cf. 325; problem-solving
procedure in, 177 n. 18,230' n. 50;
the ancient mathematicians, 283,
cf. 363; see also Mathematical,
Geometry, Arithmetic, Algebra
Matter (Materie), concept of, is
empirical, xxx, xxxvii; is lifeless,
172,383,394, cf. 374, 392 n. 6,411,
421. see also Life; alleged life of,
392,394, see also Hylozoism;
autocracy of, a meaningless
expression, 421; crude, 419, 419 n.
5, 424, 478, 215', is governed by
mechanism, 172,383,410.414,419,
419 n. 5,424,478 (see also
Mechanism), specifically. the laws
of motion, 186, 391, see also Laws
(of motion); purposeless chaos of,
452, cf. 246. see also Chaos,
Mechanism (is a natural causality
involving no purpose); its behavior
in crystallization, see
Crystallization; responsible for
heat. see Caloric; is an aggregate
of many substances extrinsic to one
another, 421; is a plurality of things
that cannot itself supply a
determinate unity for its
combination, 377, cf. 371, 374; can
receive more and other fonns than
it can get through mechanism, 411,
see also Mechanism, Organized
(beings); has no formative force,
374, see also Force; nutritive, 349,
cf. 371, 424, see also Generation;
organized, lxxxii, 374, 378, 413,
424, cf. 375, 377, 419 D. 5, see also
Organized; intention attributed to,

INDEX
Matter (continued)
in what sense, 383, cf. 414; of
intuition and sensation, see
Intuition, Sensation: of an aesthetic
judgment is sensation, 226, cf. 326,
see also Aesthetic (iistherisch),
Sensation: of liking (pleasure), 223,
see also Pleasure; of
purposiveness. see Purposiveness;
of purposes, 431, see also Purpose;
of volition, is a purpose, 451, 471
n. 87. see also Purpose, Volition,
Will; a genus as, 215'. 215' n. 23
Matter (Sache), is an object of a
cognition that is possible for us,
469, see also Cognition; of fact,
faith, and opinion. 467-73. see also
Fact-matters of, Faith. Opinion
Maxim (Maxime), is a subjective
principle, 184, cf. 379, 413; of
understanding, 295, cf. 386; of
common human understanding,
294--95; of the power of judgment,
see Judgment-power of (its
maxims), Aesthetic (asthetisch)
(reflective power of judgment),
Judgment - principle of,
Teleological principle; teleological
judgments as maxims, see
Teleological judgments; principle
of mechanism as, in what sense,
see Mechanism, Antinomy of
teleological judgment; as to how
to think objects that our
understanding cannot cognize, 403;
of theoretical reason, 295. 348, 379,
398,439,456, cf. 461; practical,
3oo, see also Practical; moral, 462,
cf. xlvi; corrupted by oratory, 327;
system of good maxims, 274, cf.
xlvi, 176, 455 br. n. 48; see also
Precepts, Rule
Maximum (Maximum, GriJ'ptes), 232,
251,314, see also Totality,
Magnitude (absolute).
McFarland, John D., lxxxix n. 90, xc
n. 93, c, cvi n. 107
Measuring (Messen), see Magnitude,
Geometry, Land surveying - art of

523

Mechanical (mecMnisch), laws,
xxxix, 370. 377, 382. 387, 409,
414,419,422,234', cf. 360, see
also Laws (of motion), Mechanism,
Natural (laws); production, in it the
whole is the product of its parts,
40S; derivation, 409, i.e.,
explanation. see Mechanism: art,
see Art; imitation, 318, see also
Mechanism, Imitation; necessities
of life taken care of
"mechanically." 432
Mechanism (Mechanismus,
Mechanik). is based (insofar as a
priori) on the understanding.
lxxviii, 386, cf. 203' n. 13, see also
Natural (laws); is (partly) a pnoo
and necessary. xxxvii. lxxxi, lxxxii.
xciii, cv-cvii, 396,409.414,219',
cf. xlvi, 186,422, see also Natural
(laws); is governed by (deals with)
efficient causes, xxv. xxxvii. xxxix,
360,417.235', see also Cause
(efficient); governs matter, 172,
383. 410, 414, 419. 419 n. S, 424,
478, see also Matter (Maferie);
governs the forces and motions of
natural things. 374, 390, 419, 422.
cf. 483. 240'-41', see also Laws (of
motion). Motion (Bewegung),
Force; in animals, 173. cf. 424. see
also Animals; cognition proper
(theoretical cognition, insight) of
nature (i.e.• natural science) is
impossible without it. lxxx, 384,
387. 410, 418, cf. 422, see also
Insight; explanation (objective
explanation) in natural science is
impossible without it, xxv, 417,
41S, 218', 235', cf. xxxvii. lxxii,
lxxxviii, cvi n. 107,377,388.422.
21S'. see also Explanation; should
be appealed to (before teleology)
wherever possible, 387, 388,411.
413,415,417-19,429,235'. cf.
379, 383-84, 389,409, 410. see also
Teleology, Teleological judgments;
itself (without the addition of
teleology) is blind, 376.377.381.

524

INDEX

Mechanism (continued)
cf. 394, 434: production in terms
of it yields a whole considered as
product of its parts, 408; is a
natural causality involving no
(concept of a) purpose, lxxxii, 246,
408,427, 219' ,235' , cf. 383,406,
414,424-26,428,434,436 n. 30,
452, 203' n. 13, 217',240'-41', see
also Purpose; as "unintentional
technic," lxxx. 390-91, cf. 393;
contrasted with nature's technic,

246,393,404,413-14.219', see also
Technic of nature; allows
alternative structures of nature,
cvii, 360, 411, cf. 4m, 422; does not
allow us to explain (or get to know)
organized beings as such, lxxii,
lxxx, 369, 376, 377, 383,388,389,
395,400,413-15,417-22 incl. n. 5,
429,240', cf.lxxviii, 360, 370,371,
375,396,408,409,417-21,424,454,

478,235'-36',240' (see also
Organized {beingsD, not even a
blade of grass, 378,400, 409, cf.
368, but this inability cannot be
proved (may not be intrinsic),
lxxiii, lxxx, xciii, 387-89, 395, 400,
408,cf.399,406,414-15,418,429,
see also Understanding (some
other); is incompatible with the
teleological principle (technic of
nature, causality in terms of
purposes) if both are construed as
principles of (objective)
explanation, 412, see also Causality
(in terms of purposes); conflict
between it and a causality in terms
of purposes, 412-14, 422, see also
Antinomy of teleological
judgment, Causality (in terms of
purposes); the possibility that it
and the causality in terms of purposes are identical (or have the
same basis), 388, 390,391,412-15,
429, cf. 404,422, see also
Antinomy of teleological judgment
(its solution), Intuition

(intellectual), Supersensible- the
(as basis of nature's purposiveness,
reason's concept of it); broader
(ideal), xciii, cf. 419; we have no
insight into its basis, xciii, 395,418,
cf. 348 br. n. 24,388,398,412-15;
as subordinated (as instrument of
an intelligent cause) to causality in
terms of purposes, xcix, 414-15,
417-24,438,cf.379,387-88,39O,
409-15, see also Cause (intelligent,
of the world), Supersensible-the
(as basis of nature's purposiveness,
our understanding's concept of it);
principle of, is regulative (a maxim)
as applied to natural products in
general (including organisms),
lxxx-lxxxi, xc, 387,429; as such is
not regulative (but constitutive),
lxxxi n. 84, lxxxix-xc; is capable of
producing happiness, 436 n. 30, see
also Happiness; is capable of
producing beautiful formations,
347-50, see also Formations; is
needed in fine art, 304, 310, cf.
305, see also Mechanical;
Mediate and Immediate (mittelbar,
unmittelbar), why these terms not
used, 208 br. n. 15
Mediation (Vermittlung), of
transitions, see Transition
Medicine of the Body. . .. see On

Medicine of the Body . ..
Meditationum quarundam de
igne . . .• see Brief Outline . ..
Meier, Georg Friedrich, xlix-Ii, lxviii,
227 hr. n. 42, 304 br. n. 37
Melody (Melodie), 329, see also
Music
Mendelssohn, Moses, lxix n. 58, 277
br. n. 47
Mental (Gemuts-), power, see Power;
state, see Attunement, Pleasure
Mentality, see Way of thinking
Meredith, James Creed, xxi incl. n. 2
Metaphysical (metaphysisch),
contrasted with physical, 475, cf.
382, see also Physical; contrasted

INDEX

Metaphysical (continued)
with transcendental, xxxvii, lvii,
lxxvi, 181-82,288 br. n. 11, see also
Transcendental; concept of nature,
475, see also Nature; law, lvii.lxxvi.
see also Laws, Natural (laws);
principle, xxxvii, 181-82, see also
Principles; proof. 475-76. see also
God; deduction, 288 br. n. 11. see
also Deduction; wisdom, 182, see
also Wisdom
Metaphysical Foundations of Natural
Science (Metaphysische
Anfangsgriinde der
Naturwissenschaften), xxix. xxxvii
n. 13, Ixxvi n_ RO, 170 br. n. 11, 181
br. n. 25, 189 br. n. 31, 224 br. n.
40,232 br. n. 51,348 br. n. 25,374
br. n. 35, 395 br. n. 9, 198' br. n. 7
Metaphysics (Metaphysik), is the
science of the a priori principles
of all possible objects of
experience, xxxiii, cf. xxx, see also
Science; is the system of
(doctrinal) philosophy, 168, cf. 170,
417, see also Philosophy;
contrasted with physics, 382, cf.
475, see also Physics; its main
problems (and ultimate purpose)
are God, Freedom, and
Immortality of the soul, 473, see
also Practical (the, is the final aim
of everything we do with our
mental powers), God, Freedom of
the will, Immortality of the soul;
is presupposed by natural science,
morality, and religion, xxxi, see
also Natural (science), Moral,
Religion; its possibility, xxx, cf. 168,
see also Critique, Synthetic a
priori; of nature and of morals,
170,170 br. n. 11; of morals, is a
system of all a priori maxims
satisfying the categorical
imperative, xlvi, see also Maxim,
Categorical imperative; immanent
and transcendent. xxxviii-xxxix, cvi

525

n. 107, see also Immanent,
Transcendent
Metaphysics of Morals (Metaphysik
der Sitten), xxix, xlv n. 32, 170 br.
n. 11, 177 br. n. 21,179 hr. n. 22,
182 br. n. 26, 209 br. n. 18, 220 br.
n. 33, 222 br. ns. 36 and 38, 227
br. n. 44,233 br. n. 52,272 br. n.
38,272 br. ns. 40-41, 291 hr. n. 19,
335 br. n. 76, 392 br. n. 7,481 br.

n. 104
Method (Methode. Lehrart),
contrasted with manner, 318-19,
355; synthetic, 283
Methodology (Methodenlehre),
contrasted with elemento\ogy,
Ixxxiii n. 85, 354; of aesthetic
reflective judgment (including
taste) is impossible,lxxxiii n. 85,
199 br. n. 45,354-55; of
teleological judgment, lxxvi n. 78,
lxxxiii n. 85,416-85
Microscope (Mikroskop), 2SO
Might (Macht), is an ability that is
superior to great obstacles, 260, cf.
271, see also Obstacles; nature as
a, 260-66, cf. 246, see also Chaos;
nature judged aesthetically as a
might having no dominance over
us is dynamically sublime, 260, see
also Sublime-the, Dominance; of
the imagination, 256, 269, see also
Imagination; of the mind, 271; of
the moral law, 271, see also Moral
(law); of an architectonic
understanding, 420, see also
Understanding, Cause (intelligent,
of the world)
Milky Way (MilchstrajJe), 256;
systems, 256
Mime (Mimik) , 225, cf. 324,352
Mind (Gemut), powers of, see Power;
see also Soul
Misanthropy (Misanthropie), 275-76,
see also Man
Misery (Elend), 432; see also Evil,
Man (as not favored by nature over

526

INDEX

Misery (continued)
other animals), War, Chaos,
Desperation
Modality (Modalitiit), of judgments
of taste, 236-40; of judgments
about the sublime, 247, 264-66; see
also Necessity, Actuality,
Contingency, Possibility
Model (Muster), in fine art. see Artfine, Genius
Modulation (Modulation), in speech,
320,328, see also Speech
Mohammedanism
(Mohammedanism us ), see Islam
Moments (Momente), the four, of a
judgment of taste,liv, 203-40, how
discovered, 203 n. 2, see also
Taste-judgments of; the four, of
a judgment about the sublime, 247,

cf.244,248-50,257-60,264-66,see
also Sublime-the; and see Quantity, Quality, Relation, Modality
Monarchy (monarchischer Staat), as
similar to an animate body, or to
a machine, 352; see also State
Monstrous (ungehell.er), 253
Moody (iaunisch), contrasted with
whimsical, 336
Moral (moralisch, sittlich, Sitten-) ,
concepts, ideas, precepts,
obligation, value, theory,
philosophy, theology, taste,
teleology, see these headings;
intelligence, 446, cf. 484, see also
God. Intelligence; wisdom, 462,
see also God, Wisdom; God
(author of the world), see God;
argument, proof, see God; basis
(point of view) for an assumption,
see God, Immortality of the soul;
faith, see Faith; being, man as, see
Man; predisposition, attitude, way
of thinking, incentive, see these
headings; springs (incentives), 462,
see also Incentives; need, 446;
interest, 298, 300, 301, 459 (see also
Interest), transition to it from
charm, 354, d. 297. see also

Charm, Transition; value, see
Value; feeling is respect for the
moral law, together with our
awareness that we have the
freedom to obey or disobey it, xliv,
ciii. cf. 267, '1f17', see also Respect,
Freedom of the will; feeling arises
from moral ideas, 356, see also
Ideas (moral); feeling, its object is
the absolutely good, 267, see also
Moral (good); feeling is our feeling
that the mind has a vocation
transcending nature, 268, see also
Vocation; feeling is a universally
valid pleasure (liking), 300, cf. '1J7,
292, based on a determinate
concept of a law, 289, ct. 292, a
liking of an act for its moral
character, a pleasure that arises
from our spontaneous activity and
its conformity with the idea of our
vocation, 292, see also Moral (law),
Pleasure (moral), Vocation; feeling,
a mind attuned to it, 445-46;
feeling may be presupposed in
man, lxxi, 266; feeling, transition
to it from enjoyment, 2m, cf. 354.
see also Enjoyment, Transition;
feeling, how the pleasure in taste
is linked to it, see Pleasure - in
judgments of taste; feeling, how the
sublime is linked to it, see
Sublime-the: feeling of gratitude
and veneration toward God, 482
br. n. 105; see also Feeling; sense,
in Hutcheson and Hume. Iii; good
(or morally good) is what is good
absolutely and in every respect,
209, viz., the will's ability to be
determined by the conception of
a law that obligates absolutely, 267,
cf. 443, see also Will, Moral (law),
Virtue; good in an act, 292, cf. 403,
471 n. 87, depends on us, 448 n.
39, cf. 451,453,471 n. 87, see also
Freedom of the will, Evil; system
of (morally) good maxims, 274, cf.
xlvi, 176,455 br. n. 48, see also

INDEX

Moral (continued)
Maxim; good is intellectual and
intrinsically purposive, 271, see also
Purposiveness; good is the ultimate
purpose of humanity, 298, see also
Ultimate purpose, Vocation, Final
purpose; good carries with it (the
highest) interest. 209, 271, 298. 300.
327 n. 63,354,459, see also
Interest, Moral Gudgments); good.
what reason links with it, 235;
good, transition to it from the
agreeable, 298. cf. 433, see also
Agreeable-the, Transition; good
is the intelligible that taste has in
view, 353, see also Beauty (its link
to morality), Taste; and see Goodthe, Perfection, Morality; use of
reason. 482, d. 171-73, 175.
454-55.195'-201', see also Reason
(practical); principle(s). 271, 446,
479 (see also Principles), is the
supersensible, 436 n. 30, see also
Supersensible-the (as contained
in the moral law); law is the basis
of duty, 471 n. 87. see also Duty;
law is based on concepts of reason,
292, on reason's concept of
rreedom, 171, 174,474,cf. 176, 195
n. 39. 237. 479. 202' • see also
Reason (practical), Freedom of the
will; law is a law that pure practical reason gives, 174.446.485. d.
403, as prescription to itself. 449.
cf. 179 (see also Reason [practical),
Will), as a regulative principle for
our acts, 453, see also Regulative;
laws must be presented by us as
commands, because of the
subjective character of our reason,
403, see also Presentation; law is
purely formal, xliii n. 29,450,451,
471 n. 87, cf. 173,199'; law is
universal. xliii, xlv, 267, 354, cf.
210,300,463,471 n. 87, 229'; law
is (obligates us) a priori. xliii, xlvi,
267, d. 275, 445,450,453, 195',
229' (see also Duty), but applies

527

to experience (nature), xliii, cf. xliv,
see also Freedom of the will (is to
make a difference in nature), Final
purpose, God (as needed to make
nature cooperate with practical
reason's aim); law is necessary
(obligates us with necessity), '1iJ7,
435,46O.cf.I72,237,403.445.463.
471, see also Duty; law commands
absolutely, xliii, 237. 267, cf. 210,
unconditionally, 435, 451,455 br.
n. 48, d. 327,474, categorically.
xliii. 471 n. 87, see also Categorical
imperative; law, its might. 271, see
also Might; law inspires obedience,
452, cf. 210, see also Duty; law is
the object of a pure and
unconditioned intellectual liking.
271. cf. 267, ZT4, 292, see also
Pleasure (moral), Respect, Moral
(feeling); law as a "postulate", 470;
involves inner legislation, 436 n. 30,
448,460, see also Lawfulness,
Legislation; law. our consciousness
of it, as well as the law itself. is a
fact of reason, xliii, xliv, xlvi, cf.

xl, 403-Q4, 447. 453, 470; law is a
matter of fact, xlvi, Ixxxiv. cf.
4~51, 472 (see also Fact-matters
of), not a deception. 471 n. 87: law,
practical cognition and knowledge
of, xl-xlvii. lxxxiv, 354, cf. 447, 472,
481. see also Cognition (practical),
Knowledge; laws, by reference to
them we must consider our power
of choice as based on something
supersensible, 343, see also Will,
Supersensible-the (as contained
practically in the moral law); law
presupposes freedom of the will,
xxxix, xli, xliv, 473, 475, d. 479. see
also Freedom of the will; law
enjoins on us the final purpose,
xxvi, xxvii, xlv-xlvii, lxxxili, lxxxiv,
195-96,446,447,449-56,460,
469-71,471 n. 87, 474,479,481,
484, 485 (see also Final purpose),
even though we must overcome

528

INDEX

Moral (continued)
obstacles, xxvi, xliii, xlv, 195 n. 39,
267, 271, cf. xliii, cvii-cviii, 175,
267,269,272,403-04,458,479,
238', see also Obstacles; laws
enjoin us to judge things by
reference to ourselves as final
purpose, 447, see also Final
purpose; laws, man (rational
beings) under them is the final
purpose, 445, 448, 448 n. 39, 449,
see also Final purpose; laws, a
world under them, 443, 444; law,
its promise, 471 n. 90; law as basis
for rational faith in God and
immortality, xlvi, 473-74, see also
Final purpose, God, Immortality
of the soul; law, as given by a being
that exists apart from the world,
446, see also God; law, its 'Validity
is independent of the assumption
that a God exists, 450-52, 456, 485;
final purpose, 457, 471, see also
Final purpose; vocation, lxx, lxxi,
302, 452, 482, cf. 433, 461, see also
Vocation; maxims, 452, cf. xlvi, see
also Maxim; judgments must say
what ought to be done, xliii, cf.
280, 455 br. n. 48, see also
Morality; judgments imply
(contain) a principle (moral law),
xv, 229', see also Moral (law);
judgments, in them we think the
freedom of the will as the will's
harmony with itself according to
universally valid laws of reason,
354, see also Freedom of the will,
Will, Reason (practical); judgments
give rise to an interest, 205 n. 10,
298-301, cf. 222,354,459, see also
Interest, Moral (good); judgments
make us feel an a priori and universally valid liking, 301, cf. 267, a
practical pleasure, 222, 354, see
also Pleasure (moral), Respect,
Moral (feeling); judgments, certain
judgments about nature as similar
to them, 482 br. n. 105;
perspectives, 482; self-preservation,

261-66; expression of the, 235, see
also Beauty (ideal of); basis of a
system of states, 433
Moralists (Sittenlehrer), 237'-38'
Morality (Moralitiit. Sittlichkeit), our
idea of, 283; as such is practical
objectively, 455 br. n. 48, see also
Practical; is reason's practical
legislation by the concept of
freedom, 171, cf. 246', see also
Moral (law); is the sum total of
laws that command unconditionally
how we ought to act, 455 br. n. 48,
cf. xlvi, 176,274. see also Moral
(judgments); consists in reason's
exerting its dominance over
sensibility, 269, see also
Dominance, SensibilitYj its
(objective) principle, 354 (see also
Moral [lawJ), is supersensible, 436
n. 30, see also Supersensible-the
(as contained practically in the
morallaw)j as a second nature,
275; possibility of, xxx, cf. xxxviii,
453; is impossible through natural
causes, 436 n. 30; its object, 452,
472, see also Final purpose;
predisposition to, 274j requires a
free assent (one not based on
theoretical proof). 469 n. 81. cf.
472, see also Assent
(Furwahrhalten); is independent of
theology. 485, cf. 460, see also
Moral (law); exhibition of, its
moving force. 275; idea of, is
indelible. 274, cf. 283; style of, Tl5;
beauty as symbol of, see Beauty
Morally practical (moralischpraktisch), see Practical
Mother-original (Urmutter), 418-19
Motion (Bewegung), laws of, see
LaWSj as predicated of a body and
of a first mover, 483, cf. 380, see
also BodYi and see Force,
Mechanism, Natural (laws)
Motion-inner (Motion), 273, 332,
334, cf. 380, see also Health
Music (Musik. Tonkunst), is a fine
art, 313, 329, cf. 325; deserves to

INDEX

Music (continued)
be considered more an agreeable
than a fine art, 332, cf. 325, see
also Art; is the art of the beautiful
play of sensations (of hearing), 324,
ef. 225, 321, 324 hr. n. 60, 325, 329;
is a language of affects, 328, see
also Affects: proceeds from
sensations to aesthetic
(indetenninate) ideas, 330-332, see
also Ideas (aesthetic); is a play
with aesthetic ideas that in the end
involves no thought, 332, ef. 328,
see also Thought; the quickening
it involves is bodily, 332; involves
the mind's playing with the
properties of numbers, 363, cf. 329;
composition in, 225, 305, 325; its
form consists in harmony and
melody, 329, ef. 332; its aesthetic
value, 328-30; its lack of urbanity,
330, cf. 330 n. 69; without a topic,
229; poetry combined with, is song,
325, see also Song; table-, 305; see
also Tonc
Myron, 235
Mystical (mystisch), enjoyment, 209
n. 17, see also Enjoyment;
ponderers, 334; presentations of
superhuman perfections and
fanatical bliss, 230' n. 50, see also
Presentation
Naivete (Nai'vitat), 335, cf. Ixix

0.58
Napoleon Bonaparte, 252 br. n. 15
Natural (Natur-), philosophy,
necessity, predispositions, beauty,
see these headings: history as
description (rather than
archaeology) of nature, 428 n. 20,
cf. 417; science is theoretical
philosophy, 172, cf. 417,195', see
also Philosophy; science, rescued
by the Critique of Pure Reason,
xxxix; science consists of the
science of bodies, psychology, and
universal cosmology, 416; science
must be systematic,lxxvi, lxxxii, ef.

529

381,418, see also System; science.
its completion. 382, see also
Completeness; science requires
detenninative rather than merely
reflective principles, 417 (see also
Determinative), hence judgment's
principle is not sufficient for it,
lxxvii, see Judgment-principle of:
science, its universal principle that
nothing happens by chance, 376,
see also Chance- blind; science
follows maxims of the power of
judgment, see Judgment-power
of (its maxims); science in the
proper sense of the term does not
include teleology, 416-17 (see also
Teleology), and is not satisfied with
an explanation of its products
through a causality in terms of
purposes, 408 (see also
Explanation, Causality [in terms of
purposes)), but does require a
teleological principle, see
Teleological principle; science
must not overlap with theology.
381, cf. 382, 439,485, see also
Theology; science, universal
(rational), contrasted with the
natural science that contains the
empirical laws of motion, 237' , see
also Laws (of motion); science
insofar as it rests on empirical
principles is physics proper, 198',
see also Physics; laws are laws
proper, not merely rules, 173, cf.
172. see also Laws, Rule; are
neither analytic nor wholly
contingent, xxxii. see also Analytic,
Contingency; laws, pure, xxxvii
(see also Pure), transcendental, lvii,
lxxvi, 179.203'.208',209',242'
(see also Transcendental),
metaphysical, Ivii. lxxvi, see also
Metaphysical; laws, transcendental,
as forming a system, see Nature
(system of); laws. metaphysical,
their universal applications, xxxvii;
laws. universal, form part of
mechanism, xxxvi-xxxvii, 234' (see

530

INDEX

Natural (continued)
also Mechanism, Mechanical
[laws]), and are based on
understanding's categories, xxxiii,
xxxvi-xxxvii,lxxvi, 180, 182-83,
202' ,211' n. 21, see also
Mechanism, Mechanical (laws),
Categories, Understanding,
Principles; laws, universal, are
constitutive and determinative
(rather than regulative), xc (see
also Constitutive), involve
necessity and are knowable a
priori, xxxviii, xxxix, cf. 370,386,
see also Mechanism, Mechanical
(laws); laws, universal, can be
cognized by understanding alone
as applied to objects of sense, 370,
cf. xxxii. 173; laws, universal. for
them the power of judgment needs
no special principle of reflection,
386, see also Judgment-principle
of; laws, universal, made specific
(i.e., made into particular laws), see
Judgment-principle of; laws,
particular, are regularities
involving some contingency, xxxvii,
cviii (see also Particular in nature,
Lawfulness [of the contingent]),
and are discovered through
experience (are empirical), xxxvii,
386, cf.lxxvi; laws, particular
(empirical), for their discovery we
need the principle of judgment, see
Judgment-principle of; laws,
particular (empirical), the
lawfulness (systematicity) among
them despite their heterogeneity
(diversity), see Lawfulness,
Judgment-principle of, Nature
(system of), Heterogeneity; and see
Nature; products that are (also)
organized, see Natural (purposes),
Organized (beings); purposes are
natural products that are
nevertheless purposes, Lxxviii, 370,
cf. xxv, 252-53,405,232', 236', see
also Organized (beings), Technic

of nature; purposes are things that
are both cause and effect of
themselves, 370, cf. lxxix, lxxxii,
372-74,376; purposes are beings
that are organized, 372, 375,418,
as well as self-organizing, 374, cf.
375, 377, 425, see also Organized;
arc the exhibition of the concept
of a real (objective) purposiveness,
193, cf. 233',250', see also
Exhibition, Purposiveness- nature's
objective and material; purposes
have intrinsic natural perfection,
375,250', see also Perfection;
purposes, theory of, 249';
purposes, concept of, is a stranger
in natural science, 390, see also
Natural (science); purposes, are
inexplicable, 395, see also
Org~ed (beings), Explanation;
purposes, concept of, is an idea (of
reason),4OS (see also Ideas
[rational]), and its objective
reality is unprovable, 396, cf. 397,
see also Reality; purposes, concept
of, belongs not to determinative
but to reflective judgment, 375,
396,405.235',236', cf. 399, see
also Judgment-power of;
purposes, concept of, is not
constitutive but regulative, 375,
396, cf. 399,405,237', see also
Regulative; purposes, concept of,
subsumes nature under a causality
conceivable only as exercised by
reason, 396, cf. 221' , 234', see also
Will, Organized (beings), Causality
(in terms of purposes); purposes
are thought (and spoken) of as
intentional. lxxx, lxxxiv, 383,
398-401, 405, cf. 396,397,420-21,
426,429,236', see also Intention,
Organized (beings); purposes are
thought by (a remote) analogy with
technically practical reason, lxxix,
375,383,390-91,397-401,429, ef.
181,220,246,360,392,396,420-21,
464 n. 64, 201',233', 234', 236',

INDEX

Natural (continued)
251', see also Practical, Organized
(beings), Technic of nature; purposes imply no actual intention.
382,399,234'-36',239'-40', cf. 181,
193,220,359-61,411, and hence
a natural purpose must be
distinguished from a purpose of
nature, lxxviii, 378, cf.lxxix, 234',
235', see also Purpose (of nature);
purposes, idealism and realism
concerning, 389-95; purposes, the
purposive causality in them must
be sought within nature, lxxx, 382;
purpose, whether nature as a
whole is one, lxxxi-lxxxii, 398, cf.
414, see also Organized; purposes,
we have no a priori basis for their
existence, 193, 194,359-60,445, cf.
376, see also Teleological
judgments (are partly empirical),
Nature (universal Itranscendental]
concept [idea] of); purposes,
concept of, is empirically
conditioned, 396; purposes,
concept of, its possibility
(noncontradictoriness), xc, 370,
396,405-10,cf.412-14,422,see
also Antinomy of teleological
judgment, Purposiveness- nature's
objective and material; purposes,
concept (thought) of, leads to the
thought of the product's existence
as having a purpose, lxxxiii, 426,
ct. 378,411,434 (see also Purpose
[of natureD, leads to the idea of
nature as a teleological system,
lxxxi, 378-79,380-81, d. 391,
398-401,414 (see also Nature), and
leads to the idea of the
supersensible, lxxxii-lxxxiv, 381,
396, cf. lxxxiv, 378, 390, 434,
483-85, see also Supersensible- the
(as basis of nature's purposiveness),
Intuition (intellectual), Cause
(intelligent, of the world), God
(teleological proof for the existence
of); and see Nature
Nature (Natur) , as object of sense

531

([ possible] experience, empirical
cognition), 183, 184, 187, 193, 195,
208', (see also Sense), is the sum
total of objects of sense, 174,359,
476, cf. 386, i.e., the sum total of
appearances, see Appearances;
concept of, its domain is the
sensible, 175, cf. 475; everything
in it is conditioned, lxxxiii, 268,
435, cf. 173,441; possibility of, 185,
415.242'-43'. cf. 183. 184, see also
Experience; concept of, is given
by understanding, 280; as product
of our understanding (cognitive
power), 246', cf. 198, see also
Understanding; outside us
(external) and within us, 264, 269,
271,430,435, the first being
material nature, 435, cf. 375, 383,
386-87 (see also Matter IMateriel,
Mechanism), the second, thinking
nature, 435, cf. 175,460,461,468,
see also Man; concept of.
universal transcendental, and its
modifications. 179, see also
Transcendental; concept of,
subsumption under it, 202';
concept of, metaphysical (a priori)
and physical (a posteriori, i.e.,
empirical), 475, see also
Metaphysical, Physical; concept of,
empirical,476; empirical, is
identical with experience, see
Experience; its principles, laws. see
Principles, Natural (laws), Laws,
Lawfulness, Mechanism,
Understanding; system of. in terms
of transcendental laws. lxxvi, 183,
203',208',211' n. 21,217', cf. 185,
288, 233' , see also Laws
(transcendental); universal
(transcendental) concept (idea) of,
what it does and does not imply
about nature's lawfulness (in terms
beyond the transcendental laws),
lxxvi-lxxvii, 180, 193,359, 208'. cf.
204', see also Natural (purposes,
we have no a priori ~asis for their
existence); system of {whole of

532

INDEX

Nature (continued)
nature as a system), in terms (even)
of empirical (particular) laws, see
Lawfulness (of the contingent).
Judgment-principle of, Particular
in nature, Experience (as a system
in terms of empirical laws).
System; system of (whole of nature
Ithe world I as a system) in terms
of (final causes or) purposes
(nature as a teleological system).
bxvi, lxxxi-lxxxii, xciv, 377-81, 417.
425-34,440-44, d. 386,399; as a
whole, whether a natural purpose,
lxxxi-lxxxii, 398, d. 414. see also
Natural (purpose); system of
(whole of nature as a system), in
terms of the final purpose, cviii,
377-81,409,436, see also Final
purpose, Ultimate purpose; whole
of, is the world. 414, see also
World; absolute whole of, is the
proper basic measure of nature,
255, see also Sublime-the;
concept(s) of. contrasted with concept of freedom, 171-76, 178-79,
195-97,474-76,478-79, 2<Y7', cf.
184, 199', see also Freedom of the
will; necessity in, civ-cix, 393, 396,
is attributed to nature as
appearance. xxxix, see also
Antinomy (third. of theoretical
pure reason); and freedom, (gulf
and) mediation of the transition
between them, see Judgmentpower of (as mediating the
transition between understanding
and reason); as interfering with our
moral aims. see Obstacles, Moral
(law), Freedom of the will; as
cooperating with our moral aims,
see God; its inner basis is not
known to us, 388, d. 188, see also
Mechanism (we have no insight
into its basis), Knowledge; not
assumed to be an intelligent being,
359,383, cf. 181; as the exhibition
of something supersensible, 268,

see also Exhibition, Supersensiblethe (as basis of nature); as thing
in itself, see Thing in itself; our
second (viz., supersensible nature),
275, cf. 280,314,344, see also
Supersensible-the (as basis of subjects), Man; our second (viz., dissimulation). 335, see also Man; as
chaotic, see Chaos; its immensity
and might, see Might. Sublimethe; as purposive, see Purposiveness, Purposiveness-nature's
subjective, Purposivenessnature's objective and material; its
free formations, see Formations;
beauty in, see Beauty; as a sum of
objects of taste, 291; its relation to
fine art, see Art-fine; as art (as
technical), see Technic of nature;
organization in, see Organization,
Organized, Natural (purposes); we
speak of its wisdom, parsimony,
foresight, beneficence, 383, see also
Judgment-power of (its maxims),
Admiration; its "intention," .~ee
Intention; as analogue of life. 374,
see also Life; metaphysics of, 170,
170 br. n. 11. see also Metaphysics;
description of, 417, 428 n. 20; its
familiar course, 458; archaeology
of, 419, 428 n. 20; see also Natural
Necessity (Notwendigk.eit), must rest
on a priori bases, 281; apodeictic,
xxxvii, c, 237, cf. 454. 468;
unconditioned, 402, 403, cf. 238;
logical objective, 182; theoretical
objective, 236, cf. 245'; physical
(physical-mechanical), 172,240', cf.
civ-cix (see also Mechanism,
Nature, Natural [laws)), as
conflicting with freedom of the will
(see Antinomy [third, of
theoretical pure reason I, Freedom
of the will), and with the
contingency in nature's particular,
see Antinomy of teleological
judgment, Particular in nature;
blind, 394, 434. cf. 376,377,381;

INDEX

Necessity (continued)
practical (practical objective), c,
172. 237.450.47I,cf. 403,460,463,
245! • i.e., moraL 403, 484, cf. 267,
435,460,470. see also Moral (law).
Duty; subjective, 237, 239,287,
245', presented as objective. 239,
see also Taste-judgments of,
Pleasure-in judgments of taste,
Sublime-the, Presentation;
exemplary, lv, 237, see also Tastejudgments of; of jthe existence of)
some being, see God (ontological
and cosmological proofs for the
existence of), Spinoza; see also
Validity, Modality
Negative (negativ). concept, see
Concepts; pleasure, see Pleasure
New Elucidation of the First
Principles of Cognition in
Metaphysics (Principorum
primorum cognitionis metaphysicae
nova dilucidatio), 476 br. n. 99
Newton, Sir Isaac, xxxv. xxxvii, 302
br. n. 33,308-09,4DD, 198' br.n. 7
Noble (edel), 272-73
Nomothetic (Nomothetik,
nomothetisch), of nature, 448, see
also Natural (laws. pure),
Understanding; of freedom, 448,
see also Freedom of the will (laws
of), Moral (law), Reason
(practical); contrasted with
technic, 215', see also Technic of
nature; power of judgment as
subsumptive (determinative) is not,
385. see also Judgment-power of
(determinative); and see legislation
Noumenon (Noumenon), in the
negative sense is a thing insofar as
it is not an object of our sensible
intuition,406 br. n. 26, cL 255 (see
also Intuition), and hence is
something we can only think.
xxxviii, cf. xxxiii; is something
supersensible, xxxviii, cf. xxxiii, see
also Supersensible-the; is a thing
in itself, 405 br. n. 25, see also

533

Thing in itself; noumenal ground
of our sensations, 405 br. n. 25; as
substrate of appearances. 255, see
also Supersensible-the (as basis
of nature). Appearances; man as,
xxxix, 435, cf. xlvii, 175, 195 n. 39,
460, see also Will, Man. Thing in
itself, Supersensible-the (as basis
of subjects), Intelligence. Soul,
Spirit; in the positive sense is an
object of a nonsensible intuition,
406 br. n. 26. see also Intuition
(intellectual)
Nova Dilucidatio, see New
Elucidation . ..
Novels (Romane), 273, 230' n. 50, cf.
276,334
Numbers (Zahlen), their power
progresses to infinity, 251, see also
Infinity; a relation of the infinite
statable in numbers is impossible,
254, see also Infinite-the; music
involves the mind's playing with
their properties, 363, cf. 329, see
also Music; numerical concepts.
251,253,255.256, 2S9.series, 251,
254.256, magnitudes, 259; see also
Arithmetic, Mathematics
Objective (objektiv), and subjective
explanation. necessity, principles,
purposiveness. purpose, reality,
validity, etc., see these
headings
Obligation (Verbindlichkeit), is a
purposiveness that is also a law,
245' -46', see also Purposiveness,
Moral (law); moral, is absolute.
xliii. see also Moral (law); moral,
does not depend on belief in the
existence of God. 452, see also
Moral (law). Duty; if I think of the
moral law as obligating me then it
is obligating me, xliii; moral,
implies the ability to carry it out.
455 br. n. 48, cf. 450, see also
Ought, Freedom of the will
Observation (Beobachtung) is

534

INDEX

Observation (continued)
experience in which we engage
methodically. 376
Observations on the Feeling of the
Beautiful and Sublime
(Beobachtungen uber das Gefuhl
des SchOnen und Erhabenen l.
xxviii. Ii. lxix. 245 br. n. 4, 277 br.
n. 49,320 br. n. 57; Remarks on
the Observations. 277 br. n. 49
Obstacles (Hindernisse). 278. as
interfering with our attempt to
carry out the moral law (and
achieve the final purpose), xxvi.
xliii, xlv. 195 n. 39.267,271,238',
see also Moral (law enjoins on us
the final purpose); great, the ability
to overcome them is might, 260,
cf. 272. see also Might
Occasionalism (Okkasionalismus),
xcix, 422-23
Occupation (or Business) (Geschiift),
contrasted with play, 304, 327, ef.
187, see also Task
Ocean (Ozean), heaved up by <;torms,
245. 261.428, cf. 256,270.427,430.
is not sublime, 245. cf. 256; see also
Chaos
On a Discovery According to Which
Any New Critique of Pure Reason
Has Been Made Superfluous by an
Earlier One (Ober eine
Entdeckung, nach der aile Kritik
der re;nen Vernunft durch eine
altere entbehrlich gemacht
werden soli), 183 br. n. 28,232 br.
n.Sl
Only Possible Basis of Proof for
Demonstrating the Existence of
God- The (Der einzig mogliche
Beweisgrund zu e;ner
Demonstration dr!s Daseins
Gottes), xxviii, 360 br. n. 10,370
br. n. 27.371 br. n. 29,388 br. ns.
2-3,423 br. n. 13.436 br. n. 31,473
br. n. 93,476 br. ns. 97 and 99
On Medicine of the Body, as far as
This Discipline Belongs to
Philosophy (De medicina corporis.

quae phil030phorum est), 331 br.
n.71
On the Dignifkd Tone Recently
Adopted in Philosophy (Von einem
neuerdings erhobenen vornehmen
Ton in der Philosophie), 351 br. n.
31.363.364 br. n. 16.467 br. n. 75.
48S br. n. 107
On the Failure of All Philosophical
Endeavors in Theodicy (Uber das
MijJlingen aller philosophischen
Versuche in der Theodizee), 451
hr. n. 46
On the Form and Principles of the
Sensible and Intelligible World (De
mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilis
forma et principiis). xxviii, 257 hr.
n. 22,351 hr. n. 31
On the Progress of Metaphysics since
Leibniz and Wolff (Ober die
Fortschritte der Metaphysik seit
Leibniz'und WoWs Zeiten). 351 hr.
ns. 27 and 31, 485 hr. n. 107
On the Saying: That May Be Correct
in Theory but Is Inadequate for
Practice (Ober den
Gemeinspruch: Das mag in der
Theorie richtig sein, taugt aber
nicht fur die Praxis), 169 br. n. 8,
172 br. n. 15
On the Various Races of Human
Beings (Von den verschiedenen
Rassen der Menschen), 420 br. n.
6,428 br. n. 21
Ontological (ontologisch), concepts,
421,440.473,475; predicate, 181,
475; proof, see God (ontological
proof for the existence of)
On Using Teleological Principie3 in
Philosophy (Ober den Gebrauch
teleologischer Prinzipien in der
Philamphie ). xxix, 359 br. n. 5, 376
br. n. 40,388 hr. n. 2,428 br. n.

21
Opera (Oper). 325
Opinion (Meinen, Meinung), 463,
465-66, 472; matters of. 467-68. cf.
470. 472; difference of, we do not
permit it in judgments about the

INDEX

Opinion (continued)
beautiful, 239, see also Tastejudgments of
Oratorio (Oratorium), 325
Oratory (Beredsamkeit), 305, 315,
325,327,327 n. 63, cf. 313, as the
art of persuasion, 327, cf. 327 n.
63,462, see also Persuasion.
Prudence; is the art of engaging in
a task of the understanding as if it
were a free play of the imagination,
321, see also Imagination;
contrasted with rhetoric, 327 n. 63;
contrasted with poetry, 326-27, 327
n. 63; oratorical force. 462
Order (Ordnung), of nature in terms
of it!> particular laws (rules), 184.
187. cf. 186, 478. see also
Lawfulness; physical, 445. 448, cf.
377,458, see also Physical, Nature,
Natural (laws); teleological, 377,
379,448, see also Teleological
principle, Purposiveness- nature's
objective and material, Natural
(purposes); in carrying on a war,
263, see also War
Organ (Organ), means instrument,
373, see also Organized,
Organization; each part in a
natural purpose is regarded as, 373,
377, cf. 314, 240', see also Natural
(purposes)
Organism (Organismus), lxxviii-lxxxii,
see Organized (beings)
Organization (Organisation), as
intrinsic purpose of nature, 384,
see also Purpose (intrinsic).
Natural (purposes); principle for
judging it, 349, see also
Teleological principle; of nature
infinitely surpasses human art, 384,
cf. 374, 375, see also Technic of
nature; original. 424; inner, of an
organism, 378, see also Organized,
Natural (purposes); inner, of man,
379, see also Man; of the two sexes
in relation to each other, 425, see
also Procreation; political, 375 n.
38, cf. 352, 433

535

Organized (Organisiert), beings
(products, bodies) of nature (i.e.,
organisms) are those in which
everything is a purpose and
reciprocally also a means, 376, see
also Natural (purposes), Organ,
Organization; beings (etc.) are
systems of purposes, 420, cf.lxxvi,
217', see also System; beings are
those in which the idea of the
whole (as a purpose) is what allows
us to judge and cognize all the
parts in their systematic
combination Gudge and cognize
the being's inner possibility),
Lxxviii, 193, 426, cf. 425, 234' , 240',
M!E! also Purpose; beings are those
that must be thought of as possible
only as purposes of nature, 375, see
also Purpose, Natural (purposes),
Possibility (inner); beings have
thorough intrinsic purposiveness,
420 (see also Purposiveness
[intrinsic D, that is objective and
material,lxxviii, 228', see also
Purposiveness- nature's objective
and material. Perfection; beings are
natural purposes, 372, 315. 418, cf.
374,409, see also Natural
(purposes); beings are produced
through nature's technic, 419, see
also Technic of nature; beings,
contrasted with machines
(watches), 374, 464 n. 64, cf. lxxiv,
351 br. n. 31,352, but also 235',
see also Machine; beings,
contrasted with works of art, 374;
beings cannot be explained (or
cognized) by means of either the
principle of judgment or the
concept of nature, lxxvii, 359, 408,
437, 218'. cf. 429, see also
Judgment-principle of, Nature
(universal [transcendental] concept
[ideal of); beings are not (as far as
we can see) explicable in terms of
mechanism. see Mechanism;
beings cannot be explained by
appeal to a supreme architect, 410,

536

INDEX

Organized (continued)
cf. Ixxiii; beings cannot be
explained (objectively) by us on
either mechanical or teleological
principles. lxxx, 360. 429, 218', see
also Mechanism. Natural
(purposes). Teleological judgments
(explain subjectively but not
objectively); beings. how they are
judged and cognized, lxxviii-lxxxiii,
388,400,409,417-22,437, cf. 217',
see also Natural (purposes).
Teleological principle, Teleological
judgments; beings, they (even the
same causal connections in them)
must be judged in terms of both
efficient causes (mechanism) and
final causes, xxv, lxxxi, 372-77, 413,
cf. lxxii, lxxxviii, 412, 235',240',
see also Natural (purposes, concept
of, its possibility), Antinomy of
teleological judgment; beings as
forming a teleological system in
their extrinsic relations, 425-29, see
also Purposiveness-nature's
objective and material (relative);
beings, generation in, 371,419 n. 5,
425, see also Generation,
Procreation; organizing (selforganizing), 374,425; matter,
lxxviii, Ixxxii. 374,378,413.424.
cf. 375,377.419 n. 5; nature as a
whole is not given us as organized.
lxxxii. 398, ef. 218', see also
Nature, Natural (purpose)
Origin (Ursprnng), first, 389; of all
beings, 363; of organized beings,
429, cf. 418-19, see also Organized;
of a blade of grass, 378, see also
Grass; original mother. 418-19;
original being, see Cause
(intelligenl, of the world)
Originality (Originalitat), is the
foremost property of genius, 308,
see also Genius; involves
peculiarity, 318; see also Fantasy,
Creative
Ornaments (Zieraten), 226, 323
Ought (Sol/en), contrasted with is.

403, see also Obligation, Duty,
Moral (law); implies 'can,' 455 br.
n. 48, cf. 450; world as it ought to
be, lxxxviii; in a judgment of taste,
237,239,240,239'; concerning
possession of taste, 213, 265-66, cf.
284.353
Pain (Schmerz), contrasted with
gratification, 223, 266, 270, 277.
331,338, see also Gratification;
rests on the feeling of being unwell,
331, see also Health, Well-being;
as ultimately bodily, according to
Epicurus, 277, see also
Gratification; fear as, 277; absence
of, 208; see also Presentation,
Grief
Painstaking (peiniich), contrasted with
punctilious, :wt, cf. 321
Painting (Maierei), 225, 322-24, 330,
cf. 226,312,313,315,317; i~
essential feature is design, 225, cf.
330; proper and landscape
gardening. 322-24. see also
Landscape gardening; is foremost
among the visual arts, 330, see also
Arts-fine
Pantheism (Pantheismus), 421, 439,
see also Spinoza
Parsimony (Sparsamkeit), in nature's
particular, see Particular in nature,
Judgment-power of (its maxims)
Particular-the (das Besondere), in
nature, see Particular in nature; in
relation to the universal, see
Understanding, Judgment-power
of, Universal
Particular in nature (das Besondere
der Natur). must be given
empirically, lxxvi; is not
determined (legislated) by our
understanding but it (its form,
order) is contingent (as far as we
can see), lvi, lxxvi, xci-xciii,
179-80,183-88,386,388,404,
406-07,210',214', ef. xlv, lxxvii,
cviii, 169.409.412-13,429,484,
202'-03' , 216', see also

INDEX

Particular in nature (continued)
Understanding, Determmation
(theoretical), Legislation
(theoretical), Natural (laws),
Contingency; manifests (must be
assumed to manifest) simplicity,
parsimony, and continuity, lvii,
lxxvii, 182, 210',213', see also
Judgment-power of (its maxims);
is systematic (thoroughly lawful),
see Lawfulness (of the contingent),
Nature (system of), Judgmentprinciple of; is. in some sense,
(regarded as) "necessary," 183, 184,
363,376.384.240'-41', cf. c n. 105;
as legislated rather than given
empirically, xcii, xciii, xcviii, civ,
see also Understanding (intuitive);
as determined, in a thing, by the
whole. xcii. 407, .fee also Universal
(synthetic); and see Particular-the
Parts (Teite). see Whole
Passions (Leidenschaften), 272 n. 39,
275,298.430 br. n. 24.433, 196',
contrasted with affects, 272 n. 39,
cr. 275, 430 hr. n. 24. see also
Affects
Pathological (pathologisch). basis, the
agreeable as, 222, cf. 209, see also
Agreeable-the; aesthetic
judgment, 2J 1', see also Aesthetic
(iisthetisch) (judgments of sense);
fear, 481. see also Fear
Peace (Friede), effects of prolonged.
263; tribulations oppressing us in
times of. 433; a person's virtues of,

262
Peculiarity (Eigentiimlichkeit) , aping
of mere, is mannerism, 318, see
also Mannerism; first and second,
of a judgment of taste, 281-85, see
also Taste-judgments of
Perception (Wahrnehmung), is
empirical intuition, xxxiv. see also
Intuition; judgments of. contrasted
with judgments of experience. 288
br. n. to. cf. xxxiv, see also
Experience; limits in our, 324-25;
upon which we reflect, 191, cf. 189,

537

see also Reflection; inner. 258,
289; can be connected directly
with the concept of an object or
with pleasure, 287-88; perfection
of, in Leibniz and Wolff, xlviii, and
in Baumgarten and Meier, xlviii-l
Perfection ( Vollkommenheit) ,
"transcendental," according to the
schoolmen, 394; implies a
standard, ); of the world, according
to Leibniz and Wolff, xlii, xlviii,
lxxii-lxxiii, cf. 404, 442; of things
in the world, according to
Baumgarten and Meier, lxi; of
perception, in Leibniz, Wolff,
Baumgarten, Meier, see
Perception; as multiplicity in unity,
according to Baumgarten and
Meier. I, cf. 227,311,227'; as
"thought in a confused way," 227
incl. br. n. 42, 228. 346, 226' • 211:/
n. 43; sensible presentation of, is a
contradiction, 226'-27', see also
Presentation; mere form of, is a
contradiction. 228; presupposes a
concept of the object, 227, 226' ,
see also Good-the; stands in
contrast to beauty (see Beauty),
but is assessed in judging fine art,
see Art-fine; carries with it an
objective liking, 366, but cf. 228',
see also Pleasure; is intrinsic
objective purposiveness, 226, 227,
d. 279,228', see also
Purposiveness; qualitative, of a
thing is the harmony of its
mani.fold with tile thing's purpose,
227, d. 311, 346, 227', 228',250',
see also Good-the; quantitative,
is completeness (totality), 227, cf.
228' • see also Completeness,
Totality; intrinsic natural, of
organisms. 375, 250', see also
Organized (beings); relative, of
mathematical objects, 366. see alro
Geometry; formal. 341, 228' ,
artistic. in nature. 251' , see also
Technic of nature; moral, I, cf.
241, see also Moral (good), Virtue;

538

INDEX

Perfection (continued)
ideal of, nothing in the world but
our humanity admits of it, 233;
superhuman, 230' n. SO; of God,
see God
PerpetuaL Peace (Zum ewigen
Frieden), xxix, 172 br. n. 15,263
br. n. 28, 369 br. n. 26,433 br. n.
27,455 br. n. 48
Perpetual Peace in Philosophy. see
Announcement . ..
Persuasion (Oberredung), contrasted
with conviction, 461-63, 477; art
of, 327, d. 462, see also Oratory
Pharisaical (pharisiiisch), 330 n. 69
Phenomenon (Phiinomen), nature or
the world as (or as phenomenal),
xxviii, xxxii-xxxiii incl. n. 10,
xxxviii, xlviii, cvi n. 107,268,412,
422, d. 277,408,417; means the
same as 'appearance; xxxii, xxxiii,
d. 422, hence see Appearances
Philosophy (Philosophie), is the
system of rational cognition
(cognition in terms of principles)
through concepts, 195', d. 168.
174, 197'.242', see alrso
Metaphysics, Rational, Cognition;
pure, divisions in it almost always
turn out tripartite, 197 n. 43;
divides into formal (viz., formal
logic) and material (real), 195';
material, contains principles for
the rational cognition (cognition in
terms of principles) ofthings
through concepts, 171, 195', cf.
174,422; as (insofar as material)
the doctrinal system of our
cognition of nature and of
freedom, 205', cf. 207'. 242', see
also Doctrine, Metaphysics (of
nature anu of mural&); all assent
in it must be based on matters of
fact, 475, see aLso Assent
(Fiirwahrhalten ); its only parts are
theoretical and practical, 168,
170-74,177,179, 195'-97',202',
246', d. 416 (see aLso Cognition),

i.e., natural and moral, 171.
195'-201', cf. 172,471 n. 90, 205',
see also Metaphysics (of nature
and of morals); theoretical and
practical, mediation of the
transition between the two, see
Judgment-power of (as mediating
the transition between
understanding and reason).
Transition; distinguished from
critique, 168,195',242', d. 207',
see also Critique; transcendental.
213 br. n. 25,289.341,401,242',
d. 170,216' (see also
Transcendental), its general
problem, 289: speculative, 454,
474. cf. 451,456 br. n. 51; pure,
can prove propositions from a
priori grounds, but cannot
demonstrate (exhibit) them, 343,
see also Proofs. Demonstration,
Exhibition; its entire possession of
theoretical arguments for the
existence of God, 475, see also
God; its duty to separate what
convinces from what merely
persuades, 462, see also
Conviction, Persuasion; schools of.
have usually tried all the dogmatic
solutions possible for a certain
problem, 392 n. 6, see also
Dogmatic; enriched by Christianity
with moral concepts, 471 n. 90
Physical (physisch), equated with
natural, 375; strictly, equated with
mechanical, 389, see also
Mechanical; -mechanical. 388,
240'; equated with empirical. 241';
contrasted with metaphysical, 475,
cf. 382, see also Metaphysical;
contrasted with psychological.
238' , cf. 277, :fee also
Psychological; contrasted with
teleological. 448, d. 377, 379,413,
434, see also Teleological;
contrasted with moral. 445, see
also Moral, Metaphysics; and
moral teleology, see Teleology;

INDEX

Physical (continued)
-teleological, see Teleology
(physical); theology, 485, see also
Theology; possibility, 434, see also
Possibility; necessity, 172,240', see
also Necessity; laws, 445, 241' , see
also Natural (laws); principle of
universal natural science. 376. see
also Natural (science); explanation,
424. see also Explanation; causes,
413, see also Cause; ability (ability
of nature). 375; order, 445. 448, cf.
377,379,458; purposes, 249', see
also Natural (purposes);
dependence. 269; see also Physics
Physicoteleology (Physikoteie%gie),
see Teleology (physical)
Physicotheology (Physikotheologie),
436-42, see also Theology;
distinguished from moral theology,
436; cannot reveal to us anything
about a final purpose, 437, see also
Final purpose; is physical teleology
misunderstood, 442, see also
Teleology (physical)
Physics (Physik),lxxiii, 382-83;
proper is empirical, 198';
explanation in, 238'; founders on
the first origin of organized beings,
424; experimental, 198'; recent,
467; teleology of nature as
belonging to it, 382, cf. 416-17;
theological, is an absurdity, 485, cf.
381,382,439; see also Physical
Physiological (Physiologisch),
contrasted with transcendental,
277, see also Transcendental; as
including psychological, 286. see
also Psychological, 286; rules, 286;
exposition of aesthetic judgments,
in Burke,liii,lxix, 277-78, d. 286,

238'
Planets (Planeten), other, rational
inhabitants on, 467, 467 br. n. 76
Plastic art (Plastik), see Art-fine
Plato, 363-64
Play (Spiel), as occupation agreeable
on its own account, 304; contrasted

539

with task, 268, 321. 329, cf. 304,
327; free, of the cognitive powers
(imagination and understanding),
see Taste-judgments of; free, of
the cognitive powers (imagination
and reason), see Sublime-the; of
chance (game of chance), tones,
and thought (wit), 331-32; with
ideas. 321, cf. 323,329-30, see also
Ideas (aesthetic); of shapes and of
sensations, 225, see also Dance,
Mime, Music; of affects, 273, see
also Affects; of the power of
judgment, in laughter, 335, see also
Laughter
Plays (Schauspieie). 284, 238', cf. 325
Pleasure (feeling of, or liking)
(iGefiihl derl Lust, Wohlgefallen) ,
is one of the mental powers in
general, lxxxvii, 167, 177, 196, 198,
205'-06',245'-46', see also Power
(mental); as mediating the
transition between the cognitive
power and the power of desire,
lxxxvii, 168, 177-79, '11Y7', cf.
196-98,245'-46', see also Power
(mental), Transition; as subject to
legislation by the power of
judgment, see Judgment-power
of (legislates a priori); as
receptivity and as individual
feeling, 223' br. n. 33, 224' br. n.
39, 229' br. ns. 46-47, see alto
Feeling; cannot be defined (or
known) on its own but can only be
felt, 232', see also Feeling; cannot
be seen a priori as being the effect
of some presentation, 221, see also
Presentation; is a mental state in
which a presentation is in harmony
with itself and which is the basis
for preserving this state, 230'. cf.
220, 222, '}J)6', or for producing the
object of the presentation, 231' •
see also Displeasure, Presentation;
in the existence of a thing is
identical with willing the thing,
209. cf. 206' , see also Volition; is

540

INDEX

Pleasure (continued)
always involved in achieving an
aim, 187, cf. lviii, 184, 242; or
displeasure accompanies all
sensation, 226' , see also Sensation;
is the feeling of life, 204, see also
Life (feeling of); sum of, equated
with happiness, 442, see also
Happiness; is empirical, 219, d.
289; is (always) subjective, xxiv,
206,266 br. n. 33,206', 208',
222' ,224', d. 204,232'; is
subjective sensation, 206, see also
Sensation (ambiguity of the term);
reference to it designates nothing
in the object, 204; can never
become the cognition of an object,
224'; cannot become an element
of cognition, 189,224',232', cf.
203-04,206,222'-23'; there is no
transition to it from concepts
(except in morality), 211, cf. 229',
but also 366; in the agreeable, the
beautiful, the good, contrasted,
209-10,222,236,281 br n. 3.
291-92,339,230', d. 230, 266, 278,
325,347,206'-07',231'-32', see
also Agreeable-the, Beautifulthe, Good-the; matter and form
of, 223; in the beautiful and in the
sublime, contrasted, 192,244-45,
247,267,269,270,275,277,292,
cf. 266, see also Pleasure-in
judgments of taste, Sublime-the;
positive and negative, lxix, 245,
269,271; its relation to nature's
subjective purposiveness and
judgments of taste, see Pleasurein judgments of taste; in
discovering unity in nature,
lviii-lix, 184, 187, see also Tastejudgments of (about larger parts of
nature); teleological judgments do
not involve, 228', but cf. 366; as
involved in our power of desire,
see Desire-power of; of
enjoyment, see Enjoyment;
pathologically conditioned, 209, cf.
222, see also Pathological; about

(and added tol gratification, 331;
universally communicable, in
science, 433; intellectual, 197,230,
271,366, and Kant's use of this
expression, 335 br. n. 76, see also
Intellectual; based on reason, is
approval, 331; moral, 178-79, 190,
211,222,237,271,272,289,292,
300,301,326,335,354, 207', 229',
230', cf. 197,331,366,228', see
also Moral (law, feeling); objective,
366; liking for people, 276
Pleasure (feeling of, or liking)-in
judgments of taste HGefUhl der I
Lust, Woh/ge/allen, in
Geschmacksurteilen),accordingto
Leibniz, Wolff, Baumgarten, Meier,
xlviii, 1, d. 226'-29', see also
Perfection; according to
Hutcheson, Hume, Burke, lii-liii:
is positive, 269, cf. 245, 271, see
also Pleasure; is a feeling of life's
being furthered, 244, $ee also
Pleasure; has a causality in it (to
preserve itself), 222, see also
Pleasure; is direct, 208, 226-27,
230,242,268,278,285,289,353;
is not connected with the
sensation, !ix, 190, 244, 249', ct.
290, 'lff/', see also Sensation; is not
based on inclination, 211, cf. 298.
see also Inclination; depends on
an empirical presentation, 191, d.
219.289,232,243', see also
Taste-judgments of, Presentation;
is not based on a concept, liv, 2CJI,
211,212,214,216,219,230,240,
244,281,289,293,295,306,329,
228' ,230', 249', d. 218, 280, 292,
353, see also Taste-judgments of,
Beautiful-the; is a noncognitive
predicate, lix, d. 191,288,289; is
our nonconceptuaI (indeterminate)
awareness of nature's (a form's)
subjective purposiveness, lviii-Ix,
lxxxvii, ciii, 189-90, 209 br. n. 19,
221,222,280,289,291-93,227' ,
230' ,249' , cf. 187-88,224',228',
248', see a/so Purposiveness-

INDEX

Pleasure-in judgments of taste (cant.)
nature's subjective; is disinterested
(free, pure),lv,Ix,lxi,lxvi, 204-07,
205 n. 10,209-19,221-23,244,267,
296, 300, 354, 380 n. 43, see also
Interest. Favor, Taste-judgments
of; is dry, 225; is a liking for the
mere form of the object, lx, lxii,
190,225,289,300,311,324,329,
cf. 249' , see also Purposivenessnature's subjective, Tastejudgments of; its form, 223; is
based on reflection, 191,207,292,
295, 296, 306, 229' , cf. 222, see also
Taste-judgmellts of; is based on
the indeterminate subsumption of
the imagination as such under the
understanding as such, lxi, 'liJ7, ef.
223'; is based on the harmony of
the cognitive powers (imagination
and understanding), lxiv, cii, 190,
191,197,209 br. n. 19,216-19,244,
289, 292, 306, 223', 224', cr. lxxxvii,
228, see also Taste-judgments of,
Judgment-power of (as such); it
and this harmony are universally
communicable, 217, 218,221,231,
238-39,275,293,295,306,433, cf.
312,317,328, see also
Communicability- universal; is a
common sense (sensus communis.
viz., taste), lx, see Sense; is
claimed to have (and has)
universal subjective validity, !ix, lx,
lxxxvii, 187, 190-91,211,216-19,
221, 231,'liJl, 'liJ5, 'liJ8,'liJ9, 292-93,
300,301,306,356, cf. 280,329,
225' , 229', see also Tastejudgments of; has necessity, 240,
289,cf.236,207',229',249',see
also Taste-judgments of; rests on
an a priori principle, 2(Jl', 208', ef.
187,190,289,353,224',225',229',
see also Judgment-principle of; is
required as a duty, as it were, 296;
its connection with morality and
moral feeling. lxiii-lxvi, ciii-civ,
197,297,298,300-01,356, ef.
190.230-31,353-54,445,482 n.

541

lOS, see also Beauty (its link to
morality), Moral (feeling);
"determination" of, is an aesthetic
judgment. 223', cf. lv-lvi, 219, 'liJl,
see also Taste-judgments of,
Determination; is also culture
(attunes the spirit to ideas), 326,
ef. 266. 326, 380 n. 43, see also
Culture, Ideas
Pluhar, Evelyn Begley, xxi
Pneumatology (Pneumatologie), 461,
479, is impossible empirically, 473,
see also Psychology
Poetry (Dichtkunst. Poesie), 'liJ2. 'liJ4,
304-OS, 3()8.....Oq. :\13, 325, 238'. d.
270,302.312, is the art of
conducting a free play of the
imagination as if it were a task of
the understanding, 321, see also
Play; holds the highest rank. among
all the arts, 326, see also Art-fine;
owes its origin almost entirely to
genius, 326. see also Genius;
depends least among all the fine
arts on precepts or examples, 326,
cf. 314; in it the power (faculty) of
aesthetic ideas can manifest itself
to full extent, 314, see Ideas
(aesthetic); gives sensible
expression to rational ideas, 314,
cf. 315, see also Ideas \rational);
sets the imagination free, 326, cf.
240,321,327, see also Imagination;
expands the mind, 326, see also
Expansion; contrasted with
oratory, 326-27, 327 n. 63; didactic,
325; see also Fiction
Polyclitus, 235
Possibility (Moglichkeit), logical and
real, 466 br. n. 72, 476 br. n. 99, see
also Reality; intrinsic (i.e., possibility in principle), lxxviii n. 82; of
(the objects of) concepts (ideas),
468, see also Reality; objective,
454, see also Reality; and actuality,
401-403,466, cf. 236; practical and
physical, 172,450,197'-201';
physical, 434, 450, cf. 4!J7, is based
on mechanism, 434, ef. xcviii;

542

INDEX

Possibility (continued)
internal (inner) and external, 221;
inner, of organized beings, 227,
233,308,373,409,413,417,425,
426, 232' , 235' , 236' , 250' , 251' , cf.
407; relative, 250'; of whatever is
to serve as a hypothesis must be
certain, 466, cf. 394, see also
Hypothesis; of experience or
nature, see Experience, Nature; of
metaphysics, see Metaphysics
Postulate (Postulat), as a demand,
468, cf. 479; the moral law as, 470,
but see Moral (law, our
consciousness of it, as well as the
law itself, is a fact of reason); the
causality of freedom as, 475, but
see Freedom of the will (is a
matter of fact); achievability of the
final purpose as, 470, 479; God and
immortality of the soul as, xli, xlvi,
470,479, cf. 450 n. 44, 453,455,
471-73, see also God,
Immortality of the soul; system of
nature in terms of empirical laws
as, 218'; the universal agreement
we require in a judgment of taste
is not, 216
Power(s) (-kraft [-krafte[, Vermogen) ,
or "faculty" means ability, xxiii, cf.
xxxii, 167 br. n. 3; reason for using
this term, 167 br. n. 3; and
capacity, 354 br. n. 40; mental, in
general, as forming a system, see
Pleasure (as mediating the
transition between the cognitive
power and the power of desire),
Transition; mental, in general, as
based on the cognitive power, 245',
cf. 198; higher mental, are those
having autonomy, 196, cf. 298, see
also Autonomy; higher menlal, as
forming a system, see Judgmentpower of (as mediating the
transition between understanding
and reason), Transition; mental,
everything we do with them must
in the end aim at the practical, 206,

see also Practical, Cognition (final
aim of all), Cognitive power,
Ultimate purpose, Vocation,
Supersensible- the, Metaphysics
(its main problems [and ultimate
purposeD
Practical (praktisch), cognition
(cognition from a practical point
of view, in a practical respect, etc.),
see Cognition; philosophy,
knowledge, faith, reason (or use of
reason), legislation, principles,
rules, precepts, propositions,
judgments, necessity, possibility,
reality, purpose, purposiveness, see
these headings: ideas, law(s), see
Ideas (moral), Moral (law); data of
reason, 468, see also Reason (fact
of); principles (propositions, rules,
reason), technically and morally,
171-73,175,455,195'-201'.234'
(see also Art, Technic of nature,
Moralllaw]), a distinction that may
not apply to the supreme cause,
455,457, cf. 456 br. n. 52, 464 n.
64; the, is the final aim of
everything we do with our mental
powers, 206, d. 168,255,257,341,
344,353, see also Vocation.
Ultimate purpose, Cognition,
Cognitive power, Supersensiblethe. Metaphysics (its main
problems [and ultimate purpose])
Prayer (Gebet, Andachtsiibung),
asking for the deflection of evil,
177 n. 18, see also Evil; family, 330
n. 69; see also Religion, God
Precepts (Vorschri!ten), contrasted
with (moral) Jaw. 172; morally and
technically practical, 173, cf. 176,
see also Practical; adjustment of,
on psychological grounds, 238';
insipid moral, 273; see also Maxim.
Rule
Precious (prezi&). 319
Predetermined (priidetenniniert ),410
Predicate(s) (Pradikat [e ]),
ontological, 181,475;

INDEX

Predicate(s) (continued)
transcendental, 182; of sensible
intuition, 339; empirical, 287-88;
noncognitive, pleasure as (in a
judgment of taste), see Pleasurein judgments of taste; of beauty,
see Beauty
Predispositions (Anlagen). natural.
430-33,200' n. 9, their
development, 432, cf. 420, see also
Evolution; moral, 292, 446, cf. 274
Preestablished harmony-theory of
(Prastabilismus), xcix, 422-24
Preformation (Pra/ormation),
individual and generic, 423, cf. 423
br. n. 11
Prejudice (Vorurteil), 294. 230' n. 50
Presentation (Vorstellung). reason for
using this term, 175 br. n. 17, see
also Exhibition; is an object of our
direct awareness. such as a
sensation, intuition, perception.
concept, cognition, idea, or
schema, 203 br. n. 4; distinct or
confused, 204, see also Clear and
distinct, Confusedness; any, can be
connected with gratification or
pain, 277, see also Gratification,
Pain; any, affects the feeling of life,
277, see also Life (feeling of);
beautiful, of a thing, as being
artistic beauty, 311, cf. 312, see also
Beauty. Art-fine; supplementary.
see Attributes (aesthetic)
Principles (Prinzipien, Grundsiitze) ,
must not be multiplied beyond
necessity, 182 incl. br. n. 27, see
also Parsimony; are required by
the cognitive powers, 385, see also
Philosophy; a priori, 182, 266 (see
also Propositions. Judgments).
cognition from, see Philosophy,
Cognition, Reason; a priori. based
on the categories, see Categories.
Natural (laws); synthetic a priori,
see Synthetic a priori; immanent,
see Immanent; transcendental and
metaphysical, see Transcendental,

543

Laws; empirical, 177 n. 18,230' n.
50 (see also Judgments),lack
logical objective necessity, 182, see
also Necessity; formal, 195, see
also Moral (law); transcendent, see
Transcendent: rationalistic, xxxi,
see also Rationalism; dogmatic,
411. see also Dogmatic;
determinative and reflective, see
Determinative; constitutive and
regulative, 167,168, 197,240,361,

379, 387, 401, 403-05, 457-58, cf.
Ixxxix incl. n. 90, 354, 376, 408,
411-12,453, see also Constitutive.
Regulative; objective and
SUbjective, 354, 385, 398, cf.
285-86,386; subjective, are
maxims. 184, see also Maxim;
heuristic, see Teleological
principle, Judgment-principle of;
theoretical and practical, 246' , see
also Propositions, Judgments,
Legislation, Philosophy, Cognition;
of nature and of freedom
(morality), 479, see also Natural
(laws), Moral (law); practical, 171,
technically and morally, see
Practical; distinct and confused,
228, cf. 238, see also Clear and
distinct, Confusedness; indigenous
and foreign, 381, cf. 242', see also
Natural (science); principle of
contradiction. xlviii. 197 n. 43, 466;
principle of sufficient reason, xlviii,
lxxiii, cf. 388; universal principle
of natural science, 376, see also
Natural (science); principle of
mechanism (see Mechanism), of
judgment (see Judgment-principle
of). of taste (see Taste). of
teleology (see Teleological
principle), of causality (see
Causality), about substance (see
Substance); of explanation in
psychology, 237'; principle of selflove, 470; supersensible, 173,363,
381,429. cf. 412, see also
Supersensible- the

544

INDEX

Principorum primorum cognitionis
metaphysicae nova dilucidatio, see
New Elucidation . ..
Probability (Wahrscheinlichkeit),
465-66, cf. xxxii, 400, 463, see also
Opinion
Problem I, lxii-lxiii, lxv, lxxxv, lxxxviii,
340 br. n. 6; its solution, xciv-xcviii
Problem II, lxiv, lxxxv, xcvi n. 101;
its solution, xcvii-cii
Problem III, lxiv, lxxxv, cii; its
solution, cii-civ
Problematic (problematisch),
concept, 397, 402; judgment, 397;
imperative, 200' n. 9, 200' br. n.
10; happiness as, see Happiness
Procreation (Fortpjlanzung) , 422-24,
425, see also Generation
Product (Produkt), 371 br. n. 31, d.
424, contrasted with educt, 423, cf.
371; organized, of nature, see
Organized (beings); of art, see Art;
production contrasted with
theoretical legislation, xcii, xciii
Progress of Metaphysics . . " see On
the Progress of Metaphysics . ..
Prolegomena to Any Future
Metaphysics (Prolegomena zu
einer jeden kilnftigen
Metaphysik . .. ), xxviii, xxxi n. 7,
xxxvii n. 13, lxxv n. 77, 233 br. n.
53,288 br. n. 10,351 br. n. 31, 457
br. n. 54,475 br. n. 96,485 br. n. 107
Proof (Beweis), must convince, not
merely persuade, 461, see also
Conviction, Persuasion; according
to the truth and according to man,
463 inel. br. n. 62; empirical and
a priori, 461; theoretical bases of,
their four degrees of sufficiency,
463-66; dogmatic, 472; based on
nature must differ from proof
based on freedom, 479; proofs for
the existence of God, see God;
bases of, cannot determine a
judgment of taste, 284, cf. 304-05,
see also Taste-judgments of
Propaedeutic (Propiideutik,

propadeutisch), to all philosophy,
194, see also Critique; for
establishing taste, 356, see also
Culture (of taste); for all fine art,
355; to theology, lxxxv, 383, 417,
442, 485, see also Teleology (its
relation to theology); and
encyclopaedic introduction,
241 -42
Proportion (Proportion), of geometric
lines, 363, see also Geometry;
between the cognitive powers
(imagination and understanding),
238, 292, 318, see also Harmony;
and see Ratio
Propositions (Siitze), analytic and
synthetic, see Analytic, Synthetic;
a priori, 467, cf. 465, see also
Principles, Judgments; synthetic a
priori, see Synthetic a priori; pure,
xxx, see also Pure; empirical, see
Principles, Judgments; theoretical
and practical, 196'-201', see also
Principles, Judgments, Legislation,
Philosophy, Cognition; provable
and unprovable (demonstrable and
indemonstrable, indirectly and
directly certain), 343, see also
Proof, Demonstration, Direct and
indirect; auxiliary, 381; conflicts
stated in terms of, lxxxix n. 89
Prudence (Klugheit), is the skill of
using free human beings (in
particular one's own natural
predispositions and inclinations) for
one's own aims, 200' n. 9, cf. 172,
470, see also Oratory
Psychological (psychologisch), rules.
286, see also Rule; explanation, as
empirical, 237', cf. 286, is much
inferior to explanation in physics,
238', see also Explanation; forces,
our, 177 n. 18, cf. 230' n. 50; as
included in physiological, 286; see
also Psychology
Psychology (Psychologie,
Seelenlehre), is one part of natural
science. 416, see also Natural

INDEX
Psychology (continued)
(science); practical, does not exist
as a special part of philosophy,
199', see also Philosophy; rational,
is anthropology of the inner sense,
461, d. 479, see also
Anthropology, Sense; rational,
contrasted with pneumatoJogy,461,
cf. 479, see also Pneumatology;
rational, contrasted with
materialism, 460-61; empirical,
199', its limitations and proper
task, 238'-39'; aesthetics treated
as belonging to, xvi,Ii-liii, lxix, 286;
empirical, provides no adequate
account of beauty and sublimity,
1, lxix, 218, 266, 277-78, 241', cf.
233,239,239'; cannot account for
judgment's maxims (principles),
182, see also JUdgment-power of
(its maxims); offers only a negative
concept of us as thinking beings,
460, see also Man; cannot
establish the immortality of the
soul, 479, see also Immortality of
the soul; and see Psychological
Punctilious (piinktlich) , contrasted
with painstaking, 307
Pure (rein), proposition is a priori and
involves no empirical concept, xxx;
mental powers are those that
legislate a priori, 179, see also
Autonomy, Legislation; reason, see
Reason; understanding, 179;
cognitive power, 177 n. 18,230' n.
50; power of judgment, 179;
synthesis, 177 n. 18, cf. 230' n. 50;
concepts, 167, 181, cf. 177 n. 18;
aesthetic judgments, see Tastejudgments of; liking, see
Pleasure-in judgments of taste;
arithmetic and geometry, see
Arithmetic, Geometry; colors and
tones, see Colors, Tone
Purpose(s) (Zweck(eJ), is an object
or state of affairs insofar as it is,
or is regarded as, the effect
brought about by some cause

545

through a concept that this cause
has of it, xxv, 180,408, cf. xcviii,

303,347,367,369-70, see also
Desire-power of, Causality,
Purposiveness; is the object of a
concept insofar as we regard this
concept as the object's cause (the
real basis of its possibility), 220,
227, cf. 192,372,426,232',236';
is an object presented as possible
only through a will, 370, cf. 2CJ7,
220,451,471 n. 87, see also Will,
Teleological judgments, Natural
(purposes), Presentation; concept
of, only man can fonn it, 427, 431,
435; as material purposiveness,
311, cf. 220,366,451,471 n.87,
see also Purposiveness, Matter;
matter of, 431; concept of, is
detenninate, lvi; determinate, 226,
228, 233; is an object covered by
a concept that must detennine a
priori everything that the object is
to contain, 373, cf. 375 n. 38, 377,
240'; concept of, indicates what
the object is meant to be, 227,
240'; implies contingency, xcii, 370,
396,398,421, cf. 4(JJ, 426, see also
Natural (purposes, concept of, its
possibility); whenever they are
regarded as the basis of a liking,
they carry with them an interest,
221, see also Pleasure, Interest;
subjective, 221, 436 n. 30;
objective, 193,221; intrinsic, 227,
230,231,347,384; absolute, 449;
categorical, 378; regarded as
underlying the possibility of things
also imply means, 414; extrinsic,
368, relative, 368,449; possible,
378; inner, of animals, 347;
sporadic, lxxiii, 441; connection in
tenns of, 367, 388, 390, 393, 404,
434,440; unity in tenns of, 393,
395,411,421,440, cf.lxxiv, carries
with it a reference to a cause that
has understanding, 393, 421, cf.
393,395; causality in terms of, see

546

INDEX

Purpose(s) (continued)
Causality; intentional and
unintentional, xxv, 382, cf. 347,
379,391, see also Intention; in
nature (whether intentional or not)
is thought of as pursued
intentionally (by an understanding
as cause of nature), lxxxiv, 399,
477, cf. 382-83, see also
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness, our
understanding's concept of it);
natural, implies no intention, see
Natural (purposes), Teleological
judgments; princlple of, see
Teleological principle; of nature
(of nature's existence) does imply
an intention, lxxviii, lxxix, 347, cf.
lxxxii, 291, 379,382,391,411, and
a final purpose, 378, see also Final
purpose; chain of (nature as a
system in terms of),lxxxiii, 435, see
also Nature (system of), Final
purpose; cause of the world in
terms of, see Cause (intelligent, of
the world); practical, 376, 228'; in
art, see Art, Art-fine; of freedom,
346,430, cf. 233, see also Causality,
Freedom of the will, Final purpose;
free (i.e., moral), 431, see also
Final purpose; aptitude for, is
culture, 431, see also Culture; man
as. see Ultimate purpose, Final
purpose; ultimate, see Ultimate
purpose; final, see Final purpose;
kingdom of, 444; divine, 382
Purposiveness (ZweckmiijJigkeit), is
a lawfulness that something
contingent may have insofar as it
is contingent, 404, 217', cf. lvi, xciv,

186,360,393,406,204', 228',243',
see also Lawfulness (of the
contingent), Particular in nature,
Judgment-principle of, Rule; is
the causality that a concept has
with regard to its object, 220; we
call something purposive if its
existence seems to presuppose a
presentation of that same thing,

216' , see also Purpose,
Presentation; is a thing's harmony
with that character of things which
is possible only through purposes,
180, cf. 220, see also Purpose; of
a thing requires that the thing have
the unity (that is characteristic) of
a purpose, 393, see also Purpose;
form of, 221, 222, 236. 286, see also
Purposiveness-nature's subjective
(as judged aesthetically); matter of
(of the nexusfinalis) , lviii, 220, cf.
221,451,471 n. 87, see also
Purposiveness- nature's objective
and material. Purpose, Matter
IMateriel; inner. in the relation of
our cognitive powers, 350, ct. 222,
286,296,249', see also Judgmentpower of (as such); nature's, we
perceive it in our power of
judgment insofar as it merely
reflects on a given object, 220', see
also Judgment-power of (as
such); nature's, must be given
empirically, 243' , cf. 364; nature's,
its principle, see Judgmentprinciple of; nature's, the concept
of it is a priori, 243',
transcendental, 184, cf. 185,
indeterminate, lxix, 340 br. n. 6,
220', and reflective rather than
determinative, 181,404,216',
219'-20'. cf. 220. see also
Reflective; nature's, our
understanding must think it by
analogy with our technically
practical ability, xcviii-xcix, 397-98,
see also Practical; nature's, is great,
483, cf. lxxii n. 63; nature's,
universal theory of, 382; nature's
aesthetic (its purposiveness without
a purpose) is subjective, ideal
(conceptual) but transcendental,
free (unconditioned) and formal
(figurative), and may be intrinsic
or relative, see Purposivenessnature's subjective (as judged
aesthetically); nature's teleological
(its purposiveness with a purpose)

INDEX

Purposiveness (continued)
is logical and objective. material
(real) and empirical. and may be
intrinsic (absolute) or extrinsic
(relative. contingent). intentional
or unintentional (natural.
spontaneous). see Purposivenessnature's objective and material;
nature's technical, 382. see also
Technic of nature: nature's, the
concept of it is equivalent to the
concept of the supersensible basis
of that purposiveness, xxiv-xxvii,
lxii-Ixiii. cH, see also Problem I.
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness); nature's,
as produced by an intelligent cause
of the world, cvii. see also
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness. our
understanding'S concept of it):
nature's, the concept of it unites
the "three" supersensibles and
thereby also the three Critiques,
xxvii, see also Problem II,
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness); nature's,
unsolved problem concerning it,
civ-cix; objective but formal, of
geometric objects, lxxvii. 362-66,
366 n. 23,447,228', cf. 228.382
(see also Geometry), is introduced
by us when we draw such objects.
365; objective and formal but
without a purpose. is a
contradiction, 228; objective and
formal. is intellectual. 362, 364;
intellectual (pure intellectual, i.e.,
mora!). 271. 273. see also
Intellectual; practical. lxxix, 181,
182,187,243', cf. 280,292,
245'-46'; highest, 235, see also
Final purpose
Purposiveness-nature's objective and
material (objektive und materiale
ZweckmiijJiglreit der Natur) , is a
purposiveness with (based on) a
(determinate) purpose, lvii-lviii,
lxxvii-lxxviii, xciii, ciii. 226, 227.

547

221',228',239'-40', cf.lxxix, xcvii.
192. 193, 232, 311 (see also Natural
[purposes]), which is judged
teleologically, see Teleological
judgments. Teleological principle,
Purposiveness; as equated with
purpose, lxxviii n. 81,366; is
teleological. 270, 233'. and hence
logical, 192,216'.217'; as material,
lvii, 311, 362. 366, 224', cf. 220 (see
also Purposiveness [matter ofD, is
real, 193.364,366,217', cf. 233',
249',250'; absolute, 217', cf. 369,
i.e., intrinsic, lxxviii, lxxxiii, 226.

227,229,366-67,376-77,420-21,
425. cf. 423,437,477.250'-51' (see
also Purpose), is periection, 226,
227, cf. 279, 228', see also
Perfection; relative (or contingent,

368), lxxviii, lxxxiii, 366-69, 251',
cf. 250'. i.e., extrinsic, lxxviii,

lxxxili,226,227,368.377-78.

425-29. cf. 359,384,43?477,see
also Purpose; unintentional, 391,
251' (see also Technic of nature),
i.e., natural, 235', or spontaneous,
235'; intentional. 391, 253, 383,
484, 235' , see also Technic of
nature; its occurrence in nature is
not implied a priori by
transcendental principles or the
concept of nature, 3~, see also
Natural (purposes, we have no a
priori basis for their existence); is
empirical, 364, cf. 243'; is
contingent in terms of mechanism.
360, see also Mechanism.
Particular in nature, Purposiveness,
Purpose; is based (not only on a
purpose but) also on nature's
subjective purposiveness, xxv, lvii,
xcvii, cf. cii, 246. 243',248' (see
also Teleological judgments), but
is not implied by it, 218',219' ,
228'-29', cf. lxxvii, 233', see also
Judgment-principle of,
Purposiveness-nature'ssubjective;
is attributed to nature only in
relation to the power of judgment

548

INDEX

Purposiveness- nature's objective and
material (continued)
(i.e., regulatively, reflectively), 221',
see also Teleological judgments;
whether nature as a whole has, see
Natural (purpose,; concept of, is
determinate, cii, see also
Teleological judgments; concept
of, its possibility, xcvii, see also
Antinomy of teleological
judgment, Natural (purposes,
concept of, its possibility),
Purposiveness- nature'ssubjective;
concept of, is equivalent to the
concept of the supersensible basis
of that purposiveness, xcvii, xcviii,
cH, see also Supersensible-the (as
basis of nature's purposiveness),
Purposiveness (nature's); idealism
and realism concerning it, 391-95,

439-40
Purposiveness- nature's subjective
(subjektive ZweckmiijJigkeit der
Natur), is nature's purposiveness
for our power of judgment
(understanding, cognitive power),
lvi, lviii, lxxvii, lxxxii, 181-86, 193,
246,287,202',203' n. 13,214'-16',
219',221',249', cf. 191,227,286,

359,360,205',217',220',232', see
also Purposiveness, Judgmentprinciple of; as (also) underlying
nature's objective and material
purposiveness,see Purposivenessnature's objective and material; is
ideal, 188, i.e., (indeterminately)
conceptual, 219', but
transcendental, 185, cf. 184 (see
also Judgment-principle of), and
formal, 181, see also
Purposiveness-nature's subjective
(as judged aesthetically); as
"technical," 382, 243'; may be
intrinsic or relative, 249'; is
analogous to the supersensible as
determined practically, lxvi, see
also Supersensible-the (as
contained practically in the moral
law); concept of, is indetenninate,

lvi, lxxxv, xcvi, 220'-21', see also
Judgment-power of (has its own
[indetenninatel concept), Tastejudgments of, Purposiveness
(nature's); concept of, its
possibility, xciii-xcv, see also
Antinomy of teleological judgment,
Natural (purposes, concept of. its
possibility) •Purposiveness- nature's
objective and material; concept of,
is equivalent to the concept of the
supersensible basis of that
purposiveness, xxiv-xxvii, Ixv.
lxxxv, lxxxviii, xciv-xcv, see also
Problem I, Supersensible-the (as
basis of nature's purposiveness),
Purposiveness (nature's); concept
of. its role in the mediation of the
transition between nature and
freedom and the "three"
supersensibles, see Judgrnentpower of (as mediating the
transition between understanding
and reason [nature and freedom,
theoretical and practical
philosophy]), Supersensible-the
(as basis of nature's purposiveness),
Transition; concept of, solves the
problem concerning taste, lxii, see
also Taste-judgments of; as
judged aesthetically, 188-92, 220.
221, 224', 239', 248', cf. 198,324,
350,245'-46' (see also Tastejudgments of), i.e., as aesthetic
purposiveness, 270, 347, 362, cf.
188, is intrinsic, 249' (contrast
Sublime-the), though not a
characteristic of the object itself.
189, is unconditioned, 344, i.e.,
free, 270, 292, cf. ciii, is the
lawfulness of the power of
judgment in its freedom, 270, and
is figurative. 233'-34', i.e., formal,
ciii, 190, 193,222, 226, 270, 361,
204',224', 230', 232', cf. 180,220,
223,227,253,279.281,293,347,
359,220'-21',249', see also
Pleasure-in judgments of taste,
Taste-judgments of; as judged

INDEX

Purposiveness-nature's subjective
(continued)
aesthetically, is the fonn of
(subjective) purposiveness, 221,
222,236,286, is a purposiveness
without a purpose,lviii, xciv, xcvi,
219,226, 241,301,347,cf. 236, and
one that can only be felt (rather
than cognized),lviii.lxi, 224'-25',
cf. 194,295, see also Pleasure-in
judgments of taste, Judgmentpower of (as such, its subjective
condition); as judged aesthetically,
idealism and realism, empiricism
and rationalism concerning it,
346-51, see also Beauty
Pyramids (Pyramiden), of Egypt,

252
Quality (Qualitiit), of judgments of
taste, 203-11, cf. 188; of judgments
about the sublime, 247, 257-60
Quantity (Quantitiit), of judgments of
taste, 211-19, logical and aesthetic,
215; of judgments about the
sublime, 247
Quarreling (Streiten), contrasted with
disputing, 338

Races of Human Beings. see On the
Various Races . ..
Ratio (Proportion), in the attunement
of a sense. 324-25. see also
Attunement; and see Proportion
Rational (Vernun/t-), concept, as
contrasted with a concept used for
reasoning, 396 (see also
Reasoning), is a rational (or
intellectual) idea, 314 (see also
Ideas lrational)), i.e., a concept
confirmed by reason and a basis
for cognition, 396; concept of the
supersensible. as "transcendental,"
339, cf. 346; judgment, contrasted
with reasoning judgment, 337 n. 1;
will, pure, 237, see also Will;
beings (finite) in general, 401,404,
409,435,442,445,447-50, cf. 453,
and on other planets, 467, 467 br.

549

n. 76; beings must exist if the
world's existence is to have value,
448-49, see also Value; natural
science, universal, 237', see also
Natural (science); and see Reason,
Rationalism
Rationalism (Rationaiismus),
dogmatic, xxx-xxxi, xxxviii. xxxix,
xlii, xlvi, xlvii,li, lxxiiwlxxiii, cf.
391,397,482, critique of taste
according to it, 346-51, see also
Beauty, Taste-judgments of; and
see Rational
Raving (Schwiirmen), reason as, 410,
411, see also Fanaticism
Real (real), possibility, contrasted
with logical, 466 br. n. 72, 476 br.
n. 9, see also Possibility; the, in
sensation, see Sensation;
purposiveness, 193,364,366, 217',
see also Purposiveness-nature's
objective and material; supremely
real being, 475, cf. 476, 476 br. n.
99; see also Realism, Material,
Reality
Realism (Reaiismus), concerning the
(aesthetic) purposiveness of nature
and of art, 346-51, see also
Purposiveness-nature's subjective;
concerning the objective material
purposiveness (final causes) in
nature, 391-95, 440, see also
Purposiveness-nature's objective
and material
Reality (Realitiit), a, is a logically
independent affirmative attribute.
476 br. n. 99, see also
Determination; existence as a, 476;
a being with all realities, 476 br.
n. 99, cf. 475,476; of a concept (its
objective reality) consists in its not
being empty, lxxxv, cf. xlvi (see aho
Concepts Inegative]), i.e., in the
concept's having application, 385,
cf. 174, 397; objective. 300, 314,
351,376,394,~.401,453,454,

468-70,474,209'; subjective, 453;
objective, of a concept, consists in
the possibility of (there being) an

550

INDEX

Reality (continued)
object conforming to it
(subsumable under it), 396, cf. 3Cf7,
see also Possibility; objective, of
the concept of a thing is required
for making (even) a hypothesis
about the thing, 394, see also
Hypothesis; objective, of a
concept, establishing it requires a
(corresponding) intuition, 351, 468,
d. 343,473,474 (see a/so
Intuition), but it can be established
from theoretical or from practical
data, 468; theoretical objective,
lxxxv, 453, 469, 470, cf. 351,454,
456,468; practical objective, lxxxv,
175,453,456,468,469,485, cf.
474; objective, of (pure) concepts
of the understanding, 351,401,451,
cf. 475; objective, of empirical
concepts, 351, cf. 343; objective,
of rational ideas, 175,300,314,351,
456,468,469,cf.lxxxv, 473;
objective, of the concept of nature,
475,209', cf. 351, 401,451;
objective, of the concept of a
causality in terms of mechanism,
397; objective, of a concept need
not be established in the case of
beauty, 290, ct. 314, see also
Beauty; objective, of the concept
of a causality in terms of purposes
in art, 397; objective, of the
concept of a natural purpose,
396-97, cf. 376, 394; objective, of
the concept of a purpose of nature,
399, cf. 300,376,397-98, see also
Purpose (of nature); objective, of
the concept of a supreme cause
that has understanding, 479, cf.
397-98, see also Cause (intelligent,
of the world); objective, of the
moral law and of the idea of
freedom as a causality, xliii, 468,
474,475, see also Moral (law),
Freedom of the will; objective, of
(the idea of) the will, 353;
objective, of the concept of the
final purpose, xlvi, 453-54, 456,

469, see also Final purpose;
objective, of the concept of the
highest good, 469, see also Goodthe (highest), Final purpose;
objective, of the idea of man's
freedom under moral laws,
473-74, see also Final purpose;
objective. of the idea of man's
immortal soul, 473. see also
Immortality of the soul; objective,
of the idea of God, lxxxv, 456, 473,
ct. 397-98,479,485, see also God;
objective, of the concept of a being
of reason, 468, cf. 473; of products,
space is not a basis of it, 409; see
also Possibility (real),
Determination
Realm (Fe/d), of concepts, see
Concepts
Reason (Vernunjt), common (sound
common), 254, 443, 448, cf. 293,
see also Understanding; broad
sense of the term, xxx, cf. 167, 168,
344,401,402,195',241'; narrow
(and usual) sense of the term,
xxxviii; as a (one) power of
concepts, lxxi, 244,202', see also
Understanding; is our power (or
source, 260, cf. 283) of ideas, 266,
269,315,343-44, cf. xxxviii, see
also Ideas; is a (one) power of (a
priori) principles, 401, cf. 167,168,
314, 344, 461, see also
Understanding; is our ability to
derive the particular from
principles, 202'; is one of the
specific cognitive powers, 167,
176-77,345,442,201',207',cf.179,
195', see also Cognitive power;
transition to it from understanding,
see Judgment-power of (as
mediating the transition between
understanding and reason),
Transition; as in harmony with
itself, 341, cf. 344, see a/so
Antinomy; nature in, 363-64, see
also Man; being of, contrasted
with being of our reasoning, 468,
see also Reasoning; theoretical

INDEX

Reason (continued)
(pure theoretical. reason in its
[pure] theoretical use), 167, 175,
442,470,479 (see a/so Critique [of
pure reason]), is not needed for
(giving rise to) experience, 233',
but tries to combine experiences
into larger wholes and ultimately
into a complete unity, xxxviii, d.
314,404,429,221', see a/so
Completeness; theoretical, tries to
cognize not only a thing's form but
also its necessity, 370, cf. 429;
theoretical, is our ability to think
an independent and absolute
totality, 268, see also Totality;
theoretical, demands absolute
totality, 250, 254, ct. xxxviii, 268
(see a/so Totality), the
unconditioned, 345, 401, ct. 268,
443 (see also Unconditioned),
demands that we assume the original basis (of things) as existing with
unconditioned necessity, 402, cf.
403; theoretical, its maxims (see
MaXim), the propensity peculiar to
it, 461, cf. 480, see also Judgmentpower of (its maxims); theoretical,
has regulative but no constitutive
principles, 401, cr. 168, hence
cannot judge objectively without
concepts of the understanding, 401,
cf. 179; theoretical, as served by
understanding, 401; theoretical, its
role in teleology, see Teleological
judgments; theoretical, as cool,
477, as passive, 294-95, as subject
to a heteronomy, 294, as raving,
410,411, and as fantasizing, 411,
see also Fantasy; theoretical,
objective and subjective use of,
344; theoretical, as in free play
with the imagination, see Sublimethe; theoretical. estimation by, 257,
see also Magnitude. Sublime-the;
theoretical, antinomy of, see
Antinomy; speculative, 445, 456,
458,469,471 n. 87.473.479,482,
d. 470 (see also Speculative),

551

cannot keep pace with practical
reason, 458-59, cf. 454, 456,471 n.
87, 482; theoretical and practical
data of, 468; its own domain is the
practical one, 265; practical,
enables us to pursue purposes,
xxxix, d. 207,268,280,375, see
also Purpose, Will, Good-the;
practical morally and technicall},
171-73,175,4S5,cf.195'-201',
234', see also Practical; as helped,
in the practical sphere, by
understanding, xlv, 464 n. 64, 465,
cf. xxxix, 398,431; looks ahead to
the consequences, 208, cf. xxxix;
practical, its peculiar (subjective)
character, 403; practical (pure
practical, reason in its [pure)
practical, i.e., moral, use), xxxix-xl,
167,168,171,174-75,195,345,445,
460,468-70,472,475.479,485,
207' (see also Critique of Practical
Reason), is our free will, xliv, cf.
237,457 (see also Will), a causality,
403 (see also Causality), one that
is independent from nature,
xxxix-xl, 195 n. 39,453, cf. 269,
403, see also Freedom of the will;
practical, as exerting dominance
over sensibility, 265, 269, 271, see
also Obstacles, Moral (law);
interest of, 210,223, 300, cf. 271,
298, 301, 459; practical, its
connection with a pleasure, 197,
see also Moral (feeling); practical,
its concepts, 292, see also Ideas
(moral); practical, legislates a
priori (viz., to the power of desire,
see Desire-power of) in the
domain of (by means of the
concept of) freedom, lxxxvii, 171,
174,175,195,345,460,475,2m',
cf.198,403,433,446,448,449,453,
485,202', see also Moral (law),
Freedom of the will; practical,
deals with the world as it ought to
be, lxxxviii, see also Moral (law);
practical, seeks to impose on
nature a supersensible form,

552

INDEX

Reason (continued)
xxxviii, xliv, ciii, d. 195, 268, see
also Supersensible- the (as
contained practically in the moral
law); practical, prescribes the final
purpose, 451, 453-56, cf. 267,472
(see also Final purpose), and must
assume the conditions under which
the final purpose can be achieved,
446, d. lxxxviii, see also Final
purpose (achieving it presupposes
immortality and God); its practical
use is religion, 482, see also
Religion; practical, antinomy of,
see Antinomy; highest moral
practical, in a moral cause of the
world, 462, see also God
Reasoning (verniinfteln), power of
judgment, is one whose judgments
make an a priori claim to universal
validity, 337, d. 359, 383 n. 46,
234'; concept used for, contrasted
with rational concept, 396, see also
Rational; judgment, contrasted
with rational, 337 n. 1;
contemplation, 292; being of our,
contrasted with being of reason,
468
Receptivity (Rezeptivitiit,
Empfiinglichkeit), see Intuition,
Sense, Sensibility, Pleasure
Refinement (Feinheit, Verfeinerung),
297, its harmony with simplicity
and originality. 356; of taste to the
point of its idealization causes
evils, 433. d. 298,237'
Reflection (Reflexion), is one kind of
contemplation, 204, see also
Contemplation; as distinguished
from determination, Iv (see also
Determination), by the power of
judgment (see also Judgmentpower of), 180, 184-86, 190-93, 203
n.l,204,207,220,224,269,280,
286,292-95,302,306,320.324,329,
346,352,370.375,385-89,399,405,
211 '-14', 218',220'.221',224'-26',
229',230',235',236',249',251' ,

consists in judgment's search for a
universal under which to subsume
a given particular, lvi, 179, cf. 211';
judgments of, see Judgments
(reflective), Judgment-power of
(reflective); pleasure based on, see
Pleasure-in judgments of taste;
principle of, see Judgmentprinciple of; taste of, 214, see also
Taste
Reflections Concerning Fire, see
Brief Outline . ..
Reflective (reflektierend), see
Reflection, Judgments (reflective),
Judgment-power of (reflective),
Judgment-principle of
Regret (Bedauern), 335
Regularity (RegelmiijJigkeit), stiff,
runs counter to taste, 242-43; of
geometric shapes, 241, d. 242,364,
370, see also Geometry; of external
things, 364; of a face, 235 n. 57;
see also Lawfulness
Regulative (reguhltiv), contrasted with
constitutive, xxxviii, see also Ideas
(rational), Principles, Constitutive
Reimarus, Hermann Samuel, 476
Relation (Relation), of purposes, third
moment of judgments of taste,
219-36, and of judgments about the
sublime, 247
Religion (Religion), xxviii, xxix, xlii,
is the practical use of reason, 4R2,
see also Reason (practical); is
morality in relation to God as
legislator, 460, see also Moral.
God; is the cognition (or
recognition) of our duties as divine
commands, 481 incl. br. n. 102, see
also Duty; how it is formed by
connecting the ideas of God,
freedom, and immortality, 474, see
also God, Freedom of the will,
Immortality of the soul; requires
only the practical point of view,
474, d. 476; in it everyone must
find the rule for his conduct within
himself, 283; in it an example of

INDEX

Religion (continued)
virtue and holiness is preferable to
received precepts, 283; in it
attitude is what is essential, 481;
religious feeling, 482 n. 105;
edification in, 273, cf. 274;
sublimity of, 263, cf. 273-74;
theology as leading to it, 481, and
as needed only for it, 482, see also
Theology; cannot be based on
theoretical philosophy, 473, 481, cf.
442; contrasted with theurgy and
idolatry, 459, 459 n. 57: contrasted
with superstition. 264, see also
Superstition; perversion of, lxxxv,
460,cf.273-75,481-82;
governments have gladly permitted
it to be furnished with childish
accessories, 274-75; see also
Prayer, Sermon, Christianity, Jews,
Islam
Religion Within the Bounds of Reason Alone (Die Religion innerhalb
der Grenzen der blofJen Vernunft),
xxix, 264 br. n. 30, 351 br. n. 31,
430 hr. n. 24,433 br. n. 27,442 hr.
n. 36,451 br. n. 45,457 br. n. 54,
464 br. n. 66,467 br. n. 75,469 br.
n. 82, 48] br. n. 103
Representation (traditional rendering
of Vorstellung), see Presentation
Residence (Aufenrhalt), of concepts,
see Concepts
Respect (Achtung), feeling of, is a
special and peculiar modification
of the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure, 222, see also Pleasure,
Displeasure; is a negative pleasure,
245, cf. 271,355; is an intellectual
feeling for moral ideas, 355, see
also Feeling, Ideas (moral); is pure
practical liking for (pleasure in) the
(moral) good, 209-10, ct. 271, see
aLso Moral (good); is self-esteem,
viz., for the humanity within us,
335, d. 273,380, see also
Humanity; is the feeling that it is
beyond our ability to attain to an

553

idea that is a law for us, 257; for
the moral law, 452,481, is one
element in moral feeling, xliv, eiii,
see also Moral (law, feeling); is
derivable a priori from moral
concepts, 222, cf. 229': disdains
charm, 271, cf. 335, see also
Charm; constraint based on it
rather than on fear, 355, cf. 481,
see also Fear; as contained in the
liking for the sublime, 245, 249, cf.
271, see also Sublime-the; for
nature, 380; see aLso Reverence
Reverence (Ehrjurcht), contrasted
with (pathological) fear. 264,
481-82, see also Fear, Pathological
Revolutions (Revolutionen), in
conditions on the earth, see Chaos
Rhetoric (Rhetorik), contrasted with
oratory, 327 n. 63, see also Oratory
Right(s) (recht [Rechtl), and wrong,
458; human, contrasted with
happiness, 273, see also Happiness;
of citizens, 263, d. 355, 465
Robinsonades (RobinsotuJden), 276,
see aLso Novels
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 204
Rule(s) (Rege/[nl), mayor may not
be laws (have apodeictic necessity),
173,183,213, cf. c, civ, 194,360,
364,391, see also Laws, Lawfulness
(of the contingent); universal and
general, 213; understanding needs
them, 364: practical, contained in
the concept of freedom, 195, see
aLso Moral (law); technically
practical (of skill, art, prudence),
172,173,175,200' n.9.cf.470,see
also Practical, Skill, Art, Prudence;
of purposes, 382, 391, see also
Causality (in terms of purposes),
Teleological principle; in art. see
Art, Art-fine; about beauty, see
Taste-judgments of; by which the
aesthetic power of judgment
proceeds, 194,seeaiso Judgmentprinciple of: in relation to the
standard idea, 234-35, see also

554

INDEX

Rule(s) (continued)
Standard idea; psychological and
physiological, 286; methodical
instruction by m.eans of, is a
school, 318, see also School;
schema as, xxxvi, see also Schema;
and see Precepts, Maxim
Sacred thrill (heiliger Schauer), 269,
316 n. 15; see also Holiness
Sacrifice (Aufopferung), as involved
in the su blime, 269, 271, see also
Sublime-the
Sacrilege (Frevel), 263; doubting as,
462, cf. 480
Sadness (Traurigiceit), insipid and
interesting, 276, see a/so Grief
St. Peter's Basilica (St.-Peterskirche),

252
Saussure, Horace Benedict de, 265,

276
Savary, Anne Jean Marie Rene, 252
Saying, the: That May Be
Correct . .. , see On the Saying . ..
Schema (Schema), mediates (makes
possible) the subsumption of
intuitions under concepts of the
understanding, 253 br. n. 17, cf.
xxxvi, xlv, lxxxvi, 218, 253, 269,
287,351-52,212',223', see also
Subsumption, Exhibition: connects
a category with time, xxxvi, see
also Categories, Time; is a rule
stipulating what conditions an
intuition must meet so that it can
match a category, xxxvi; contrasted
with example, 351, see also
Example; contrasted with symbol,
352, 352 n. 32, see also Symbol,
Exhibition (schematic and
symbolic); schematic contrasted
with technical, 213'-14',248'; for
ideas, the imagination's straining
to treat nature as, 265; as it were,
of the supersensible, 326; common
(in different sense of 'schema'),
shared by many genera of animals,
418
Schiller, Friedrich von, 277 hr. n. 47

School (Schule). is methodical
instruction by means of rules, 318;
contrasted with the community's
sound understanding, 476; origin
of a, 318; schools of philosophy,
392 n. 6: in the sense of
scholasticism, 394: provides the
form, genius the material. for art,
310, cf. 318, see also Academic,
Genius; Plato's, 363
Science (Wissenschaft), its concern
is truth, 355, see also Truth; every,
is a system (of cognitions), lxxvi,
381, d. Ixxxii,lxxxvi, 247', see also
System; every, is part of an
encyclopaedia (system) of all the
sciences, 416, 242', see also
Encyclopaedia; as preceded by
critique, 354, see also Critique;
introduction to a, 241'; division of
a (rational), 171-72, see also
Divisions; philosophical, 416, 238' ,
see also Philosophy; metaphysics
as, see Metaphysics; natural, see
Natural; historical, 305; alleged
fine, I-Ii, Ixix n. 58,304,305;
alleged, of the beautiful, Hi, Ixxxiii
n. 85,304,354-55, see also
Aesthetics; its relation to art, see
Art, Art-fine; involves a
universally communicable
pleasure, 433; makes us civilized,
433; treated as food for vanity (as
luxury), 433, see also Luxury; and
see Scientific. Knowledge,
Doctrine
Scientific (wissenschaftlich), Kantian
works as, xxix, see also Science;
investigation of nature as, lxxvi, see
also Natural (science); and
mechanical division, 247', see also
Divisions; mind, contrasted with
genius, 308-09, see also Genius
Sculpture (Bildhauerkunst), 322, cf.
225,226,235 inel. hr. n. 56,312,
315; its essential feature is design,
225, cf. 330; see also Art-fine
Segner, Johann Andreas von, 316 n.
51 and br. n. 52

INDEX

Self (Selbst), our thinking, 461, cf.
175,435,460,468, see also Man;
-consciousness, 394, 476; -love,
470; -estimation. 262; -esteem. 335;
-preservation. moral, 261;
-preservation. physical, 374, 420;
-preservation of a mental state, see
Pleasure; -causation, in organisms,
see Natural (purposes); -organizing,
374, see also Organization,
Organized
Sensation (Empfindung). is what is
merely subjective in a presentation.
189. see also Presentation; is
passive, xxxv, cf. 292, 405 br. n. 25,
see also Sense; ambiguity of the
term, 205-06, 266 br. n. 33, 270 br.
n. 36, 281 br. n. 3,287 br. n. 9, 291
br. n. 19, cf. 295, 221'-24', see also
Aesthetic (iisthetisch); subjective,
206, see also Feeling, Pleasure; in
the proper meaning of the term,
is what is material (real) in a
presentation (that through which
something existent is given), 189,
203,294,325-26, see also
Presentation; proper (i.e.,
objective), 291, 291 br. n. 19,306,
cf. 270, 277, 281,222', 230';
through it is given the matter of
intuition, xxxiv, lix. xcv, see also
Intuition (matter of); equated with
the matter of a presentation, 224,
294,321, cf. 226. see also Presentation, Matter [Matene]; matter of,
326; is a sense impression, 321, see
also Impressions; noumenal ground
of, 405 br. n. 25, see also
Noumenon; is the matter of an
aesthetic judgment, 226, cf. 326,
see also Aesthetic (iisthetisch)
(judgments of sense); agreeable,
324, see also Agreeable-the,
Aesthetic (iisthetisch) (judgments
of sense); intersubjective variation
in. 224, 291, 324-25; is always
accompanied by pleasure or
displeasure, 226', see also Pleasure,
Displeasure; universal language of,

555

328; in relation to judgments of
taste, see Taste-judgments of;
changing free play of. 331, see also
Music, Art-fine (of color); pure,
of a color Or tone, 224, see also
Colors, Tone
Sense (Sinn), is a receptivity
belonging to the cognitive power,
206, cf. 324,405 br. n. 25, see also
Sensibility, Intuition. Cognitive
power; cannot contain concepts,
293, see also Understanding,
Reason; feeling of, 306, see also
Feeling; enjoyment, 297, see also
Enjoyment; aesthetic judgments
of, see Aesthetic (iisthetisch)
(judgments of sense); taste of, see
Taste; objective, 222', see also
Sensation; objects, human beings
as beings of, world of, see
i\ppearances;outer,225,238,291
br. n. 19,467, cf. 189, as having
attunement and tension, 324; inner,
xxxix, 225,228,259,291 br. n. 19,
461, 226', cf. 206, 289, its
appearances, 460 (see also Feeling
[of the inner senseD, its organ, 234,
234 br. n. 55, 291 br. n. 19, and its
anthropology, 461. see also Nature
([outside and] within us); interior,
291 br. n. 19, cf. 295; common, as
sensus communis, lv, lix, Ix. lxii,
217-40, 293-96, cf. 356, is the effect
arising from the free play of the
cognitive powers (imagination and
understanding), 238, see also
Taste-judgments of; common. as
Sensus communis. is taste, see
Taste; common, as common
(sound) understanding, see
Understanding; of truth, decency,
justice, 293; moral, in Hutcheson
and Hume, Iii
Sensibility (Sinnlichkeit), is a (lower)
cognitive power, 321, 354 hr. n. 40,
see also Cognitive power; is
(sensible) intuition, see Intuition;
is a receptivity (is passive), xcii, 354
br. n. 40, see also Sense, Sensation;

556

INDEX

Sensibility (continued)
our (active) power of, is the
imagination, see Imagination; its
objects are appearances, xliv, cf.
403, see also Appearances; is not
reducible to thought, xxxiii n. 10.
226' n. 43, see also Thought; its
limits when compared with the
supersensible and the infinite.
258-59,265. 275. cf. 267,402,see
also Supersensible-the, Infinitethe; greatest (most expanded)
power of, 257, cf. 265, see also
Expansion. Imagination; as subject
to dominance exerted by reason,
265,269.271, cf. xlv-xlvi, 267, 403,
443, see also Reason (practical),
Obstacles, Moral (law)
Sensible (sinniich), the, is the domain
of the concept of nature, 175 (see
also Nature), i.e., the realm of
appearances, see Appearances;
intuition, see Sensibility, Intuition;
equated with aesthetic, 247' , cf.
188, see also Aesthetic (iisthetisch)
(ambiguity of the term); concepts
as made sensible, 351.223'. see
also Exhibition
Sentimentality (Empfindelei), 273, cf.
334
Series (Serien), numerical. see
Numbers
Sermon (Predigt). 274. 313. ct. 327
n. 63, see also Religion
Sexes (Geschlechter), the two, as
organized in relation to each other,
425, see also Organization
Simplicity (Einfalt), is artless
purposiveness, 275, cf. 335; as
nature's style in the sublime, 275,
cf. 335; in the sense related to
parsimony, see Particular in
nature, Judgment-power of (its
maxims)
Simultaneity (Zugleichsein), 259, cf.
483
Skepticism (Skeptizismus.
Zwel/elglaube J. xxxii, xxxix, lx,

238,472, cf. 239,450 n. 44; see also
Empiricism, Doubt
Skill (Geschicklichkeit ).lxxxiv, 172,
232,295,297,307,309.430-32,
200' , 200' n. 9; its cultivation,
lxxxiv, 431-32, see also Culture
Sleep (Schiaf), 334, 380
Sociability (Geselligkeit), consists in
fitness and propensity for society,
296, cf. 433, see also Society; man's
natural propensity to it, 218, cf.
296; judgments referring to, 213:
befits our humanity and
distinguishes it from the limitations
characteristic of animals, 355, see
also Humanity, Animals
Society (GeseJIscha/t), 296-97; civil.
432. cf. 355; propensity to, see
Sociability; isolation from, 275-76;
only in it does it become
interesting to have taste, 205 n. 10,
cf. 296; judgments about the
sublime not introduced to it by
convention, 265
Song (Gesang), 325; human, 243; of
birds and its imitation by a human
being, 243, 302, see also Imitation,
Flowers; at family prayer, 330 n.
69; .see also Music
Sophistry (Sophisterei), 476
Soul (Seele), doctrine of its nature.
473, see also Pneumatology;
immortality of, see Immortality of
the soul; its locomotive force. 457,
see also Force; beautiful, 300;
expansion of, 274. see also
Expansion; hygiene of, 196'; good,
298, see also Moral (good); world-,
392; as conjoined with crude
matter, 374-75, cf_ 392, see also
Hylozoism; and see Thing in itself
(man as), Spirit (as non corporeal
rational being), Intelligence
Source (Quelle), the common a
priori, 283, cf. 260,341
Space (llaun1),xxx, 2S4,259. 268,405
br. n. 25, 406 br. n. 26, 209' • is
contributed to (and applies to) all

INDEX

Space (continued)
experience (outer intuition), xxxii,
xxxvi,xci,cf.189,342,364,365,
409, see also Intuition (forms of);
pure theory of, 237'; is not a basis
responsible for the reality of
products, xci, 409; what we imply
concerning it in attributing motive
force to a body, 482-83
Species (Arten, Spezies), see Genera
and species
Specification (Spezijikation), of
nature,principieof.see Judgmentprinciple of; contrasted with
classification, 214'-15'
Speculation (Spekuiation), 470, 482,
see also Speculative
Speculative (spekulativ), contrasted
with theoretical, 456 hr. n. 51;
philosophy, 454, 474; reason, see
Reason; cognition, 456, 456 br. n.
51; arguments, 451
Speech (Sprache, Sprechen,
Redplnj), arts of,see Art-fine;
expression in, consists in word,
gesture, and tone, 320, cf. 328;
excellence of, 327, 327 n. 63; see
also Languages
Spinoza, Baruch, his account of
purposive unity in organisms,
lxxiii-lxxiv, 391-94, 421, 439-40, cf.
273 br. n. 43; as atheist, 452
Spirit (Geist), as non corporeal
rational being, 210, 467-68, cf. 314,
324, 473, see also Soul,
Intelligence; in an aesthetic sense,
is the animating principle of the
mind, lxvii-lxviii, 313, the ability to
exhibit aesthetic ideas lxvii-lxviii,
313-14 (see also Genius, Ideas),
the talent tu express them in a way
that communicates the mental
attunement, lxvii, 317, cf. 304, JOB,
313,315,316.318,335 br. n. 76,
344, see also Inspiration; of
imitation, 308. see also Imitation;
commercial, 263: warlike, 312
Spontaneity (Spontaneitiit), of the

557

understanding. 186; in the play of
the cognitive powers, see Tastejudgments of, Problem Ill,
Imagination; of intuition, 406, see
also Intuition (intellectual); of a
cause, 411, see also Cause (first)
Springs (Triebjedern), moral, see
Incentives
Standard idea (Normalidee),
aesthetic, 233-35; see also Beauty
(ideal of)
State (Staat), as a system, 465, cf. 375
n. 38; system of all states, 432; see
also Commonwealth, Monarchy,
System
Statesman (Staatsmann), see General
(Feldherr)
Stimuli (Reize, Anreize), 209, 266; see
also Charm
Streit der Fakultiite", see Dispute
Among the University s Schools
Subjective (subjekt;v), and objective
explanation, necessity, principles,
purposiveness, purpose, reality,
validity, etc., see these headings
Sublime-the (das Erhabene) , in
Baumgarten and Meier, lxviii, in
Mendelssohn, lxix n. 58, in Burke,
lxix, 269 br. n. 34, 277-78, 238' , cf.
266; critique of, is the critique of
intellectual feeling, 250', 251';
theory of, is a mere appendix to
our judging of the purposiveness
of nature, Lxxi n. 60, 246. ct. 250';
contrasted with the beautiful, 192,
244-47, 266-78, 249' , see also
Beautiful-the; contrasted with the
agreeable,266,seeaJso Agreeablethe; contrasted with the good,
266-67, see aJso Good-the; in
nature, contrasted with the sublime
in art, lxviii, 245, 252-53; in art, as
combined with beauty, 325; in
nature, as Kant's focus, lxviii, 245;
nature's style in it is simplicity, 275.
cf. 335, see aLro Simplicity; is what.
by its resistance to the interest of
the senses, we like directly, 267; is

558

INDEX

Sublime (continued)
an object (of nature) the
presentation of which determines
the mind to think of nature's
inability to attain to an exhibition
of ideas, 268, see also Presentation,
Exhibition, Ideas (rational); is what
even to be able to think proves that
the mind has a power surpassing
any standard of sense, 250, see also
Reason; is that in comparison with
which everything else is smail, 250;
involves vast (absolute) magnitude
(infinity, unboundedness,
formlessness), lxviii, 192,244-55,
274,279,292, cr. 380, 249', see also
Magnitude, Infinite-the; the
mathematically sublime, lxix-lxx,
247, 248-60, 268; the dynamically
sublime, Lllix.-lxx, 247,260-66,268,
see also Might; pure and mixed
judgments about, 252-53, 270, cf.
279; judgments about it involve no
determinate concept, 258, 269,
250', cf. 194,270, and are not
cognitive, 169,244: judgments
about it are (in logical quantity)
singular judgments. 244, cf. 215;
judgments about, their four
moments, 247, cf. 244, 248-50,
257-60,264-66, see also Moments:
judgments about it are aesthetic
and reflective, lxviii, lxix, 244. 247,
258,266,269, 279,250',cf. 169,
192,270 (see also Aesthetic
[asthetisch I. Reflection), and
disinterested, lxix, 244,247,249,
253, cr. 267,270-71, see also
Interest; involves a subjective
(relative subjective, 249', cf. 266,
250') purposiveness and (as
awareness of this purposiveness) a
(liking or) feeling of pleasure (of
reasoning contemplation, 292),
lxix, lxx, 244, 247-49, 252, 253,
257-60,267-69,271.279,292,250',
cf. 265 (see also Pleasure), which
are based on the free play of (and
conflict between) two cognitive

powers (imagination and reason),
258,266,269, cf. 280. and are
indirect and negative, lxix, 245,
269,271, viz., insofar as they
involve also a subjective
contrapurposiveness
(unpurposiveness) and a (dislike or)
feeling of displeasure, lxix-lxx, 245,
252,257-60,266-67,cf.265,see
also Contrapurposiveness,
Displeasure; judgments about
(along with the purposiveness and
pleasure they involve), their
universal (subjective) validity (as
their aesthetic quantity. 215) and
necessity, xxviii, lxix, 244, 247, 249,
253, 2M-b7, 21!O, 292, cf. 275,278,
250'; judgments about. their
deduction is provided by their
exposition lxxi, 279-80, see also
Deduction, Exposition; what,
properly speaking, is and is not
sublime, lxx-lxxi, 192, 244, 245-47,
250,255-56,262,264,267.271-76,
280, 292,cf. 249,261, 263,268,380,
249' -50'; what. properly speaking,
is (can be) sublime is the mind,lxx,
245, 256, 264, its attunement (state,
feeling, way of thinking [see also
Way of thinking!), lxx, 246, 256,
264, 273, 280, the use we make of
nature's intuitions, 246, the mind's
vocation. 262 (.tee also Vocation),
mtional ideas, 250, cf. 245 (see also
Ideas), acts done from duty, 267
(see also Dutyj, humility, 264, cf.
273, certain affects, 272-76 (see
also Affects). the state of being
without affects, 272, isolation from
society. 275, war. 263 (see also
War), religion, 263, cf. 274 (see also
Religion), God, 263 (see also God),
and this sublimity is then (by a
subreption) attributed by us to
those natural objects which make
us aware of it, lxx, 247, 264, 280;
involves emotion (mental
agitation), 226,245,247,251,252,
258, cf. 265, 269, 316 n. IS, see also

INDEX

Sublime (continued)
Emotion; involves an intellectual
feeling, 192,250',251', d. 250, 292,
335 br. n. 76, see also Feeling,
Intellectual: intellectual sublimity,
271; feeling of, is respect for our
own vocation, 257, 291, ct. 245,
262,265,268,271, see also
Vocation; its link to morality and
moral feeling, lxx, lxxi, 255-59,
261-69, 271, 274,280,291,cf. 192,
246-47,250,254.316, see also
Morality, Moral; leads to the idea
of a supersensible substrate of
nature and of ourselves, 255, see
also Supersensible- the; mental
attunement to it requires
receptivity to ideas, 265, and
culture, 265-66, and is
incompatible with charms, 245, d.
271 (see also Charm), and with
fear, 261, d. 263, see also
Fear
Subreption (Subreption), 257 incl. br.
n. 22, 222', d. 337 br. n. 2, 243'
Subsistence (Subsistenz), 393
Substance (Substanz), as support of
accidents, 352, see also Accident
(Akzidenz); concept of, is
ontological, 421; category of, xxxvi,
181, see also Categories; principles
concerning, xxxi, xxxiii, xxxvi;
multitude of substances, 421, 439,
d. 448 n. 39; simple, the world
whole as, in Spinoza, see Spinoza;
simple intelligent, as cause of the
world, 421, see also Cause
(intelligent, of the world)
Substrate (Substrat), sensible, 246';
or basis, supersensible (intelligible),
see Supersensible-the
Subsumption (Subsumption), as the
role of the determinative power of
judgment, 179, 183, cf. xxxvi,lv,
lvi, 292, see also Judgment-power
of (determinative); of the
imagination as such under the
understanding as such, lxi, 1f!,7, cf.
233', see also Pleasure-in

559

judgments of taste; erroneous, in
judgments of taste, see Tastejudgments of (erroneous)
Sufficient reason-principle of (Satz
des zureichenden Grundes), xlviii,
lxxiii, cf. 388
Summum bonum, see Good-the
(highe!lt)
Supersensible (iibersinnlich), means
the same as intelligible and
noumenal, see Supersensible-the;
principle, 173,363,381,429, cf.
412, see also Supersensible-the;
form, see Reason (practical);
causality (ability) in us, see
Freedom of the will; vocation, see
Vocation; intuition, see Intuition
(intellectual); understanding, see
Understanding (intuitive and some
other); original being, see Cause
(intelligent, of the world)
Supersensible- the
(das Obersinnliche), is the same as
the intelligible, the noumenal, the
thing in itself (things in
themselves), xxxiii, see also
Noumenon, Thing in itself; logical
possibility of, xlii, 409, 463-64, 466,
467,244'-45'; as needed to solve
the antinomy of taste (see
Antinomy lof aesthetic reflective
judgment]), of teleological
judgment (see Antinomy of
teleological judgment), and as
invoked in general by Kant to solve
his antinomies, xci, cviii-cix,
344-45, see also Antinomy;
cannot be cognized theoretically
(is beyond our insight; we know
only its appearance), xxxvii-xxxviii,
169,175,396,410,414,418,422,
218',ci.195,339,346,409,422,
466, see also Cognition
(theoretical), Insight, Appearances;
the concept of it is a rational idea,
339,J40,and(hence)cannotbe
exhibited, 343 (see also Ideas,
Exhibition), but serves
(regulatively) to unite our

560

INDEX

Supersensible (continued)
experiences, xxxviii, cf. 175; three
concepts (ideas) of, xxvii, Ixiii-Ixv.
xcvi n. 101, xcvii, cii. 346, cf. 176,
196,474; which of these three
concepts is needed for the analysis
of beauty, lxii-lxvi, see also Beauty,
Antinomy (of aesthetic reflective
judgment), Taste-judgments of,
Deduction (of judgments of taste);
as basis (substrate) of nature
(objects and subjects as
appearances), xxvi, lxiii-lxv, xcvi
n. 101, cii, 169, 175.176,195 n. 39,
196,254-55,268,339-41,343-46,
348 br. n. 24,353,388,410.412,
414,418,422,429,448 n. 39, ct.
lxxxiv, 391, 483; as basis of nature,
the concept of it is indeterminate,
xxvi, lxiv, lxv, lxxxv, c-ci, 196,268,
339-40,346,412,422,466, cf. xlvi,
343,344.409,410,414,448 n. 39,
see also Determination; as basis of
subjects (the supersensible within
us), xcvi n. 101,175,195,196,222,
255,275,340,341,343,344,353,
409,429,474, cf. 173. see also
Noumenon (man as), Thing in itself
(man as); as contained practically
in (required by and determined by)
the moral law (practical reason, the
concept of freedom), xxvi-xxvii,
xlvi-xlvii, lxiii-lxvi, lxxxv, xcvii, ci,
176, 195 n. 39, 196,346,474, cf.
273,353,459, 246', see also Moral
(law), Reason (practical), Freedom
of the will; as basis of nature's
(subjective, objective)
purposiveness, xxiv, xxvi, xxvii,
lxii-lxvi, lxxxviii, xcvii-xcviii, 340,
346,407-10,412,429,218', cf. 268,
353, 388, 240', 247', see also
Purposiveness- nature's subjective,
Purposiveness- nature's objective
and material, Deduction (of
judgments of taste), Antinomy (of
aesthetic reflective judgment),
Antinomy of teleological

judgment; as the principle
(possibly) uniting mechanism and
teleology, 412. 218', cf. 388, 395,
396; as basis of nature's (subjective,
objective) purposiveness, reason's
concept of it (as an intellectual
intuition), xcv-xcviii. ci, cf. 255.
407.409,412,429 (see also
Intuition Iintellectual)), and our
understanding's concept of it (as
an intelligent cause), lxxxv,
xcviii-cii, 407-10, cf. 402.413,416,
429,478, 247', see also Cause
(intelligent, of the world); as basis
of nature's (subjective, objective)
purposiveness. the concept of it is
equivalent to the concept of
nature's (subjective, objective)
purposiveness. see
Purposiveness-nature's subjective,
Purposiveness- nature's objective
and material, Deduction (of judgments of taste); as that by reference to which we are to make (as
the ultimate purpose given us by
our intelligible nature) all our cognitive powers harmonize, 344, cf.
168. 206, 257. see also Cognitive
power, Cognition, Vocation.
Ultimate purpose, Practical; as the
point where all our a priori powers
are reconciled, 341, cf. 255, 344,
353; as the basis of nature's (subjective, objective) purposiveness,
its concept makes the concept of
the supersensible determinable and
thus mediates between the other
two concepts of the supersensible
(and thereby unites the "three"
supersensibles and unites the three
Critiques in a system), xxvii,
lxiv-lxvi, lxxxv,lxxxviii, XCVIi-xcviii,
ci-cii, cix, 196, cf. 176.353.437,
464-65,478. see also Critique of
Judgment, Problem II, System,
Transition
Superstition (Aberglaube.
Superstition), is the greatest

INDEX

Superstition (continued)
prejudice of all, 294, cf. 177 n. 18,
230' n. 50; contrasted with religion,
264. cf. 457 br. n. 54, see also
Religion; and see Idolatry
Supplementary presentations

(Nebenvorstellungen), see
Attributes (aesthetic), Presentation
Supreme being (hOchstes Wesen),
why the expression is not capitalized, 273 br. n. 43; see also God
Surveying, see Land surveying-art of
Syllogistic inference (VemunftschlujJ),
463-65, as the relation between
God, freedom, and immortality of
the soul, 473 br. n. 93
Symbol tSymbol), is a presentation
by analogy, 351 br. n. 31, 352-53,
see also Presentation, Analogy;
contains an indirect exhibition,
352, see also Exhibition; contrasted
with schema, 352, cf. 351, see also
Schema, Exhibition; of morality,
beauty as, see Beauty; symbolic
cognition of God, see God
Symmetry (Symmetrie), 242
Sympathy (Sympathie,
Teilnehmungs-. Mit/eid), 208, 262,
276, 355, cf. 273
Synthetic (synthetisch), contrasted
with analytic, xxxii, cf. xl, 203' n.
13, see also Synthetic a priori;
predicates, 397, 463; judgments are
objective. 401; rules, 364;
cognition, xl; unity of the manifold
of intuItion, 288, see also
Imagination, Intuition; division,
contrasted with analytic, 197 n. 43;
method, 283
Synthetic a priori (synthetisch a
priori), judgments, propositions,
principles, xxx n. 6, xxxvi, xxxviii,
cvi, how they are possible,
xxxii-xxxiii, 288-89, see also
Metaphysics, Categories; judgments
of taste as, see Taste-judgments
of
System (System), principle of the

561

possibility of, is reason's, 221', see
also Reason; logical, its form,
214'-16'; Kant's appeal to
systematicity as a justification
procedure,lxxxvi-lxXltviii; of the
three Critiques, see Critique of
Judgment; of pure philosophy, see
Philosophy: philosophical, see
Empiricism, Rationalism, Idealism,
Realism, etc.; of all the sciences.
see Science; of cognitions, every
science as, see Science; of
experience (empirical cognitions),
see Experience; of nature, in tenns
of transcendental laws, in terms of
empirical laws, in terms of final
causes (purposes), in terms of the
final purpose, see Nature (system
of); an individual thing as, see
Organized (beings); of the mental
powers in general, see Power
(mental); of the cognitive powers
(see Cognitive power), of the
"worlds" with which they deal,
lxxxvii-lxxxviii, and of these
"worlds" as supersensible, lxxxviii,
ciii, see also Supersensible-the (as
basis of nature's purposiveness); of
good maxims, 274, see also
Maxim; decadic and tetradic, 254,
see also Numbers; a state as, 465,
cf. 375 n. 38; of all states, 432; of
planets, 256; Milky Way systems,
256; see also Whole, Unity,
Lawfulness, Coherence, Transition
Talent (Talent), 307, cf. 304, for
science and for fine art, 309, see
also Genius, Spirit; in art must be
academically trained, 310, see also
Academic, School
..ask (Ueschiift), contrasted with play,
268,321.329, see also Occupation
Taste (Geschmack), of sense, as
distinguished from taste of
reflection (taste for the beautiful),

212,214,238, cf. 208, 210, 285, 345,
see also Aesthetic (iisthetisch)

562

INDEX

Taste (continued)
Gudgments of sense); as ability to
judge the agreeable in general, 213,
see also Agreeable-the; of
reflection, why called 'taste,' 285;
according to other philosophers,
see Beauty, Taste-judgments of;
critique of, see Critique; antinomy
of, see Antinomy (of aesthetic
reflective judgment); theory of,
249'; is concealed from us even as
to its sources, 341, see also Source;
is an ability to judge rather than
produce, 313, see also Art-fine;
power of, is the aesthetic
(subjective but reflective) power of
judgment, 170, cf. 194,285,250',
see also Aesthetic (iisthetisch)
(reflective power of judgment); is
the ability to judge the beautiful,

203 n. 1,311,341,249'-51' (see
also Taste-judgments of,
Beautiful-the), to judge it (with
universal validity I by means of a
pleasure of reflection (judge it
without a determinate concept),
190, cf. 193, 194,204,210 br. n. 20,
283,292 (see also Pleasure-in
judgments of taste), a pleasure
devoid of interest, 211, cf. 210, see
also Interest; presupposes and
sustains the mind in restful
contemplation, 247; subsumes the
imagination as such under the
understanding as such, 287, d.
233', see also Pleasure-in
judgments of taste; whether it is
an original and natural ability, or
only the idea of an ability yet to
be acquired, 240; is the ability to
judge a priori the communicability
of the feelings that (without
mediation by a concept), are
connected with a given
presentation, 296, cf. 295, see also
Presentation; is a common sense
(sensus communis), Ix. lxii, 293-%,
cf. 237-40, 356. see also Sense

(common); cannot have an
objective rule (objective principle),
231,285,341, see also Tastejudgments of (are not provable by
rules); its subjective but a priori
principle, 191,286, cf. 354, is the
principle of the power of judgment
as such. 286. see also Judgmentprinciple of. Judgment-power of
(as such); in its purity (as a priori),
298, has autonomy, 282, 350, cf.
281, see also Autonomy; if used
correctly, is entitled to claim
universal validity for its judgments,
293, see also Taste-judgments of;
its standard, lx-lxi, cf. 356; the
claim that everyone has his own,
212-13, see also Antinomy (of
aesthetic reflective judgment);
disputing and quarreling about,
338; censure of. 278; we demand
it as something that people ought
to have. 213, 265-66,cf. 284.353,
see also Ought; cultivation of, see
Culture; propaedeutic for, 356;
cannot be acquired by imitating
someone else's, 232, cf. 282, see
also Imitation; needs examples
(models), 283, cf. 232, 232 n. 49,
see also Art-fine; archetype of,
232; its relation to genius, see
Genius; its role in judging and
producing fine art. see Art-fine;
as united with reason, 230-31; is
less noble than respect, 335. see
also Respect; has in view some·
thing intelligible, viz., the morally
good, 353, see also Beauty, Moral
(good); is an ability to judge the
way in which moral ideas are made
sensible, 356; permits a transition
from sense enjoyment to moral
feeling, 297, cf. 354. see also
Transition, Enjoyment, Moral
(feeling), Judgment-power of (as
mediating the transition between
understanding and reason); its
empirical origin. 237'; its

INDEX

Taste (continued)
empirical standard (criterion),
Iii-liii, 231-32, cf. 283; is barbaric
if it requires charms and emotions,
let alone makes them its standard,
223, see a/so Charm, Emotion;
interest in, 205 n. 10,298, see a/so
Interest; contributes to culture,
319, see also Culture; moral, 210
incl. hr. n. 20; its refinement to the
point of its idealization causes evils,
433, ct. 298; virtuosi of, 298; as
a luxury, 237' , see also Luxury; is
not needed for liking the regularity
in geometric objects, 241
Taste-judgments of
(Geschmacksurteile), are
judgments about the beautiful,
xxiii, liv, 203, 280. 324, 380 n. 43,
237', see also Beautiful-the,
Beauty. Taste; paradigm of, liv,
215, see also Flowers; about larger
parts of nature.lviii-lix, 184, 187,
cf. 233, see also Pleasure (in
discovering unity in nature); the
problem as to how they are
possible. 288, see also Deduction
(of judgments of taste); the
problem of a (seeming) conflict in
them, xxiii-xxiv, xlvii, lxii, 281-85,
see also Antinomy (of aesthetic
reflective judgment); require a
critique, 191, see also Critique; are
synthetic, xwii, lix, 288, see also
Synthetic; are synthetic (and
partly) a priori, lix, 288-89, see also
Synthetic a priori; pure and
partial, 205,223-26,230,296,301,
d. 261, 270, see also Pure; pure
and applied (logically conditioned),
lxvi, 229-32, 242, 270, 290 n. 15,
312; proper, must be pure, 223;
erroneous, lxi, 216,231,237,239,
290-93, cf. lxii, 211,214,235-36,
264, 294; their four moments, liv,
203-40, how discovered, 203 n. 3,
see also Moments; as conceptual,
cognitive, and hence not

563

distinguished from judgments
about the good, in Baumgarten and
Meier, Hi, 227-28, 346, ct. 284-85,
338; use no (determinate) concept
(are not logical), Hi, liv-lvi, lxi,
lxxxviii, em, 190-92,203,207,209,
211,215.217,228,231,239,244,

267,279-83,285-88.290,295-96,
311,338-41,344,347,366,223' ,
233',239', 244' ,250' , cf. 194.213,
219,266,300,306,309,320,350-51,
354.229' .243',249' , see also
Pleasure-in judgments of taste;
are not provable by rules
(principles, reasons), Ii, 215-16,
231,281,286,338,340,341,355,
cf. lxv. 191, 283-85, 300, 304-05,
229', see also Proof, Taste; one
cannot be compelled to make a
certain one, 215-16, 281, 285-86,
cf. 210; are not cognitive, Ii, lix,
lxv. 169, 191,203,209,221,228,
237,279-82,288,290,339-40,347,
cf. 194,354; ate not (in a strict
sense) determinative, lvi, 244, ct.

192,231.284, see also
Determinative; contrasted with
judgments about the good, lx,

209-10.214,221,226-30,241, ct.
lxv, 211-12,222,270,311.340,
346-51, see also Beautiful-the
(contrasted with the agreeable and
the good), Beauty (contrasted with
perfection), Good-the; are not
teleological, 346, see also
Teleological judgments; their
relation to morality, xxiv, 300-01,
see also Beauty. Pleasure-in
judgments of taste; have (as
judgments) reference to the
understanding, liv. 203 n. 1, 228
(see also Judgments), but are based
on the power of judgment alone,
cii, 193-94,349,353, cf. 287,288,
320. 241' , 243' , see auo Judgmentpower of (as sucb); are based on
the free (spontaneous. barmonious)
play of the cognitive powers

564

INDEX

Taste-judgments of (continued)
(imagination and understanding),
Ivii,lx n. 48, lxiv, ciii, 197,217-18,
222,228,238,240-43,256,268,
286-87,289,290,295-96,306,319,
354,359,366,224', cf. 230, 270-71,
277,279,292,305,316-17,321,
326-27.329,344,347.380.380 n.
43,221' ,223', 232', see also
Pleasure-in judgments of taste,
Judgment-power of (as such),
Cognitive power; are reflective
(contemplative), liv, lv, lix, lxii, cii,
209, 244, 258, 286. 288, 294, 238',
239', 241', 250', cf. 267,243',
248'-49', see also Reflection,
Contemplation, Judgments
(reflective), Judgment-power of
(reflective), Pleasure-in judgments
of taste; judge only form, 225, 279,
280, 300, 311, 324-26, 329, see also
Pleasure-in judgments of taste,
Beauty; are singular (in logical
quantity, see also Quantity), liv,lix,
lxii, 191,215,244,281,285,289,
339-41; contrasted with logical
judgments based on aesthetic ones,
215,285; are aesthetic (and
subjective), Ii, liii, lv, lix, lxi-lxii,
203-11,221,228,231,237,267.279,
282, 284, 288, 291, 338, 347, 238',
244',250',cf.271,285,290,337,
346.233'; are partly empirical, !ix.
lxii, 191,289,232', ct. 233'.243',
249', and are (to that extent)
intrinSically contingent, 191; are
made with a mere intuition (in
mere apprehension), !iv, lvii, 192,
279,339,340,353-54, 223', 232',
cf. 206, 209 br. n. 19, 228, 230, 244,
282, 285, 290, 359, 249', see also
Intuition, Apprehension; involve
(exhibition of) some concept or
other. but it is indeterminate which
concept this is (it is a concept as
such), 207, 244, 256, 220'-21', 223',
cf. 230',232', see also Exhibition;
involve (the indeterminate concept
of) nature's subjective

purposiveness, lvi, lxxvii, lxxxvii,
191,221,249.279-81.289-90,292.
340, 345, 350, 359, 366, 229', 230',
244' , 249', 250' • see also
Purposiveness- nature's subjective;
are based on (determined by) a
(disinterested) liking (feeling of
pleasure). xxiv, xlvii. 191, 194.203.
231,238,239.280-81,285-88.300,

301,306,311,339,344, see also
Pleasure-in judgments of taste;
"determine" an object with regard
to liking (pleasure) (and the
predicate of beauty), lv-lvi, 219.
281. cf. 221, 222', 223', 223' br. n.
33,224'-26',229', see also
Determination, Beauty; as not
distinguished from judgments
about the agreeable, by the
empiricists.liii, 346, ct. 277-78,
281,338,238'-39',241'; contrasted
with judgments about the
agreeable,Ux-lx, 209-10, 214,221,
244, ct. 222, 238, 278,339, see also
Beautiful-the (contrasted with the
agreeable and the good),
Agreeable-the; are not based on
a mere sensation, lxi, 226, 244, 267,
270, 286,288,290,306,325-26.see
also Aesthetic (iisthetisch)
(judgments of sense), Sensation;
are independent of charm and
emotion. 212. 222-26. 236, 244. 245
br.n.4 ,278,293 ,294,cf. 299, see
also Charm, Emotion, Taste;
interest connected with, 296-303.
see also Beautiful-the, Interest;
are partly a priori (rest on a priori
bases) and necessary, xlvii, Ii.liii,
191,221-22,236-40.278-82.
286-89,296.339,351,239',241',
244'. cf. 218,350,225',232'-33',
243', though this necessity is not
apodeictic but is exemplary, Ii v-Iv,
236-37, and subjective, 237.239,
287,245', see also Necessity, Artfine, Genius; claim universal
subjective (aesthetic. general.
exemplary) validity (require the

INDEX

Taste-judgments of (continued)
same liking of everyone, demand
universal agreement, assent,
approval), xv, xxiv, xlvii, lii-lv,1ix,
lxii, 191,211-16,237-40,244,264,
266-67,278-81,286-90,290 n. 15,
293, 294, 296,339,353-54, 225' ,
229',241',244', d. 229,295,350,
239' ,243', see also Pleasure- in
judgments of taste; the universality
(universal validity) they claim is
their aesthetic quantity, liv, 215, see
also Quantity; claim to speak with
a universal voice, lv, 216; their
underlying subjective condition is
the universal communicability of
the mental state in the given
presentation, 217. see also
Communicability- universal,
Presentation, Pleasure-in
judgments of taste; presuppose a
common sense (sensus communis),
viz., taste, see Sense (common),
Taste; justification of their claim
to universal (subjective) validity,
xxviii,li,lxv, 190, 191,211,238-40,
278-336,340,341,244', ct. xvi, see
also Deduction (of judgments of
taste); their justification involves
claims about the supersensible,
Ixxxvi,lxxxvii, 340-41, see also
Deduction (of judgments of taste),
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness)
Tautologous (tautologisch),
explanation, 410, see also
Explanation; the principle of
judgment is not, 211' n. 21
Teachability (Gelehrigkeit), contrasted
with genius, 308-09
Technical (technisch), means artistic
(as it were), 217',251', see also
Technic of nature. Art; as meaning
teleological, 389, see also Technic
of nature, Teleological; contrasted
with practical, 199', 243', cf. 229' ,
251', see also Practical; contrasted
with architectonical, 381, see also
Architectonic; contrasted with

565

schematic, 213'-14',248', see also
Schema; nature is regarded as, 270
(see also Technic of nature), i.e.,
as purposive in its products, 249',
by analogy with our technical
(artistic) use of reason, 383, 251',
cf. 246, 360, see also
Purposiveness, Art; purposiveness
in nature, 382, see also
Purposiveness; technically
practical, see Practical
Technic of nature (Technik
[Technizismus/ der Natur) , is
nature's power to produce
(causality in producing) things in
terms of the rule of purposes
(purposeJike things), 390, 391, 219',
cf. 393, see also Causality (in terms
of purposes), Purpose; concerns
the possibility of natural things as
natural purposes, 248', see also
Natural (purposes); according to
other philosophers ("systems"),
391-95; contrasted with the
nomothetic of nature in terIIlS of
transcendental laws of the
understanding, 215' , see also
Nomothetic (of nature), Legislation; contrasted with mechanism,
246.393,404,413-14,219' ,
see also Mechanism; seems to stem
from crude matter and its forces
governed by mecbanicallaws, 419,
see also Matter (Materie].
Mechanical; in organized products
(organic technic, 234') is quite
beyond our grasp (i.e., insight),
419, cf. 395, 477, see also
Organized (beings), Insight;
concept of, is a heuristic principle
for ludging nature, lOS, cf. 411,
203 n. 13 (see also Teleological
principle), one that the power of
judgment makes a priori a
principle for its reflection. 214',
cf. 215', see alro Judgment-power
of (reflective); idea of, is based on
the technic of the power of
judgment, 219'-21 ,cf. 201',243',

566

INDEX

Technic of nature (continued)
248'; concept of, compared to a
category, 203' n. 13, see also
Categories; involves combining
mechanism with the teleological
principle, 410, see also
Mechanism, Teleological principle;
involves attributing (reflectively) to
nature our concept of a purpose,
193, d. 233, 234, 302, 228', see also
Teleological judgments, Purpose,
Natural (purposes); contrasted with
technic of (human) art, 229',251'
(see also Technical [contrasted
with practical, and technically
practical]), with the latter
contrasted in tum with theory, 303;
concept of, is the concept of
nature as art, 204', 217', see also
Art; involves judging nature by
analogy with art, 246, cf. 301, 303,
311, 359-60, 383, 392, 200', 215',
251'; allows us to present nature
(or an organism in it) as a system
(in terms of empirical laws), 246,
217', cf. 204', see also Organized
(beings), Judgment-principle of,
System, Presentation; intentional
and unintentional (the latter being
mechanism), lxxx, 390-91, cf. 393,
413,234', see also Intention; as
pertaining (in a broad sense of the
expression) to both aesthetics and
teleology, 249', cf. 233'-34';
formal and real, 221', 232' , d. 246,
233'-34',249'; as a power of nature
to produce things having a
purposiveness for our mere
apprehension, 411, cf. 301, see also
Purposiveness-nature's SUbjective;
as revealed to us by independent
natural beauty, 246, cf. 301,411,
see also Beauty
Teleological (teieologisch), order in
nature, 377, 379, 448, see also
Purposiveness-nature's objective
and material; connection of causes
and effects, 409-10, see also
Causes (fina!), Causality (in terms

of purposes); concepts, 417; laws,
409; principle, see Teleological
principle; system, nature as, see
Nature (system of, in terms of
purposes); bases (for explanation
or inference), 360, 399,422;
explanation, 409, 411, 414, cf. 382,
but see Teleological judgments;
inference,436; proof, see God
(teleological proof for the existence
of); cognition of nature, 378, see
also Teleological judgments;
judgments, see Teleological
of judgment,
judgments;
193-94,250 -51', is not a special
power (but is the reflective power
of judgment as such), lxxviii, 194,
243'-44', cf. 170,375,429, see also
Teleological judgments,
Judgment-power of; power of
judgment, its antinomy, see
Antinomy of teleological
judgment; question, as to why our
nature was given a propensity to
desires of whose futility we are
aware, 177 n. 18, d. 230' n. 50
Teleological judgments (tele%gische
Urteile), are judgments about
nature in terms of purposes, lxxi,
193,311,346,349,364,376,379,
234',235',239',240',243', cf. 270,
372,435,221',232'-33', see also
Purpose, Natural (purposes).
Teleology, Teleological principle:
are judgments about nature's
objective and material (real)
purposiveness, lvii, lxxvii, cii, 279,
311,221', 228', 239'-40',249', 25(Y.
cf. 232',233', see also
Purposiveness-nature's objective
and material; are used to judge
organisms (natural purposes) as
well as nature as a whole,
lxxi-Ixxii. lxxvii-lxxxi, see
Organized (beings), Natural
(purposes), Nature (system of. in
terms of purposes); presuppose
(but do not use) judgment's own
indeterminate concept of nature's

power

INDEX

Teleological judgments (continued)
subjective purposiveness, lxxviii,
cii, cf. lvii, 231, 380 n. 43, 241' ,
243' , see also Judgment- power
of, Purposiveness- nature's
objective and material; use reason's
determinate concept of a purpose,
lvii-lviii, lxxvii-lxxviii, cii, 417, 221',
233', 234' ,239' , 244', cf. 193, 194,
230,233,360-61,370,386,396-401,

409.415,440,201',235' (see also
Natural [purposesJ), but use it (not
constitutively but) regulatively (i.e.,
they are maxims), lxxix, 361. 417,
251', cf. 375,376,379,396, 203' n.
13, 234' , 239'-40', see also
Teleological principle, Natural
(purposes); are made by
understanding and reason
combined, lxxix, 193-94, 233', d.
cii-ciii, 252, 372, 243',250'-51';
compare what a thing is with what
it is meant to be, 240'; as neither
theoretical nor practical, 200' , cf.
243'; involve no pleasure, 228', but
cf. 366, see also Pleasure; are
cognitive, lxxviii-lxxix, lxxxii-lxxxiv,
378,383,221',239', cf. 169, 192,
373,442,456, see also Cognition;
are (logically) reflective rather than
determinative (constitutive), Ixxviilxxix, cii, 194,360-61,396,441,
221',234'-36',239',241',243',
244', 250',cf. 170,375,379,383,
387,389,395,405,412,413,416,
200' -201' • see also Teleological
principle, Judgments (reflective);
determinative, what they would be
like, lxxix-lxxx, 361, 389, 235'-37',
cf. 379, 383, 234'; are partly a
priori, universal, necessary, 376,
417,239',241', cf. 240', see also
Teleological principle; are partly
empirical, 436, 445, 476, 234' ,239',
cf. 218' ,232' ,235', see also
Teleological principle; explain
subjectively but not objectively,
lxxv, lxxix, 360,
169,371,383,

cr.

395,409,413,437,235', see also

567

Teleological, Explanation,
Organized (beings), Mechanism;
give us no insight into how
organized beings are produced,
lxxix, 411, 417, 418, cf. 384, 437,
see also Insight, Organized
(beings); their justification, xlvii,
involves claims about the
supersensible, lxxxvi, lxxxvii, see
also Supersensible-the (as basis
of nature's purposiveness); seeming
contradiction in, xxv, see
Antinomy of teleological
judgment;
Teleological principle (teleoiogisches

Prinzip, teleologischer Grundsatz),
is a principle inherent in natural
science, 381-84, cf. 379,437, see
also Teleology, Natural (science);
no one has ever doubted its
correctness, 389; is the principle
of (final causes or) purposes (in
nature), 379, 388, 411, 413, cf. 387,
see also Purpose, Cause (final),
Causality (in terms of purposes);
we need it to judge nature (its
organized products) in terms of
purposes (final causes), 389-90,
408,417,429,cf.193,291,349,36O,
386-87,409,411,414,422,437 (see
also Teleological Judgments,
Organized {beingsj, Natural
[purposesl), Le., in tenos of a cause
(thought of as) acting intentionally,
379,398,400,405-06,413-14,422,
cf. 360,390,399,411,415,437,441,
454,465, see also Teleology,
Intention; is the principle for
judging (objective and material)
intrinsic purposiveness in organized
beings, 376, 397,cf. 360,382,see
also Purposiveness-nature's
objective and material; is the
principle that nothing in an
organized product of nature is
gratuitous, 376, cf. 379,437-38,
454. but that everything in it is a
purpose and reciprocally also a
means, 376, cf. 420, see also

568

INDEX

Teleological principle (continued)
Organized (beings), Natural
(purposes); involves the principle
that nothing in an organized beillg
is to be taken up into its generative
power that does not already belong
to one of the being's original
pTedispositions, 420, see aim
Generation, Procreation,
Evolution; its relation (the relation
of the causality in terms of
purposes) to mechanism, see
Mechanism; implies contingency,
civ, 414, see also Purpose,
Purposiveness, Purposivenessnature's objective and material.
Particular in nature; must be
prompted by experience, 376, cf.
381.386, 4051.see also Teleological
judgments), but claims universality
and necessity, 376. and rests on an
a priori principle, 376, see also
Judgment-principle of,
Teleological judgments; is not a
principle for deriving products from
their causes, 361, 412, cf. 381, see
also Derivation. Explanation; is
(not constitutive but) regulative (a
maxim of the reflective power of
judgment), 361, 376, 379. 398, 399,
408,413,cL360,39O,405,411,437,
see also Teleological judgments,
Regulative, Maxim; is used
heuristically, lxxxi, 389-90,411, cf.
205,383,398,399,203' n. 13,see
also Judgment-principle of; as
used to judge the whole of nature
as a system in terms of purposes,
see Nature (system of. in terms of
purposes)
Teleological Principws ... , see On
Using Teleological Principles . ..

Teleology (Tele%gie), in Aristotle
and after the Renaissance,
Ixxi-Ixxii; in Leibniz and Wolff.
Ixxii-Ixxiii. cf. 395,440-42; in
Spinoza, see Spinoza; in Locke
and Hume,lxxiv-Ixxv, cf. 438.

240'-41': is the logic of the
reflective power of judgment. 249' ,
cf. 192. see also Purposiveness
(nature's teleological), Judgmentpower of (reflective); its relation
to theology, xlvii,lxxii-lxxiv, Ixxxiii
n. 85. lxxxv, ci, 169,381-84,399,
416-17,436-42.444-45,447,448,
455-56, 470, 479,480,485, see a/so
God, Theology; physical (or
physico-, i.e., teleology of nature),
378, 437. 438, 441, 442, 444-45, 447,
448,453-54,456,462,470,47~80,

485, what it does splendidly,
437-38; physical, misunderstood,
is what physicotheology is, 437, cf.
381; physical, contrasted with
rnoral,447-48,462,cf.473-74,
480-81; physical, leads to the
(mere) thought of a final purpose,
lxxxv, 436-37, see also Final
purpose; physical, as borrowing
from moral, 444; moral.lxxxiv. 444,
447-48,460-62,480-85; physical
(i.e., teleology of nature), consists
in using a special a priori principle,
417 (see also Teleological
principle), so as to judge nature's
(organized) products (natural
purposes), 376, viz., as to their
possibility, 395, cf. 193,291,301,
437, see also Organized (beings),
Natural (purposes); physical,
involves judging nature (its
organized products) by analogy
with our causality in terms of
purposes (final causes), 360, cf.
414, see also Teleological
principle, Causality (in terms of
purposes), Teleological judgments,
Technic of nature; physical,
belongs (only) to physics, 382, el.
360,381,383,395.416-17,437~ee

also Physics), but does not

constitute a special part of it (Le.,
of natural science), 383, d. 41~ 17,
see also Natural (science);
physical, belongs to the description

INDEX

Teleology (continued)
of nature, 417; physical, as a
science, belongs to no doctrine but
only to critique, 417, see also
Critique
Telescope (Te/eskop), 250
Territory (Boden), of concepts, see
Concepts
Testimony (Zeugnis), 468, 469
That May Be Correct . .. , see On the
Saying ...
Theism (Theismus), 392, 395, see also
Theology, God
Theodicy, see Evil (problem of)
Theodicy-Endeavors in, see On the
Failure of All ...
Theological (theologisch), ethics or
physics, 485; derivation, 381; see
also Theology
Theology (The%gle, Gotteslehre) ,
436-85, is cognition of God and his
existence, 484-85, cf. 455, see also
God; its possibility, 482; leads to
religion, 481, and is needed only
for it, 482, see also Religion;
contrasted with theosophy, 459,
460,479; contrasted with
demonology, 444, 459, see also
Demonology; its relation to
teleology, see Teleology;
propaedeutic to, lxxxv, 383, 417,
442,485, see also Teleology (its
relation to theology); physical
(natura!), 436, 461, 485, is a
physical teleology misunderstood,
442, cf. 473,481, see also
Teleology; must not overlap with
natural science, 381, cf. 382,439,
485, see also Natural (science),
Theological; if regarded as a
problem for the sciences of
speCUlative reason, cannot be
established empirically because its
concepts are transcendent, 473, see
also Reason, Transcendent; the
concept (obtained from Iphysical]
teleology) of a supreme cause with
understanding is far from sufficient

569

for it, 479, see also Cause
(intelligent, of the world), God;
requires the concept of a God, i.e.,
the detenninate (concept or) idea
(including all the divine
perfections) of a supreme cause of
the world according to moral laws
(and hence also in terms of the
final purpose), 437, 439, 478-81, d.
485, see also God, Moral (law),
Final purpose; physical and moral,
436, cf. 442, 485, see also God;
moral, 436, 442-85; its relation to
morality, 460, see also Religion.
God, Duty, Moral (law).
Theological; according to
theologians, the ultimate purpose
of creation is the glory of God, 448
n. 39; natural, contains no articles
of faith, 469 n. 81. see also Faith
Theoretical (theoretisch), contrll8ted
with speCUlative, 456 br. n. 51;
cognition (cognition from a
theoretical point of view, in a
theoretical respect, etc.), see
Cognition; philosophy, knowledge,
reason (or use of reason),
legislation, principles, propositions,
judgments, necessity, reality, see
these headings; natural science,
see Natural (science); data of
reason, 468, see also Reason; and
see Theory
Theory (Theorie, Lehre), 172 incl. br.
n. 15; moral, 172, cf. 213, see a/so
Philosophy; of nature, 4J7, see aLw
Philosophy, Natural (science); of
space and time, 237', see also
Space, Time; universal, of the purposiveness of things, 382, see also
Purposiveness, Purposivenessnature's subjective,
Purposiveness- nature's objective
and material, Judgment-principle
of; of taste, 249', see also 'Thste; of
physical purposes, 249'. see also
Teleology; contrasted with technic.

570

INDEX

Theory (continued)
303, see also Technic of nature;
and see Science, Theoretical
Theosophy (Theosophie), 459, 460,
479, see also Theology
Theurgy (Theurgie), 459
Thing in itself (or things in
themselves) (Ding[ e I an sich), is
the same as the supersensible, the
intelligible, the noumenal, xxxiii,
see also Supersensible-the,
Noumenon; contrasted with things
as they appear. xxvi. xcii, 175,189,
344,345,405 br. n. 25, see also
Appearances; objects as, xxxix,
189,346, 40S br. n. 25,408-09. see
also Supersensible-the (as basis
of nature); man as, xxxix, xlvii, cf.
175, see also Will, Man,
Noumenon, Supersensible-the (as
basis of subjects). Intelligence,
Soul, Spirit; nature or the world
as. xxvii, xxxiii, xxxviii-xxxix. dvii,
lxxxiv, lxxxviii, xcii, xcv, c-ci, 268.
409, see also Supersensible-the;
cannot be cognized theoretically,
175, cf. xxxviii, 189; the concept
of freedom allows us to present its
object as, 175, see also Freedom
of the will. Presentation, Cognition
(practical); an archetypal (i.e.,
intuitive, 407) understanding would
present them, 408 br. n. 27, cf. xcii,
405 br. n. 25, see also
Understanding (intuitive).
Presentation; as a completely
determinate form, xcv
Thinking (Denkend, Denkungs-), way
of, see Way of thinking; nature,
see Man, Nature (outside and
within us); see also Thought
Thought (Gedanke, das Denken),
determinate. is a concept, 314,329,
see also Concepts; form of, see
Categories. Logic; empty, is a
thought devoid of any object, 343,
see also Reality; mode of, see Way
of thinking; all, as harmoniously
connected with bodily agitation,

334; play of, see Play;
unspeakable wealth of, 329, see
also Ideas (aesthetic); and see
Thinking
Thoughts on the True Estimation of
Living Forces (Gedanken von der
wahren Schiitzung der lebendigen
Kriifte). 422 br. n. 8,476 br. n. 98
Time (Zeit), xxx. 225,254,258,259,
268, 324, 329.405 br. n. 25,406 hr.
n. 26,483.484,209',237', is
contributed to (and applies to) all
intuition (and experience). xxxiii,
xxxvi, 259, cf. 2:37'. see also
Intuition (forms of); universal
theory of, 237'
Tone(s) (Ton, 1One), nature of, 224,
324-25,329; purity of, 224-25;
agreeableness of, 224, see also
Agreeable-the; in nature, 302; in
art, see Music; in speech, 320, 328,
see also Speech; play of, see Play;
see also Song
Totality (Totalitiit, Allhelt), xxxviii,
227,244, 250,254, 259, 268, 228',
cf.168.232,257,26O,314,377,456,
see also Magnitude (absolute),
Completeness, Unconditioned,
Ideas (rational)
Tragedy (Trauerspiei). 274, 325
Transcendent (traTlSzendent,
uberschwenglich), contrasted with
transcendental, xxxvii, see also
Transcendental; contrasted with
immanent, xxxviii, cvi n. 107,342,
396-97,403,235',237', cf. 401. see
also Immanent; concepts. 342, 396,
403, ct. 167,237', see also Ideas
(rational); ideas as, see Ideas
(rational); judgment, 236';
principle. 413, cf. 403: reason (its
use) as, 401. 235'
Transcendental (transzendental).
contrasted with transcendent.
xxxvii, metaphysical. xxxvii, lvi,
lxxvi, 181-82,288 hr. n. 11,
empirical, 277-78,203',
physiological, 277, moral, 444, see
also these headings,' philosophy,

INDEX

Transcendental (continued)
see Philosophy; aesthetic of
judgment. see Aesthetic
(Asthetik); critique of taste, see
Critique; discussion, 278;
definition, 177 n. 18.230' n. 50;
concepts of the understanding or
of nature (transcendental
predicates), see Categories;
rational concept as, 339, 396, but
see Ideas (rational); attributes, 219;
concept of purposiveness, see
Purposiveness- nature'ssubjective;
principles, xxxvii, 181, 359, see also
Judgment-principle of; laws, see
Laws; deduction. see Deduction;
freedom, 343, see also t'reedom of
the will; perfection, 394, see also
Perfection
Transition (and its mediation)
(Obergang und dessen
Vermlttlung), among the mental
powers in general, see Pleasure (as
mediating the transition between
the cognitive power and the power
of desire); among the higher
mental (cognitive) powers, see
Judgment-power of (as mediating
the transition between
understanding and reason, nature
and freedom, theoretical and
practical philosophy); among the
"three" supersensihles, see
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness); between
enjoyment and moral feeling, see
Enjoyment; between Charm and
moral interest, see Charm;
between the agreeable and the
morally good. see Moral (good);
see also System
Treatise on Perpetual Peace . .. , see
Announcement. .
Trees (Biiume). generation among.
see Generation
Trichotomy (Trichotomie), 197 n. 43,
see also Divisions
True EstimatIOn . ... see
Thoughts ...

571

Truth (Wahrheit), in exhibiting
(rendering) objects in art, 355;
sensible, and sensible illusion,
322; as true proposition, xxx-xxxi,
see also Propositions; sense of,

293
Typus, xlv, Ixxxvi
Uehling, Theodore E., 224 br. n. 40
Ugliness (HiijJlichkeit) , see Art-fine,
Disgust
Ultimate purpose (letzter Zweck), of
nature is the last natural member
in the chain of purposes (leading
to the final purpose), lxxxiii, 426,
cf. 443, see also Final purpose; of
nature is man, lxxxiii, 426-27,429,
477 , cf. 428, though subject to the
condition that he has the
understanding and the will to
pursue the final purpose, Ixxxiii.
431. see also Final purpose;
nature's, within man, 429, is (not
to make him happy [see
Happinessl but) to help him
cultivate his skill and discipline,
lxxxiii-lxxxiv, 431-34, see also Skill;
of creation, according to
theologians, is the glory of God,
448 n. 39; of our existence (of
humanity) is the morally good (our
moral vocation), 298, 301, see also
Moral (good), Vocation: given us
by the intelligible element of our
nature is that we make all our
cognitive powers harmonize by
reference to the supersensible
substrate of all our powers, 344,
see also Cognitive powers (all our
higher, [are toJ harmonize with the
[moral) supersensible), Cognition
(final aim of all), Supersensiblethe (is that by reference to which
we are to make all our cognitive
powers harmonize), Vocation.
Practical
Unbelief (Unglaube), 472
Unconditioned (unbedingt), necessity,
see Necessity; the, is demanded by

572

INDEX

Unconditioned (continued)
reason, 345,401, cf. 443. see abo
Totality; the, is lacking in nature,
268. cf. 345, see also Final
purpose; command of the moral
law, see Moral (law)
Understanding (Verstand), is a (one)
power of concepts, lxxi, 190.228,
244.266.279,287,292,321,343,
345.365.366,401.406.202'.220' ,
226' n. 43. see also Reason; isone
of the specific cognitive powers,
167,168,176-77,198,201',207',
223' , 245'-46', cf. 406, see also
Cognitive power; broader sense of
the term, 222'; proper sense of the
term, 465; legislates a priori
(prescribes a priori laws) to (its
domain is) the cognitive power in
general. 167-68, 174-75, 178, 195,
196, 198,207',244'-46', see also
Cognitive power, Legislation;
provides (a priori) concepts and
(constitutive) principles (laws) for
(legislates to) nature as appearance
(experience), xxxiii, xxxvii, xxxviii,
xliv, lv, lxxxvii, 167-69, 174, 175,
178-80,186,187,195,196,241,288
br. n. 10,294,351,386,202',208',
210', 242', cf. 198, 217,238, 280,
287,314,389,448,484,225',245',
246', see also Concepts.
Categories, Legislation, Laws.
Natural (laws), Nature,
Appearances, Experience; deals
with the "world" of appearances
as it is (rather than as it ought to
be), lxxxviii, d. 405, see also
Reason (practical); its arrogant
claims (beyond appearances), 167;
has a certain form (structure,
lawfulness), lxi, xcv, 241, 287, 318,
319, d. 198,245'-46', see also
Lawfulness: needs rules, 364; its a
priori principles (based on the
categories), see Categories; gives
transcendental laws, 179, see Laws
(transcendental); universallaw~ of,
are at the same time laws of

nature, 186. see also Natural (laws),
Categories; is needed to make
concepts valid for objects, 401, see
also Validity; concepts of, 339. a
priori (see Categories), empirical
(see Concepts). confused. 340 (see
also Confusedness. Perfection); its
pure (see also Pure) concepts (i.e.,
categories) are ontological
predicates, 181, and are a priori
concepts of nature, 178, see also
Categories, Nature (concept!s] of);
concepts of, can be demonstrated
(exhibited), 342 (see also
Exhibition, Demonstration), and
are immanent (rather than
transcendent), 342, see also
Inunanent, Transcendent;concep~
of, contrasted with concepts (ideas)
of reason (rational ideas), 342, see
also Ideas (rational); as ability to
cognize the universal. 201', see also
Universal, Cognition; the power of
judgment as a function of, see
Judgment-power of; proceeds
from the universal (from concepts)
to the particular (the empirical
intuition that is given), 406,407,
see also Intuition; brings intuitions
under a concept (rule). 484; unifies
the manifold in (empirical) nature
so as to give rise to cognition. 406;
its relation to the imagination (as
other cognitive power), see
Imagination, Judgment-power of
(as such, its subjective condition);
is induced by the imagination to
provide the manifold of intuition
with unity in concepts, 283, cf. 287.
288,406; as needed for
comprehension, 220', see also
Comprehension. Imagination; as
power of exhibition. 224', see also
Exhibition; free play between it
and the imagination, see Tastejudgments of; as involved in
judgments of taste inasmuch as
they are judgments.liv. 203 n. 1,
228, see also Taste-judgments of;

INDEX

Understanding (continued)
its role in teleology, see
Teleological judgments; its maxim,
295, cf. 386, see also Maxim; as
serving (theoretical) reason, 401,
see also Reason; as helping reason
in the practical sphere, xlv, 464 n.
64,465, cf. xxxix, ~ee also Reason;
as man's ability to set himself
purposes, 431, see also Purpose;
causality of, 398, see also
Causality; transition from it to
reason, see Judgment-power of
(as mediating the transition
between understanding and
reason), Transition; common, lx,
238,241,293,294,354,398,442,
476, 478, (see also Reason
!commonJ), its maxims, 294-95;
sound,169,275,293,295,476,478,
is the power of judgment, 169, cf.
lx, 293; points to something
supersensible (but tells us nothing
about it),lxxxviii, 196, ef. 351, see
al~'o Supersemsible-the (as basis
of nature); man's, its peculiarity,
xci-xciii, xcviii, 401-10, 413-15,
429,430,cf. 180,183-86,219,484,
see also Particular in nature; as
such, i.e., in the most general
sense, lvii, xcii, 406; some other
(higher), lvii,lxxx, xciii, xciv,
180-81,405-08,cf.399-400,402;
archetypal and ectypal, 408 br. n.
27, see also Archetype, Ectype;
archetypal, is intuitive, 407, see
also Intuition (intellectual);
intuitive, xcii-ci, civ-cv, cviii,
402-03, 405 br. n. 25, 406-08, 227',
ef. 180-81,405, see also Intuition
(intellectual), Particular in nature,
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness, reason's
concept of it); supreme, as cause
of (nature or) the world, lxxxiv,
410,414, i.e., (as not legislative
theoretically but) as productive,
435, ef. 398 (see also Product),
creative,425 (see also Creation),

573

architectonic, 388, 420, artistic,
441-42, see also Cause (inteUigent,
of the world), Intelligence,
Supersensible-the (as basis of
nature's purposiveness, our
understanding's concept of it);
artistic, contrasted with wisdom,
441-42, see also Wisdom, God (is
not merely an intelligent cause of
the world)
Unity (Einheit), systematic, see
System; and unit, 248 br. n. 8:
constituted by a multiplicity of the
homogeneous, is a magnitude, 248,
see also Magnitude; multiplicity in,
see Perfection; analytic and
synthetic, 203' n. 13, cf. 197 n. 43:
of the manifold of intuition, see
Imagination; of space, 409, see
also Space; of the manifold in
nature, see Understanding; of
principles, to be pursued, 456, see
also Maxim (of theoretical reason):
of nature in terms of particular
(empirical) laW5,see Nature (system
of), Judgment-principle of,
Judgment-power of (its maxims),
Lawfulness (of the contingent); or
harmony between imagination and
understanding, see Judgmentpower of (as such, its subjective
condition); or harmony
(harmonious free play) between
imagination and understanding in
judgments of taste, see Tastejudgments of; its role in the
sublime, see Sublime-the; in
terms of purposes, see Purpose; in
an organism, see Organized
(beings); of the basis that accounts
for the structure of organisms, 420,
see also Spinoza; and see System,
Lawfulness, Coherence
Universal (allgemein), the, is a rule,
principle, law, 179, see also Rule,
Principles, Laws; the, our ability
to cognize it, 201'; the, its relation
to the particular, see
Understanding, Judgment-power

574

INDEX

Universal (continued)
of; contrasted with general, 213, cf.
214-15; synthetic and analytic, xcii,
xcviii, 407; concepts, see
Categories; rules, see Rule,
Principles, Laws; laws (principles)
of nature, see Natural (laws),
Categories; principle of natural
science, 376, see also Natural
(science); moral law as, see Moral
(law); see also Universality
Universality (Allgemeinheitl, or universal validity, logical (objective)
contrasted with aesthetic
(subjective), 214-15; or universal
validity, subjective (aesthetic,
general, exemplary), in judgments
of taste and judgments about the
sublime, see Taste-judgments of,
Pleasure- in judgments of taste,
Sublime-the; or universal validity
in teleological judgments, see
Teleological judgments; a priori
claim to, is needed in order for a
dialectic to arise, 337; comparative,
in judgments by the taste of sense,
213, see also Taste (of sense);
and see Universal, Validity,
Necessity
Universalizability
(Verallgemeinbarkeit), xliii-xlv
Universal Natural History and Theory
of the Heavens (Allgemeine
Naturgeschichte und Theorie des
Himmels), 250 br. n. 12,256 br. n.
21, 270 br. n. 35, 388 br. n. 2, 400
br. n. 15,427 br. n. 19,467 br. n.

76
Unpurposiveness
(UnzweckmdjJigkeit),lxix, 260,420,
see also Contrapurposiveness,
Sublime-the
Urbanity (Urbanitdt), 329, 330
Usefulness (Nutzbarkeit), contrasted
with benefit, 367, see also Utility
Using Teleological Principles . .. , see
On Using Teleological
Principles . ..

Utility (Nfitzlichkeit), 226, 227, cf.
207, 250' , see also Usefulness,
Good-the
Validity (Gfiltigkeit), private, 338;
objective (rather than subjective),
in a proof, 461; logical, 189,281;
universal (universality), xxxiii. 238',
logical (objective) contrasted with
aesthetic (subjective), 214-15;
universal (universality), subjective
(aesthetic, general. exemplary), in
judgments of taste and judgments
about the sublime, see Tastejudgments of, Pleasure-in
judgments of taste, Sublime-the;
universal (universality), in
teleological judgments, see
Teleological judgments; see also
Universality, Necessity
Value (Wert), objective, see Goodthe; intrinsic moral (rather than
extrinsic), of an act, 471 n. 87, cf.
444, see also Moral (good);
intrinsic (absolute), of a human
being's life (existence), 208-09, 434
n. 29,442-44,477, cf. 451, see also
Man; of the world cannot arise
from its being cognized, 442; of the
world's existence presupposes
rational beings, 448-49, see also
Rational; aesthetic, of the various
fine arts, 326-30, see also Artfine; and see Vocation
Various Races . .. , see On the
Various Races . . .
Vergil, 177 D. 18
Virtue (Thgend), 260, 283, 316, 343,
consists in the will's obedience to
the morallaw,liv, see also Will,
Moral (law); makes us worthy of
happiness, xlv, 450; happiness in
proportion to it is the final
purpose, see Final purpose;
magnitude of, 249; a person's
virtues of peace, 262
Virtuosi (Virtuosi), of taste, 298, see
also Taste

INDEX

Vital (Lebens-), force, see Force;
processes, 332; see also Life
Vitruvius, 370 n. 28
Vocation (Bestimmung), man's, 257,
264,269,292,431,460,481,cf.444,
446,447; man's higher, 433; man's
practical, 461; man's moral, lxx,
lxxi, 301. cf. 298,344.452.482; of
the moral laws, 479; man's
supersensible, lxx, 258, 292, see
also Man; or supersensible
vocation, of the (whole) mind (of
the mental powers), 259. 262, 268.
250' , cf. 257, 458, see also Ultimate
purpose, Cognitive power,
Cognition. Supersensible- the,
Practical
Voice (Stimme), universal, Iv, 216
Volition (Wollen), to will a thing is
identical with taking an interest in
(having a liking for) its existence,
209 cf. 222, 206', see also Interest,
Pleasure; universal lawfulness in,
229' , see also Moral (law); matter
of, 451, 471 n. 87, see also Matter
(Materie); and see Will
Voltaire, 334
Vorlander, Karl, 309 br. n. 43
Wallace, William, 330 br. n. 70
War (Krieg), as barbaric, 430; can be
sublime, 263, cf. 262; as an
endeavor of the supreme wisdom,
433; warlike spirit, how rendered
in sculpture. 312; see also Misery,
Chaos
Watch (Uhr), 374, 351 n. 31, cf.lxxiv,
304, see also Machine, Mechanism
Way of thinking (Denkungsart), in
terms of principles of nature and
in terms of principles of freedom,
176, transition between these two,
see Judgment-power of (as
mediating the transition between
understanding and reason, nature
and freedom, theoretical and
practical philosophy), Transition;
moral. 210, 231, 298-99, 301. 446,

575

471,472,cf.176,246,274,280,335,
451; sublime and debased, 263;
thorough, 206'; unprejudiced,
broadened, and consistent, 294-95;
liberal, 268; refined, 299; patriotic,
327 n. 63
Well-being (Wohlbefinde1l, WohLrein),
as pertaining to how nature relates
to oneseH, 449, see also Health; of
soul and body, precepts for, 195',
see also Hygiene; equated with
enjoyment and happiness, 442, cf.
274, see also Enjoyment,
Happiness; feeling of, 269, see also
Health (feeling of), Ufe (feeling
of), Pleasure; and being unwell,
278, 331, see also Pain
What Does It Mean: to Orient
Oneself in One's Thought? (Was
heijJt.· sich im Denken
orientieren?) , 467 br. n. 75
Whimsical (launig), 334, contrasted
with moody, 336
Whole (das Ganze), as a purpose,
408, see also Purpose; and its parts
in an organism, see Organized
(beings); material, in relation to its
parts, as conceived by our
(discursive) understanding and by
an intuitive understanding, 407-()9,
see also Understanding;
organizing, 425, cf. 374, see also
Natural (purposes); of nature, is
the world, 414, see also World; of
nature as a system. see Nature
(system of); cosmopolitan, 432-33,
see also Cosmopolitan; idea of
absolute whole, 257, 260. see also
Totality; and see System. Unity
Wieland, Christoph Martin, 309
Will (Wille), in Wolff, xlii, xlviii, ef.
172,206'; as practical reason, see
Reason (practical); freedom of, see
Freedom of the will; as power of
choice determinable by reason
(and its moral law), xliv, 206, 209,
222,289,296,303,197',199', 1fJ7',
229'. cf. ciii, 267, 272, 275 (see also

576

INDEX

Will (continued)
Determination, Reason, Moral
[Iawll, and by natural incentives
(inclinations), 172, 173, cf. 432,
196'-200',206'; is subject both to
the concept of freedom and the
concept of nature, 172, see also
Freedom of the will, Nature; as
(supersensible) causality
(determining something in the
world), xliv, xlvi, lv, 197', see also
Freedom of the will, Causality
(through freedom); as our power
of (carrying out) purposes (in
nature), lxxi, 220, 280,370,431-32,
see also Purpose. Reason
(practical); as our power of desire
(see Desire-power of), is a
natural power, 172, d. 432; the
objective reality of (the idea of) it
is proved only in worldly beings,
353, see also Appearances (human
beings as), Man; we have
(practical) a priori knowledge of
it, xlvi, lxxi, see also Knowledge;
as determined by something, the
mental state of it is identical with
pleasure, 222, see also Pleasure;
willing a thing is identical with
pleasure in its existence, 209, cf.
206'; its object is the good, see
Good-the; good, 443, see also
Moral (good); form of the earnest.
451, cf. 471 n. 87: its obedience to
the moral law is virtue. xlv, see also
Virtue; man's, is weak, xlvi; the
skill of influencing it is prudence,
172, see also Prudence; its
liberation from the despotism of
desires, 432. see also Discipline;
holy, c n. 105, cf. 403-04; supreme,
485, see also Cause (intelligent. of
the world); not attributed

theoretically to God, 457, see also
God
Windelband, Wilhelm, xx, 204 br. n.
9,224 br. n. 40,327 br. n. 64,343
br. n. 15,353 hr. n. 39
Wisdom (Weisheit), 444, cf. 441,442,
448 n. 39,230' n. 50; moral, 462;
metaphysical, 182
Wishes (Wunsche), mere, 177 n. 18,
230' n. 50
Withof, J. Ph. L, 316 br. n. 50
Wolff, Christian, xxxi, xxxiii n. 10, xlh,
xlviii-I, lxxii-lxxiii, 476 br. n. 100
Woodfield, Andrew,lxxii n. 62
World (Welt). xxx. as the whole of
nature, 414, see also Nature; as
experienced ("world of"
experience) or as appearance, see
Appearances; limited or unlimited,
xxxi; magnitude of a, 250, see also
Magnitude; edifice, 256-57; as a
system, see Nature (system of);
beings of. 393.451, see also Being;
rational beings in, 453, see also
Man, Rational, Appearances,
Being; mediation among "worlds,"
Ixxxvii-Ixxxviii. see also Transition;
as perfect, according to Leibniz
and Wolff. xlii. xlviii,lxxii, cf. 404;
value of its existence, see Value;
under moral laws, see Moral (law);
highest good in, see Good-the;
soul. 392. see also Hylozoism;
intelligent (supreme) cause of, see
Cause (intelligent, of the world);
as identified with an original being,
see Pantheism, Spinoza; moral
author of. see God; see also
Cosmology, Cosmopolitan
Worth (Wert), see Value
Worthiness (WUrriigkeit), to be happy.
is virtue, xlv. 450. see also Virtue,
Happiness

