ECLIPSE
OF
GOD

Eclipse
of God
STUDIES IN THE RELATION
BETWEEN RELIGION
AND PHILOSOPHY

Martin
Buber
WITH A NEW INTRODUCTION BY

Leora Batnitzky

PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS
PRINCETON & OXFORD

Copyright © 2016 by the Martin Buber Literary Estate
Introduction to the 2016 Edition copyright
© 2016 by Princeton University Press
Requests for permission to reproduce material from this work
should be sent to Permissions, Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press,
41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press,
6 Oxford Street, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TW
press.princeton.edu
All Rights Reserved
Originally published by Harper & Brothers in 1952
First Princeton University Press paperback edition,
with a new introduction by Leora Batnitzky, 2016
Library of Congress Control Number 2015938543
ISBN 978-0-691-16530-1
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Adobe Caslon Pro,
ITC Caslon 224 Std, and Montserrat
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

Contents
Introduction to the 2016 Edition vii
Foreword xxiii

1
PRELUDE: REPORT ON TWO TALKS 1

2
RELIGION AND REALITY 8

3
RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 20

4
THE LOVE OF GOD AND THE IDEA OF DEITY 39

5
RELIGION AND MODERN THINKING 53

6
RELIGION AND ETHICS 83

vi Contents

7
ON THE SUSPENSION OF THE ETHICAL 100

8
GOD AND THE SPIRIT OF MAN 106

9
SUPPLEMENT: REPLY TO C. G. JUNG 113

Introduction to the
2016 Edition
Given that this book was first published in 1952, and given
its title, Eclipse of God, some readers may assume that this is
a work of post-Holocaust theology. It is not. In these essays,
Buber does not offer a response to the Holocaust because “the
eclipse of God,” for him, marks not only God’s absence during
the Shoah but also God’s absence in the modern world more
broadly. “The eclipse of God” is the Jewish notion of “hester
panim,” which refers to God hiding His face. The term is originally biblical, occurring, for instance, in Deuteronomy 31:17,
when God says, “And I will forsake them [the children of Israel], and I will hide my face from them, and they shall be
devoured,” and later in the prophets.1 In its original contexts,
“hester panim” connotes a God who bestows rewards on those
who obey His commands and punishes the wicked by hiding
His face from them. The idea of a retributive God may be difficult for many people today, but, following Jewish mystical
traditions, Buber interprets the term hopefully, for a hiding
God is a God who can also be found.2

1 See also Deuteronomy 32:20; Psalms 13:2, 102:3, 143:7; Isaiah 8:15, 40:27,
45:14, 45:15, 57:15, 59:1, 64:10; Job 23:3, 34:29; and Jeremiah 29:10.
2 See, for instance, Abraham Joshua Heschel, Man Is Not Alone (Philadelphia:
Jewish Publication Society, 1951), chapter 16, “The Hiding God.”

vii

viii Introduction to the 2016 Edition

To begin to understand what Buber means by “the eclipse
of God,” we must first consider his assessment of his historical moment. In his 1923 I and Thou Buber presents himself in
the role of physician engaged in curing humanity’s “time of
sickness.”3 Humanity is sick, Buber claims, because we have
lost access to our fundamental state of being, our “ontological
orientation,” which he describes as the “I-Thou” relation and
in later work as the dialogical situation. Buber’s basic claim is
deceptively simple. He suggests that human beings have two
attitudes toward the world, attitudes that are captured in what
he calls the “I-It” relation and the “I-Thou” relation. The “I-It”
relation is an instrumental relation: I relate to an object (any
object, including another person) in terms of how the object
serves my needs. For instance, I have an “I-It” relation with
a pen when I use it to write. I can also have an “I-It” relation with another person when I use that person to fulfill my
particular needs—for service (a store clerk), for making me
feel good about myself (a child, a spouse, a friend), or for another end (a business partner in the service of making money).
These relationships are not intrinsically bad. They are in fact
necessary and are often productive aspects of human life. The
problem, according to Buber, is that human beings have lost
access to a more fundamental relationship—the “I-Thou” relationship, which is not one of instrumentality but of mutuality. The difference between the “I-It” and “I-Thou” relations
is as much about the “I” as it is about the other to whom the
“I” relates. As Buber puts it, “For the I of the primary word
I-Thou is a different I from that of the primary word I-It.”4
I am different in the “I-Thou” relationship because the other
affects me. In an “I-It” relationship, in contrast, I understand
3 Martin Buber, I and Thou, trans. Ronald Gregor Smith (New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1958), 53.
4 Ibid., 19.

Introduction to the 2016 Edition ix

myself and act as an isolated being, unaffected by the greater
reality of which I am a part.
This brings us to “the eclipse of God.” In the essays in this
volume, Buber describes God as “the primary Thou.” God is
the greater transcendent reality against which all of human life
takes place. The eclipse of God is the eclipse of the possibility
of experiencing human life in relation to this greater reality. In
this sense, the eclipse of God is also the eclipse of the human.
Let us turn to Buber’s own words from the second essay of this
volume, “Religion and Reality”:
Eclipse of the light of heaven, eclipse of God—such indeed is the character of the historic hour through which
the world is passing. . . . An eclipse of the sun is something
that occurs between the sun and our eyes, not in the sun
itself. . . . But . . . one misses everything when one insists
on discovering within earthly thought the power that
unveils the mystery. He who refuses to submit himself
to the effective reality of transcendence as such—our
vis-à-vis—contributes to the human responsibility for
the eclipse. (18)
Three points are important here. First, according to Buber, our
inability to see God does not mean that God is not there, just
as the sun still exists when the moon blocks it in a solar eclipse.
Second, seeing God’s reality is not merely a matter of adjusting
human psychology, just as seeing the sun during a solar eclipse
is not merely a matter of adjusting our eyesight. Finally, just as
the moon blocks the sun while in no way destroying the sun’s
reality in a solar eclipse, so too, Buber suggests, something literally blocks our relationship to God in our day. What stands
in the way of the human being and God in the modern world?
God is eclipsed in the modern world, argues Buber, by the
predominance of instrumentality, the glorification of usefulness,

x Introduction to the 2016 Edition

which turns human beings into objects among other objects.
Modern political and economic arrangements treat the individual person as an object among others, to be manipulated
and regulated by the modern nation-state. Modern science,
philosophy, and even religion similarly deny the simultaneous
singularity and interconnectedness of individuals. Buber argues that we live in an age in which knowledge and the use of
knowledge to control our lives are our dominant values. This
means that our relations are relations of usefulness, of instrumentality, and not mutuality. For Buber, we have lost access
to God’s primary Thou because “I-It” relations eclipse our access to “I-Thou” relations. It is important to be clear, however,
that Buber does not think we can or even should dispense
with many of the gifts of modernity, such as individual right
or modern science. He does not wish to suggest that modern medicine, for instance, errs in its attempt to use scientific
knowledge to eradicate disease. Rather, the problem is that the
exclusive focus on scientific knowledge and instrumentality
blocks, as the moon blocks the sun in a solar eclipse, the possibility of our relationship to God.
Of course, one of the tasks of these essays is to clarify exactly what Buber means by “God.” It is perhaps best to begin
with what Buber does not mean by God. Rebuffing the “God
of the philosophers,” Buber contends that God is not an idea
or a metaphysical principle. Instead, God is a presence whom
the human encounters in specific places and times. These encounters, like the human beings who experience them, are different from one another. They cannot be captured under any
unifying or abstract concept and in fact can only be described
in anthropomorphic terms: “Anthropomorphism always reflects our need to preserve the concrete quality evidenced in
the encounter. . . . This is true of those moments of our daily
life in which we become aware of the reality that is absolutely

Introduction to the 2016 Edition xi

independent of us, whether it be as power or as glory, no less
than of the hours of great revelation of which only a halting
record has been handed down to us” (10).
Buber rejects not only “the god of the philosophers” generally but also more specifically the claims of his older contemporary, the great neo-Kantian Jewish philosopher Hermann
Cohen. Cohen, following the medieval Jewish philosopher
Moses Maimonides, insists that the Bible’s anthropomorphic
descriptions of God must be refused entirely. Like Maimonides, Cohen contends that we can only know God by way of
our intellects. Updating Maimonides’ Aristotelianism with
Immanuel Kant’s claim that God is best understood as an
ideal of practical reason, Cohen contends that God can be understood only as an idea. In the essay “The Love of God and
the Idea of Deity,” Buber opposes Cohen’s twin assertions that
God is an idea and that one can only love ideas. Cohen maintains that when one loves another person, what one really loves
is the idea of that person. Buber denies that one loves ideas and
asserts that love can take place only within the concrete reality
of the meeting of two persons in a particular place and time.
As Buber explains: “the deepest basis of the Jewish idea of God
can be achieved only by plunging into that word by which God
revealed Himself to Moses, ‘I shall be there.’ It gives exact expression to the personal ‘existence’ of God (not to His abstract
‘being’)” (51).
It is worth noting that Buber’s contention bears directly on
the question of how to translate Exodus 3:14. While a number of Greek, Latin, German, and French translations of the
Bible (such as Luther’s and Calvin’s) render “I am that I am”
(eheye asher eheye) as a statement about God’s being and God’s
eternity, Buber, in his translation of the Bible into German
with Franz Rosenzweig, insists that this misunderstands the
Hebrew, which is not about God’s essence but about God’s

xii Introduction to the 2016 Edition

presence. Buber and Rosenzweig translate Exodus 3:14 as Ich
werde dasein, als der ich dasein werde (“I will be there, howsoever I will be there”).5 God’s presentation of God’s self to
Moses is not for the sake of clarifying philosophically what
kind of being God is or is not. Instead, God presents God’s self
to Moses to let him know that God is literally there with him,
and the children of Israel.
Buber is often described as more of a poet than a philosopher, but this characterization does not do justice to his philosophical acumen. One of the themes that unites these essays
is Buber’s submission that a number of seminal philosophers
inadvertently bump up against the limitations of philosophy
and in this way cannot but begin to affirm not just the idea
of God but also God’s reality. As Buber puts it with regard
to Cohen, “For when man learns to love God, he senses an
actuality which rises above the idea. Even if he makes the philosopher’s great effort to sustain the object of his love as an
object of his philosophical thought, the love itself bears witness to the existence of the Beloved” (52). Buber similarly suggests that Kant could not but touch on the reality, and not
just the idea, of God. Referring to some of Kant’s unpublished
late writings, Buber argues that while Kant earlier had sought
an idea of God that was a postulate of practical reason that
could be “the source of all moral obligation,” he realized late
in his life “that a God who is nothing but a condition within
us cannot meet this requirement, that only an absolute can
give the quality of absoluteness to an obligation.” This realization, Buber claims, was “the spur of Kant’s restlessness”
(13).
5 For a discussion of Buber and Rosenzweig’s choices regarding Exodus 3:14,
see Franz Rosenzweig, “The Eternal: Mendelssohn and the Name of God,” trans. in
Scripture and Translation, ed. Lawrence Rosenwald and Everett Fox (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1994).

Introduction to the 2016 Edition xiii

While contemporary readers may debate Buber’s interpretations of a variety of philosophers, including Baruch Spinoza,
Kant, G.W.F. Hegel, Cohen, and Martin Heidegger, his basic
contention that ideas and cognition are derivative of practical experience is one that is now widely accepted among most
post-Heideggerian philosophers as well as philosophers coming out of the American pragmatist tradition.6 When Buber
applies this reasoning to God, it is important to be clear, however, that he is not making an ontological argument, or even
an argument at all, for the existence of God. Rather, he is insisting that modern philosophers (such as Kant and Cohen)
have it backward when they assert that our experience of the
world derives from ideas within the human mind, and that it
is the philosopher’s task to clarify and articulate these ideas.
Buber maintains that the opposite is in fact the case: ideas
are derivative of experience. Experience, which Buber also calls
reality, conditions cognition. And again, it is our access to reality, which Buber also understands as God, that is eclipsed by
an overemphasis on cognition. The question of faith in God
is then a question of experience, and not of rational proof. If
people do not have faith in God, it is because they have not
experienced God. And, once again, Buber’s concern in these
essays is that the modern world and modern thinking block
the possibility of our experience of God.
Buber’s arguments are directly relevant to contemporary
debates stemming from the “new atheism,” a term that has
been much discussed since the beginning of the early 2000s.7
Among other things, this school of thought contrasts religion
6 For an example of this convergence, see Robert Brandom, “Heidegger’s Categories in Being and Time,” in Heidegger: A Critical Reader, ed. Dreyfus and Hall (Oxford,
UK; Cambridge, USA: Blackwell, 1992), 45–64.
7 Sam Harris, The End of Faith (New York: W. W. Norton, 2004); Richard
Dawkins, The God Delusion (New York: Mariner Books, 2006); and Christopher
Hitchens, God Is Not Great (New York: Twelve Publishing, 2007).

xiv Introduction to the 2016 Edition

with science, arguing that the former is an outdated, crude explanatory system that science has overcome. As many critics
have noted, this sort of position fundamentally misunderstands what religion or “faith” actually are. In other writings,
Buber elaborates on the biblical term for faith, “emunah,”
which is more properly translated as “trust.” “Emunah,” Buber
contends, is not blind belief that something is true. Instead,
faith is more like trusting someone “without being able to
provide a sufficient reason for my trust in him.”8 Trust is fundamentally relational. Let us recall again Buber’s reading of
Exodus 3:14. When God states, “I am that I am,” God does
not ask Moses to believe something about God that will offer
a rational explanation of everything that goes on in the natural
world. Rather, God tells Moses to trust God because God is
there with him. Trust in God is not proof of God’s existence,
but, Buber might add, there are many things that philosophers
and others take for granted for which we do not have definitive
evidence, such as sense perception, memory, or the inner lives
of other people.9 With their dogmatic and narrow focus on
definitive evidence, the new atheists, from Buber’s perspective,
misunderstand the natures of faith and much of human experience. In doing so, the new atheists eclipse God’s reality.
Buber’s conception of faith also complements recent work
in the anthropology of religion that suggests that faith in God
is something acquired, not through philosophical or theological instruction but by actively cultivating a relationship with
God, even when there is no evidence of God’s existence. Anthropologists have described how, for the faithful, a relation8 Two Types of Faith (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1961), 7. Buber contrasts
this view of faith with another conception that he associates with the development of
Christianity.
9 For contemporary Christian theological arguments to this effect, see Alvin
Plantinga and Nicholas Wolterstorff, eds., Faith and Rationality: Reason and Belief in
God (South Bend, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1991).

Introduction to the 2016 Edition xv

ship with God begins with people trusting that they do in fact
have a relationship with God. In a statement that could have
come out of recent anthropological investigations into religion,
Buber writes: “many true believers know how to talk to God
but not about him” (21). As the Stanford anthropologist
T. M. Luhrmann has put it in the context of her fieldwork
studying how God becomes real for American evangelicals,
“Faith is hard because it is a decision to live life as if a set of
claims are real, even when one doubts. . . . These are not intellectual judgments on the same order as deciding how many
apples you should buy at the market. They are ways of experiencing life, attitudes we take toward living in the world.”10
As Buber recognizes, this is not a new insight but one that
religious traditions, including Buddhism, Christian mysticism,
and Hasidism, have long put forward.
It is important to emphasize that Buber’s claims about faith
do not oppose modern science or rationalist philosophy. This
brings us to the subtitle of this book, “Studies in the Relation
between Religion and Philosophy.” Buber does distinguish
between religion and philosophy, and understands philosophy
in a way that coheres with the new atheist’s understanding of
science. And Buber does cast philosophy in seemingly negative
turns: “I-It finds its highest concentration and illumination in
philosophical knowledge. In this knowledge the extraction of
the subject from the I of the immediate lived togetherness of
I and It and the transformation of the It into the object detached
in its essence produces the exact thinking of contemplated
existing beings, yes, of contemplated Being itself ” (37). Nevertheless, Buber does not dismiss philosophy or science. Indeed,
the subtitle suggests precisely this: despite their differences,
10 T. M. Luhrmann, When God Talks Back: Understanding the American Evangelical Relationship with God (Vintage, 2012), xii.

xvi Introduction to the 2016 Edition

there is a relation between religion and philosophy. In Buber’s
words: “A sceptical verdict about the ability of philosophy to
lead to and contain truth is in no way here implied. The possibility of cogitative truth does not, indeed, mean a cogitative possession of being, but a cogitative real relation to being. Systems
of thought are manifestations of genuine thought-relations to
being made possible through abstraction. They are not mere
‘aspects,’ but rather valid documents of these cogitative voyages of discovery” (36). The key phrase here is “possession of
being.” When philosophy or science claim to possess being,
that is, to provide definitive answers to the question of what it
means to be human, then philosophy is problematic. This does
not mean, however, that philosophy, or science, is false. Philosophy and science are true relations to being, just as the “I-It”
relation is a genuine way of being in the world. The problem
arises only when the “I-It” relation eclipses the “I-Thou” relationship. So, too, the only problem with philosophy or science
arises when they eclipse religion, as, for instance, the claims of
the new atheists do.
In his historical context, it is not the scientism of the new
atheists that Buber opposes but rather what he regards as
modern thinkers’ obsession with “self-discovery.” In particular, Buber targets Jean-Paul Sartre, Carl Jung, and Heidegger. Buber agrees with all three that the modern age is one in
which “God is silent.” Friedrich Nietzsche’s famous statement
that “God is dead” captures God’s silence for these modern
thinkers, but they each have different interpretations of this
famous phrase. Sartre, Buber argues, incorrectly understands
Nietzsche literally. From this Sartre concludes that there is no
God and that the human being must be brave enough to find
his own creative freedom. While Jung criticizes Freud for not
understanding religious experience, Buber argues that his con-

Introduction to the 2016 Edition xvii

ception of religion denies the possibility of God’s reality by
positing the identification of God and the human as the final
moment in the psychic development of the individual. Whereas
Sartre took Nietzsche too literally, Jung, Buber claims, answers
Nietzsche by saying, “All the gods are dead, now we desire that
the superman live!” (78). Buber is perhaps most sympathetic
to Heidegger’s reading of Nietzsche. Like Buber, Heidegger
understands Nietzsche’s pronouncement on God’s death in
light of the sentence that follows this claim: “for we have killed
him.”11 For Heidegger, Buber explains, this means “God can
rise from the dead. . . . [T]he unfolding of the new ontological
thought can prepare for a turning-point in which the divine, or
as Heidegger, in agreement with the poet Hölderlin, prefers to
say, the holy, will appear in new and still unanticipated forms”
(59). Where Buber disagrees with Heidegger is in Heidegger’s
insistence that human beings cannot affect the reappearance
of God (or gods in Heidegger’s case). For Heidegger, only the
fate of being, and not human freedom, determines whether
and how a God might appear. For Buber, in contrast, “God
needs man independent . . . as partner in dialogue, as comrade
in work, as one who loves Him; God needs His creature thus
or wills to need him thus” (63).
While Buber’s philosophy, like Heidegger’s, is complex, his
worry about Heidegger is ultimately very straightforward. By
refusing the possibilities of a transcendent God and human
freedom, Heidegger, Buber contends, surrenders the possibility of moral judgment and affirms the “most inhuman manifestation” of his historical hour. Buber’s point is not just that
Heidegger joined the Nazi party and gave his infamous Rectoral
11 Friederich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, ed. Bernard Williams, trans. Josefine
Nauckhoff (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 120.

xviii Introduction to the 2016 Edition

address in 1933 but also that Heidegger’s philosophy of being is
fundamentally amoral, if not immoral. As Buber puts it:
He [Heidegger] has allied his thought, the thought of
being, in which he takes part and to which he ascribes
the power to make ready for the rise of the holy, to that
hour which he has affirmed as history. He has bound his
thought to his hour as no other philosopher has done.
Can he, the existential thinker, despite all this, existentially wrestle, in opposition to the hour, for a freedom
devoted to the eternal and gain it? Or must he succumb
to the fate of the hour, and with it also to a “holy” to
which no human holiness, no hallowed standing fast of
man in the face of historical delusion, responsibly answers? (65)
Contra Heidegger, Buber’s God is not only the reality against
which the human may come to define himself but also the
moral absolute without which the human world cannot but
spin into chaos and nihilism.
While both necessary and admirable, Buber’s defense of the
ethical is also conceptually the weakest part of these essays. In
articulating what he means by ethics, Buber’s lifelong engagement with Kant is evident. Like Kant, Buber defines the ethical in terms of that which is intrinsically, and not instrumentally, good: “We mean by the ethical in this strict sense the yes
and no which man gives to the conduct and actions possible to
him, the radical distinction between them which affirms or denies them not according to their usefulness or harmfulness for
individuals and society, but according to their intrinsic value
and disvalue” (83). Also like Kant, Buber rejects “moral heteronomy or external moral laws” (86). Yet Buber parts ways
with Kant by rooting morality not in the autonomy of reason
but in the individual’s response to another (whether God or

Introduction to the 2016 Edition xix

another person). Similarly, Buber trumpets the moral voice of
the Hebrew prophets, yet he also opposes any notion of divine
authority that prescribes particular behaviors to people. As he
puts it in I and Thou, God’s revelations mean that “Man receives and what he receives is not a content, but a presence, a
presence as a strength . . . the eternal voice sounds and nothing
more.”12
Philosophically, it is difficult to discern where moral authority comes from for Buber. He would say of course that morality
comes in the dialogical relation, in the response of me to you
and you to me. But it is not clear why the dialogical relation
is an ethical relation. For instance, Buber quotes Heidegger:
“The gods can only enter the Word if they themselves address
us and place their demand upon us. The Word that names the
gods is always an answer to this demand” (64). There is no
moral underpinning to Heidegger’s description of this dialogical relation. Yet Buber insists there must be. There is a parallel
tension in Buber’s claims about religion, and the Bible particularly. Buber notes that Heidegger rejects biblical religion because it provides “certainty of salvation.” Buber counters: “The
prophets of Israel have never announced a God upon whom
their hearers’ striving for security reckoned. They have always
aimed to shatter all security and to proclaim in the opened
abyss of the final insecurity the unwished-for God” (61). How
and why does the “opened abyss of this final insecurity” result
in an absolute moral command?
This issue is particularly acute in Buber’s essay on Søren
Kierkegaard’s Fear and Trembling, titled “On the Suspension
of the Ethical.” Against Kierkegaard’s famous contention that
faith may require, as in the case of God’s command to Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac, “a suspension of the ethical,”
12 I and Thou, 158–60.

xx Introduction to the 2016 Edition

Buber writes: “God Himself demands . . . nothing more than
justice and love, and that he ‘walk humbly’ with Him, with
God (Micah 6:8)—in other words, not much more than the
fundamental ethical” (103). Once again, based on his own conception of God, the grounds for Buber’s ethical reading are unclear. If, as Buber argues, revelation has no particular content
and it is up to the individual to respond to God, couldn’t the
individual, and certainly Abraham, then plausibly believe that
the ethical could be suspended in responding to God? Buber
was well aware of these criticisms. He acknowledged that his
philosophy could not determine “what is right and wrong in a
certain situation to be a decision valid in itself.” Nevertheless,
he insisted that people must understand that they are “standing every moment under the judgment of God.”13
In a related vein, Buber’s Jewish contemporaries criticize
him for not recognizing Jewish law as a source of theological, cultural, or normative authority. Rosenzweig famously admonishes Buber on theological terms, arguing that revelation
requires law.14 Other Jewish critics of Buber, including Haim
Nahman Bialik, perhaps the greatest Hebrew poet of the modern era, and Emil Fackenheim, perhaps the most significant
Jewish thinker to respond philosophically to the Shoah, also
chastise his rejection of Jewish law. Bialik, who knew Buber
and taught at Buber’s Lehrhaus in Frankfurt before the Second
World War, criticizes Buber largely on cultural grounds, maintaining that Buber’s philosophy denies the creative dialectic
between law and narrative (halachah and aggadah) in Jewish
thought and culture.15 Fackenheim, who considers himself a
13 Martin Buber, “Reply to My Critics,” in Paul A. Schilpp and Maurice S. Friedman, eds., The Philosophy of Martin Buber (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1967), 719.
14 See especially Franz Rosenzweig, On Jewish Learning (New York: Schocken
Books), 116.
15 Haim Nahman Bialik, “Halachah and Aggadah,” in Revealment and Concealment: Five Essays ( Jerusalem: Ibis Editions, 2000), 45–87.

Introduction to the 2016 Edition xxi

student of Buber’s and also appropriates Buber’s term “the
eclipse of God” in his own writings, links Buber’s dismissal of
Jewish law to what he contends is Buber’s “lifelong difficulty
with the recognition of evil. . . . [T]he celebrated ‘I-Thou/I-It,’
leaves room for decay and dehumanization, but not for an evil
that is truly radical.”16 For this reason, Fackenheim argues,
Buber is unable to provide an authentic Jewish response to the
Holocaust. Despite these criticisms, however, Buber remains
enormously influential in both Israel and the United States for
his writings on Judaism, Zionism, Jewish culture, politics, education, and other subjects. But as Paul Mendes-Flohr notes, it
has largely been “post-traditional” Jews who have felt the pull
of his philosophical and theological claims.17
It is perhaps because of his de-emphasis of law that Buber
has been far more theologically influential on Christian theologians, including Walter Nigg, Karl Barth, Paul Tillich, and
Robert Merrihew Adams.18 Interestingly, these theologians
find in Buber’s “I-Thou” an important and moving account of
Christian grace. This is despite the fact that in many of his
other writings Buber is at pains to distinguish his conception
of faith, which he regards as Jewish, from a Christian conception of faith, which he holds partially responsible for the
eclipse of God in the modern world.19
16 Emil Fackenheim, To Mend the World: Foundations of Post-Holocaust Jewish
Thought (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994), 195.
17 Paul Mendes-Flohr, “Buber’s Reception among Jews,” Modern Judaism (1986)
6 (2): 111–126.
18 For an overview of the Christian reception of Buber, see Maurice S. Friedman,
Martin Buber: The Life of Dialogue, 4th ed. (New York: Routledge, 2002), chapter 27.
For Adams’s more recent Christian appropriation of Buber, see Finite and Infinite
Goods: A Framework for Ethics (New York: Oxford, 1999).
19 Various Christian theologians have also criticized Buber for his treatment of
Christianity. See, for instance, Emil Brunner, “Judaism and Christianity in Buber,”
in Paul A. Schilpp and Maurice S. Friedman, eds., The Philosophy of Martin Buber,
309–18.

xxii Introduction to the 2016 Edition

In conclusion, Buber’s writings continue to elicit varied responses and no doubt the republication of these essays will
spur only more discussion. Whatever one makes of Buber’s arguments in the end, he remains a philosopher for our times. As
he writes in the prelude to this volume, “Real listening has become rare in our time.” In an age in which technology and the
vitriol of partisan politics dominate in the United States and
the world at large, Buber’s words could not be more prophetic.
Leora Batnitzky
Princeton University

Foreword
This book arises out of lectures which I gave at several American universities (Yale, Princeton, Columbia, Chicago and
others) in the months of November and December, 1951. I
have placed first, as an appropriate prelude, the “Report on
Two Talks” which I wrote in 1932, and I have also included
the essay “The Love of God and the Idea of Deity,” written
in 1943. In the section “Religion and Philosophy” I have used
some passages from the address on this subject with which
I opened the 1929 session of the Schopenhauer Society at
Frankfurt a. M., devoted to this theme.
“Report on Two Talks,” “Religion and Philosophy,” “Religion and Modern Thinking,” “On the Suspension of the Ethical,” “God and the Spirit of Man” and the supplement “Reply
to C. G. Jung” were translated by Maurice S. Friedman. “Religion and Ethics” was translated by Eugene Kamenka and
Maurice S. Friedman. “Religion and Reality” was translated by
Norbert Guterman. “The Love of God and the Idea of Deity”
was translated by I. M. Lask, and is reprinted from my book
entitled Israel and the World: Essays in a Time of Crisis, copyright, 1948; a Shocken Book, Farrar, Straus and Young, Inc.,
publishers, and reprinted with their permission.
Martin Buber

xxiii

ECLIPSE
OF
GOD

1
P RE LUD E: R EPORT ON T WO TAL KS

I shall tell about two talks. One apparently came to a conclusion, as only occasionally a talk can come, and yet in reality
remained unconcluded; the other was apparently broken off
and yet found a completion such as rarely falls to the lot of
discussions.
Both times it was a dispute about God, about the concept
and the name of God, but each time of a very different nature.
On three successive evenings I spoke at the adult folk-school
of a German industrial city on the subject “Religion as Reality.” What I meant by that was the simple thesis that “faith” is
not a feeling in the soul of man but an entrance into reality,
an entrance into the whole reality without reduction and curtailment. This thesis is simple but it contradicts the usual way
of thinking. And so three evenings were necessary to make it
clear, and not merely three lectures but also three discussions
which followed the lectures. At these discussions I was struck
by something which bothered me. A large part of the audience
was evidently made up of workers but none of them spoke up.
Those who spoke and raised questions, doubts, and reflections

1

2 Chapter 1

were for the most part students (for the city had a famous old
university). But all kinds of other circles were also represented;
the workers alone remained silent. Only at the conclusion of
the third evening was this silence, which had by now become
painful for me, explained. A young worker came up to me and
said: “Do you know, we can’t speak in there, but if you would
meet with us to-morrow, we could talk together the whole
time.” Of course I agreed.
The next day was a Sunday. After dinner I came to the
agreed place and now we talked together well into the evening.
Among the workers was one, a man no longer young, whom
I was drawn to look at again and again because he listened as
one who really wished to hear. Real listening has become rare
in our time. It is found most often among workers, who are
not indeed concerned about the person speaking, as is so often
the case with the bourgeois public, but about what he has to say.
This man had a curious face. In an old Flemish altar picture
representing the adoration of the shepherds one of them, who
stretches out his arms toward the manger, has such a face. The
man in front of me did not look as if he might have any desire to
do the same; moreover, his face was not open like that in the picture. What was notable about him was that he heard and pondered, in a manner as slow as it was impressive. Finally, he
opened his lips as well. “I have had the experience,” he explained slowly and impressively, repeating a saying which the
astronomer Laplace is supposed to have used in conversation
with Napoleon, “that I do not need this hypothesis ‘God’ in
order to be quite at home in the world.” He pronounced the
word “hypothesis” as if he had attended the lectures of the distinguished natural scientist who had taught in that industrial
and university city and had died shortly before. Although he
did not reject the designation “God” for his idea of nature, that

Prelude: Report on Two Talks 3

naturalist spoke in a similar manner whether he pursued zoology or Weltanschauung.
The brief speech of the man struck me; I felt myself more
deeply challenged than by the others. Up till then we had certainly debated very seriously, but in a somewhat relaxed way;
now everything had suddenly become severe and hard. How
should I reply to the man? I pondered awhile in the now severe
atmosphere. It came to me that I must shatter the security of
his Weltanschauung, through which he thought of a “world” in
which one “felt at home.” What sort of a world was it? What
we were accustomed to call world was the “world of the senses,”
the world in which there exists vermilion and grass green, C
major and B minor, the taste of apple and of wormwood. Was
this world anything other than the meeting of our own senses
with those unapproachable events about whose essential definition physics always troubles itself in vain? The red that we
saw was neither there in the “things,” nor here in the “soul.” It
at times flamed up and glowed just so long as a red-perceiving
eye and a red-engendering “oscillation” found themselves over
against each other. Where then was the world and its security?
The unknown “objects” there, the apparently so well-known
and yet not graspable “subjects” here, and the actual and still
so evanescent meeting of both, the “phenomena”—was that
not already three worlds which could no longer be comprehended from one alone? How could we in our thinking place
together these worlds so divorced from one another? What
was the being that gave this “world,” which had become so
questionable, its foundation?
When I was through a stern silence ruled in the now twilit
room. Then the man with the shepherd’s face raised his heavy
lids, which had been lowered the whole time, and said slowly
and impressively, “You are right.”

4 Chapter 1

I sat in front of him dismayed. What had I done? I had led
the man to the threshold beyond which there sat enthroned
the majestic image which the great physicist, the great man
of faith, Pascal, called the God of the Philosophers. Had I
wished for that? Had I not rather wished to lead him to the
other, Him whom Pascal called the God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, Him to whom one can say Thou?
It grew dusk, it was late. On the next day I had to depart. I
could not remain, as I now ought to do; I could not enter into
the factory where the man worked, become his comrade, live
with him, win his trust through real life-relationship, help him
to walk with me the way of the creature who accepts the creation. I could only return his gaze.
Some time later I was the guest of a noble old thinker. I had
once made his acquaintance at a conference where he gave a
lecture on elementary folk-schools and I gave one on adult
folk-schools. That brought us together, for we were united by
the fact that the word “folk” has to be understood in both cases
in the same all-embracing sense. At that time I was happily
surprised at how the man with the steel-grey locks asked us
at the beginning of his talk to forget all that we believed we
knew about his philosophy from his books. In the last years,
which had been war years, reality had been brought so close
to him that he saw everything with new eyes and had to
think in a new way. To be old is a glorious thing when one
has not unlearned what it means to begin, this old man had
even perhaps first learned it thoroughly in old age. He was not
at all young, but he was old in a young way, knowing how to
begin.
He lived in another university city situated in the west.
When the theology students of that university invited me to

Prelude: Report on Two Talks 5

speak about prophecy, I stayed with the old man. There was a
good spirit in his house, the spirit that wills to enter life and
does not prescribe to life where it shall let it in.
One morning I got up early in order to read proofs. The
evening before I had received galley proof of the preface of
a book of mine, and since this preface was a statement of
faith, I wished to read it once again quite carefully before
it was printed. Now I took it into the study below that had
been offered to me in case I should need it. But here the old
man already sat at his writing-desk. Directly after greeting me
he asked me what I had in my hand, and when I told him,
he asked whether I would not read it aloud to him. I did so
gladly. He listened in a friendly manner but clearly astonished, indeed with growing amazement. When I was through,
he spoke hesitatingly, then, carried away by the importance
of his subject, ever more passionately. “How can you bring
yourself to say ‘God’ time after time? How can you expect
that your readers will take the word in the sense in which you
wish it to be taken? What you mean by the name of God is
something above all human grasp and comprehension, but in
speaking about it you have lowered it to human conceptualization. What word of human speech is so misused, so defiled,
so desecrated as this! All the innocent blood that has been
shed for it has robbed it of its radiance. All the injustice that
it has been used to cover has effaced its features. When I hear
the highest called ‘God,’ it sometimes seems almost blasphemous.”
The kindly clear eyes flamed. The voice itself flamed. Then
we sat silent for awhile facing each other. The room lay in the
flowing brightness of early morning. It seemed to me as if a
power from the light entered into me. What I now answered, I
cannot to-day reproduce but only indicate.

6 Chapter 1

“Yes,” I said, “it is the most heavy-laden of all human words.
None has become so soiled, so mutilated. Just for this reason
I may not abandon it. Generations of men have laid the burden of their anxious lives upon this word and weighed it to
the ground; it lies in the dust and bears their whole burden.
The races of man with their religious factions have torn the
word to pieces; they have killed for it and died for it, and it
bears their finger-marks and their blood. Where might I find
a word like it to describe the highest! If I took the purest, most
sparkling concept from the inner treasure-chamber of the philosophers, I could only capture thereby an unbinding product
of thought. I could not capture the presence of Him whom the
generations of men have honoured and degraded with their
awesome living and dying. I do indeed mean Him whom the
hell-tormented and heaven-storming generations of men
mean. Certainly, they draw caricatures and write ‘God’ underneath; they murder one another and say ‘in God’s name.’ But
when all madness and delusion fall to dust, when they stand
over against Him in the loneliest darkness and no longer say
‘He, He’ but rather sigh ‘Thou,’ shout ‘Thou,’ all of them the
one word, and when they then add ‘God,’ is it not the real
God whom they all implore, the One Living God, the God
of the children of man? Is it not He who hears them? And
just for this reason is not the word ‘God,’ the word of appeal,
the word which has become a name, consecrated in all human
tongues for all times? We must esteem those who interdict
it because they rebel against the injustice and wrong which
are so readily referred to ‘God’ for authorization. But we may
not give it up. How understandable it is that some suggest we
should remain silent about the ‘last things’ for a time in order
that the misused words may be redeemed! But they are not to
be redeemed thus. We cannot cleanse the word ‘God’ and we
cannot make it whole; but, defiled and mutilated as it is, we

Prelude: Report on Two Talks 7

can raise it from the ground and set it over an hour of great
care.”
It had become very light in the room. It was no longer
dawning, it was light. The old man stood up, came over to me,
laid his hand on my shoulder and spoke: “Let us be friends.”
The conversation was completed. For where two or three are
truly together, they are together in the name of God.

2
R ELIGION AND R EAL I TY

1
The relationship between religion and reality prevailing in a
given epoch is the most accurate index of its true character.
In some periods, that which men “believe in” as something
absolutely independent of themselves is a reality with which
they are in a living relation, although they well know that they
can form only a most inadequate representation of it. In other
periods, on the contrary, this reality is replaced by a varying
representation that men “have” and therefore can handle, or
by only a residue of the representation, a concept which bears
only faint traces of the original image.
Men who are still “religious” in such times usually fail to realize that the relation conceived of as religious no longer exists
between them and a reality independent of them, but has existence only within the mind—a mind which at the same time
contains hypostatized images, hypostatized “ideas.”
Concomitantly there appears, more or less clearly, a certain
type of person, who thinks that this is as it should be: in the
opinion of this person, religion has never been anything but
an intra-psychic process whose products are “projected” on

8

Religion and Reality 9

a plane in itself fictitious but vested with reality by the soul.
Cultural epochs, such men say, can be classified according to
the imaginative strength of this projection; but in the end,
man, having attained to clear knowledge, must recognize that
every alleged colloquy with the divine was only a soliloquy, or
rather a conversation between various strata of the self. Thereupon, as a representative of this school in our time has done,
it becomes necessary to proclaim that God is “dead.” Actually,
this proclamation means only that man has become incapable
of apprehending a reality absolutely independent of himself
and of having a relation with it—incapable, moreover, of imaginatively perceiving this reality and representing it in images,
since it eludes direct contemplation. For the great images of
God fashioned by mankind are born not of imagination but
of real encounters with real divine power and glory. Man’s capacity to apprehend the divine in images is lamed in the same
measure as is his capacity to experience a reality absolutely independent of himself.

2
The foregoing naturally does not mean that a given concept of
God, a conceptual apprehension of the divine, necessarily impairs the concrete religious relationship. Everything depends
on the extent to which this concept of God can do justice to
the reality which it denotes, do justice to it as a reality. The more
abstract the concept, the more does it need to be balanced by
the evidence of living experience, with which it is intimately
bound up rather than linked in an intellectual system. The further removed a concept seems from anthropomorphism, the
more it must be organically completed by an expression of that
immediacy and, as it were, bodily nearness which overwhelm
man in his encounters with the divine, whether they fill him

10 Chapter 2

with awe, transport him with rapture, or merely give him guidance. Anthropomorphism always reflects our need to preserve
the concrete quality evidenced in the encounter; yet even this
need is not its true root: it is in the encounter itself that we are
confronted with something compellingly anthropomorphic,
something demanding reciprocity, a primary Thou. This is true
of those moments of our daily life in which we become aware
of the reality that is absolutely independent of us, whether it
be as power or as glory, no less than of the hours of great revelation of which only a halting record has been handed down
to us.
We find an all-important example of the necessary supplementation of a genuine concept of God by an interpretation of
what man experiences humanly, occurring just a little before the
dawn of our own era, in the doctrine of Spinoza. In his theory of the divine attributes he seems to have undertaken the
greatest anti-anthropomorphic effort ever essayed by the human
spirit. He designates the number of the attributes of the divine
substance as infinite. However, he gives names to only two of
these, “extension” and “thought”—in other words, the cosmos
and the spirit. Thus everything given us, both from without
and within ourselves, taken together, accounts for only two of
the infinite number of the attributes of God. This proposition
of Spinoza’s implies, among other things, a warning against
identifying God with a “spiritual principle,” as has been attempted particularly in our own era with ever greater insistence; for even the spirit is only one of the angelic forms, so
to speak, in which God manifests Himself. However, despite
the abstractness of the concept, the greatness of God is here
expressed in an incomparably vivid way.
Nevertheless, this highest concept of God would have remained confined to the sphere of discursive thinking, and divorced from religious actuality, if Spinoza had not introduced

Religion and Reality 11

into his doctrine an element which for all that it is intended
to be purely “intellectual,” is necessarily based on the experience that by its very nature draws man out of the domain
of abstract thinking and puts him in actual relation with the
real, namely, love. In this, although his exposition here is as
strictly conceptual as everywhere else, Spinoza actually starts
not from a concept but from a concrete fact, without which
the conceptual formulation would have been impossible—
and that fact is that there are men who love God (regardless
of whether they are many or few, Spinoza himself obviously
knew this fact from his own experience). He conceived of their
love of God as God’s love of Himself, actualized by His creation, and encompassing man’s love of God as well as God’s
love of man. Thus God—the very God among the infinity of
whose attributes nature and spirit are only two—loves, and
since His love becomes manifest in our love of Him the divine
love must be of the same essence as human love. In this way
the most extreme anti-anthropomorphism evolves into a sublime anthropomorphism. Here too we end up by recognizing
that we have encountered the reality of God; it is truly an encounter, for it takes place here in the realization of the identity
(unum et idem) of His love and ours, although we, finite natural
and spiritual beings, are in no wise identical with Him, who is
infinite.

3
Spinoza began with propositions stating that God is, that He exists not as a spiritual principle which has no being except in the
mind of him who thinks it, but as a reality, a self-subsisting reality absolutely independent of our existence; this he expresses
in the concept of substance. But he concluded with propositions implying that this God stands in a living relationship to

12 Chapter 2

us, and we in a living relationship to him. Spinoza includes
these two aspects in the one concept of God’s intellectual love,
and the adjective “intellectual” is to be construed in the light of
the anti-anthropomorphic tendency of this philosopher, who
was endeavouring to put an end to the human disposition to
conceive images of God. Thus he aimed to give greater stringency to the Biblical prohibition, without, however, impairing
the reality of the relation between God and man. He failed to
avoid this impairment solely because he recognized only the
supreme aspect of the relation, but not its core, the dialogue
between God and man—the divine voice speaking in what befalls man, and man answering in what he does or forbears to
do. However, Spinoza clearly stated his intention.
The thinking of our time is characterized by an essentially
different aim. It seeks, on the one hand, to preserve the idea
of the divine as the true concern of religion, and, on the other
hand, to destroy the reality of the idea of God and thereby
also the reality of our relation to Him. This is done in many
ways, overtly and covertly, apodictically and hypothetically, in
the language of metaphysics and of psychology.
An argument against Spinoza, which long remained unknown, and to which insufficient attention is paid even to-day,
was formulated at the beginning of our era. It is a proposition
found (together with several variants) in the remarkable notes
set down by Kant in his old age: “God is not an external substance, but only a moral condition within us.” It is true that Kant
did not stop with this proposition. In the course of his restless search he propounded diametrically opposite theses in the
same notes, but the reader who does not shrink from the arduous labour of reading them will nevertheless recognize that
this is what Kant ultimately sought and tried to apprehend—a
God who would meet the requirement of the philosopher’s
earlier “postulate of practical reason,” a God who would over-

Religion and Reality 13

come the contradiction between the imperative, which is unconditional, and any immanent justification, which is conditional; a God who is “the source of all moral obligation.”
The fact that a God who is nothing but a condition within
us cannot meet this requirement, that only an absolute can
give the quality of absoluteness to an obligation, is the spur
of Kant’s restlessness. He had tried to avoid this fundamental
difficulty in his moral philosophy by putting human society in
place of the individual man, believing that the continued existence of this society depends upon the moral principle. But do
we not discover, in the depth of any genuine solitude, that even
beyond all social existence—nay, precisely in this realm—there
is a conflict between good and evil, between fulfilment and
failure to fulfil the purpose embodied in us, in this individual
being? And yet I am constitutionally incapable of conceiving
of myself as the ultimate source of moral approval or disapproval of myself, as surety for the absoluteness that I, to be
sure, do not possess, but nevertheless imply with respect to this
yes or no. The encounter with the original voice, the original
source of yes or no, cannot be replaced by any self-encounter.

4
Understandably, the thinking of the era, in its effort to make
God unreal, has not contented itself with reducing Him to
a moral principle. The philosophers who followed Kant have
tried essentially to reinstate the absolute, conceived of as existing not “within us,” or at least not only within us. The traditional term “God” is to be preserved for the sake of its profound overtones, but in such a way that any connection it may
have with our concrete life, as a life exposed to the manifestations of God, must become meaningless. The reality of a vision
or a contact that directly determines our existence, which was

14 Chapter 2

a fundamental certainty to thinkers such as Plato and Plotinus, Descartes and Leibniz, is no longer found in the world
of Hegel (if we disregard his youthful works, which have a
completely different orientation). “The spiritual principle, that
which we call God,” and which “alone is real,” is, by its nature,
accessible only to reason, not to the whole of man as he lives
his concrete life. The radical abstraction, with which philosophizing begins for Hegel, ignores the existential reality of
the I and of the Thou, together with that of everything else.
According to Hegel, the absolute—universal reason, the Idea,
i.e., “God”—uses everything that exists and develops in nature
and in history, including everything that relates to man, as an
instrument of its, i.e., God’s, self-realization and perfect selfawareness; but God never enters into a living, direct relation to
us, nor does He vouchsafe us such a relation to Him.
At the same time, however, Hegel takes a peculiarly ambivalent attitude toward Spinoza’s amor Dei. “The life of God and
of the divine element,” he says, “might be described as love in
love with itself ” (“ein Spielen der Liebe mit sich selbst ”). But he
adds at once, “This idea degenerates to mere edification and
even insipidity if it does not include the seriousness, the pain,
the patience, and the labour of the negative.” For Hegel, it follows from this quite correct insight (which, it is true, does not
at all apply to Spinoza’s thought) that God Himself must be
drawn into the dialectical process, in which negations emerge
in order to be transcended. But thereby the concrete encounter
between God and the contradiction, as it is documented with
human existence, personal and historical, is relegated to the
domain of fiction. The substance which, from among the infinity of its attributes, reveals to us only two, nature and spirit, and
yet lets its infinite love shine in our finite love, here becomes
the subject of an absolute process encompassing nature and
spirit, which in this very process “achieves its truth, its con-

Religion and Reality 15

sciousness of itself ” in “an irresistible urge.” In this process, in
which the use of universal reason “mobilizes the passions for
its own purposes,” as Hegel puts it, “individuals are sacrificed
and surrendered.” The basic theme of all religions, which even
so-called atheistic philosophies could only vary, the dramatic
conflict between limited and unlimited being, is extinguished,
because it is replaced by the exclusive rule of a universal spirit
wrestling with and for itself, using everything as a means and
consuming everything. Hegel, who wanted to preserve religion
by renewing its form, by amending “revealed” (offenbarte) religion and transforming it into “manifest” (offenbare) religion,
has denuded it of reality for the era now closing. “There is no
longer anything mysterious about God,” he says of this stage
of development which he regards as the highest. Nothing
mysterious indeed, except that what is here and now called
God can no longer be for man that God which he encounters,
both deeply mysterious and manifest, in his despairs and in his
raptures.

5
Nietzsche’s saying that God is dead, that we have slain Him,
dramatically sums up the end situation of the era. But even
more eloquent than this proclamation, which recapitulates a
proposition of Hegel1 with a change of accent and meaning,
are the attempts to fill the horizon that has been declared
empty. I shall mention here only two of the most important
of these attempts.
1 The connection has recently been pointed out by Heidegger. Hegel, in his essay
“Faith and Knowledge,” written in 1802, sought to express the essence of the feeling
“on which the religion of the modern era rests” in the words, “God himself is dead.”
He refers in explanation to Pascal’s phrase, “the lost God.” But these three expressions
actually mark three very different stages on one road.

16 Chapter 2

Bergson’s point of departure is the fact of the effort créateur
que manifeste la vie. This effort, he says, “is of God (est de Dieu),
if it is not God Himself.” The second part of the sentence nullifies the first. An effort, i.e., a process, or the preliminary forms
of a process, cannot be named God, without making the concept of God utterly meaningless. Further, and most especially,
the crucial religious experiences of man do not take place in a
sphere in which creative energy operates without contradiction, but in a sphere in which evil and good, despair and hope,
the power of destruction and the power of rebirth, dwell side
by side. The divine force which man actually encounters in life
does not hover above the demonic, but penetrates it. To confine God to a producing function is to remove Him from the
world in which we live—a world filled with burning contradictions, and with yearning for salvation.
The conception represented by Heidegger is of an essentially different kind. Unlike Bergson, he does not aim at a new
concept of God. He accepts Nietzsche’s statement about the
death of God and interprets it. This interpretation is doubtless
correct to some extent. He holds the sentence “God is slain” to
mean that contemporary man has shifted the concept of God
from the realm of objective being to the “immanence of subjectivity.” Indeed, specifically modern thought can no longer
endure a God who is not confined to man’s subjectivity, who is
not merely a “supreme value,” and, as we have seen, this thought
leads us down a path which although by no means straight, is
ultimately unmistakable. But then Heidegger goes on to say:
“The slaying means the elimination of the self-subsisting suprasensual world by man.” This sentence likewise, taken by
itself, is correct, but it leads to crucial problems that neither
Nietzsche—if Heidegger interprets him correctly—nor Heidegger has perceived or acknowledged. By the “self-subsisting
suprasensual world” Heidegger means “the highest ends, the

Religion and Reality 17

foundations and principles of the existent, the ideals, as well as
the suprasensual, God and the gods.” But the living God who
approaches and addresses an individual in the situations of real
life is not a component part of such a suprasensual world; His
place is no more there than it is in the sensible world, and
whenever man nonetheless has to interpret encounters with
Him as self-encounters, man’s very structure is destroyed. This
is the portent of the present hour.
Heidegger rightfully looks upon this hour as an hour of
night. Thus he refers to a verse of Hölderlin, the great poet to
whose work he has devoted some of his most important interpretative writings. Hölderlin says:
Aber weh! es wandelt in Nacht, es wohnt, wie im Orkus,
Ohne Goettliches unser Geschlecht.
(But alas! our generation walks in night, dwells as in Hades,
without the divine.)
It is true that Heidegger holds out the promise, even
though only as a possibility, of an intellectual transformation
from which day may dawn again, and then “the appearing of
God and the gods may begin again.” But this coupling of an
absolute singular with an iridescent plural has a ring different from that of the verses in which Hölderlin a century and
a half ago praised God and His manifestations in the active
forces of nature, i.e., the gods. To-day, when we are faced by
the question of our destiny, the question as to the essential
difference between all subjectivity and that which transcends
it, the juxtaposition of such a singular and such a plural seems
to indicate that after the imageless era a new procession of
images may begin—images of God and images of gods, images
of God and gods together—without man’s again experiencing and accepting his real encounters with the divine as such.
But without the truth of the encounter, all images are illusion

18 Chapter 2

and self-deception. And who would dare, in this hour when
all speech must have a deadly seriousness, to juxtapose God
and the gods on the plane of the real encounter? Indeed, there
was once a time when a man invoking a god in true dedication to him, really meant God Himself, the divinity of God,
manifesting itself to him as a force or a form, at that moment
and in that place. But this time is no longer. And even Hölderlin, when, associating singular and plural, said, der Goetter
Gott, “the God of the gods,” meaning not merely the most high
of the gods, but Him whom the “gods” themselves worship as
their god.

6
Eclipse of the light of heaven, eclipse of God—such indeed
is the character of the historic hour through which the world
is passing. But it is not a process which can be adequately accounted for by instancing the changes that have taken place
in man’s spirit. An eclipse of the sun is something that occurs
between the sun and our eyes, not in the sun itself. Nor does
philosophy consider us blind to God. Philosophy holds that
we lack to-day only the spiritual orientation which can make
possible a reappearance “of God and the gods,” a new procession of sublime images. But when, as in this instance, something is taking place between heaven and earth, one misses
everything when one insists on discovering within earthly
thought the power that unveils the mystery. He who refuses to
submit himself to the effective reality of the transcendence as
such—our vis-à-vis—contributes to the human responsibility
for the eclipse.
Assume that man has now fully brought about “the elimination of the self-subsisting suprasensual world,” and that the
principles and the ideals which have characterized man in any

Religion and Reality 19

way, to any extent, no longer exist. His true vis-à-vis, which,
unlike principles and ideals, cannot be described as It, but can
be addressed and reached as Thou, may be eclipsed for man
during the process of elimination; yet this vis-à-vis lives intact
behind the wall of darkness. Man may even do away with the
name “god,” which after all implies a possessive, and which,
if the possessor rejects it, i.e., if there is no longer a “God of
man,” has lost its raison d’être: yet He who is denoted by the
name lives in the light of His eternity. But we, “the slayers,”
remain dwellers in darkness, consigned to death.
According to a Jewish legend, Adam and Eve, when they
rejected God on the day of their creation and were driven out
of the Garden, saw the sun set for the first time. They were
terrified, for they could interpret this phenomenon only as a
sign that the world was to sink back into chaos because of their
guilt. Both of them wept, sitting face to face, the whole night
through, and they underwent a change of heart. Then morning
dawned. Adam rose, caught a unicorn, and offered it as a sacrifice in place of himself.

3
R E LIGION AND PHILOSOPHY

1
The difficulty of making a radical distinction between the
spheres of philosophy and religion, and, at the same time, the
correct way of overcoming this difficulty, appear most clearly
to us when we contrast two figures who are representative of
the two spheres—Epicurus and Buddha.
Not only does Epicurus teach that there are gods, that is to
say, immortal and perfect beings who live in the spaces between
the worlds and yet are without power over the world or interest in it, but he also holds that one should worship these gods
through pious representations of them and through the traditional rites, especially devout and fitting sacrifices. He says that
he himself worships and sacrifices, but then cites the words of a
character from a comedy: “I have sacrificed to gods who take no
notice of me.” Here is a kind of dogma and also a cultic practice,
and yet clearly a philosophical rather than a religious attitude.
Buddha treats the gods of popular belief, so far as he deigns
to mention them at all, with calm and considered goodwill, not
unmixed with irony. These gods are, to be sure, powerful, and,
unlike the gods of Epicurus, concerned with the human world.

20

Religion and Philosophy 21

But they are bound like men by the chain of desire, heavenly
figures entangled, even as men, in the “wheel of births.” One
may worship them, but the legends consistently picture them
as paying homage to him, the Buddha, the “Awakened One,”
freed and freeing from the wheel of births. On the other hand,
Buddha knows a genuinely divine, an “Unborn, Unoriginated,
Uncreated.” He knows it only in this wholly negative designation, and he refuses to make any assertions about it. Yet he stands
related to it with his whole being. Here is neither proclamation
nor worship of a deity, yet unmistakable religious reality.

2
Thus the personal manifestation of the divine is not decisive
for the genuineness of religion. What is decisive is that I relate myself to the divine as to Being which is over against me,
though not over against me alone. Complete inclusion of the
divine in the sphere of the human self abolishes its divinity. It
is not necessary to know something about God in order really to believe in Him: many true believers know how to talk
to God but not about Him. If one dares to turn toward the
unknown God, to go to meet Him, to call to Him, Reality is
present. He who refuses to limit God to the transcendent has a
fuller conception of Him than he who does so limit Him. But
he who confines God within the immanent means something
other than Him.
The radical difference between the two becomes clear when
one compares religious speech in Aeschylus with that in Euripides. In Agamemnon the chorus says:
Zeus, whoever he is,
If it pleases him so to be called,
With this name I invoke him.

22 Chapter 3

How the passage, “whoever he is,” is to be understood is shown
by a fragment from the same poet that expresses his feelings
in a paradox:
Zeus is all and what is more than all.
Here immanence is united with transcendence. But in connection with the following passage, “If it pleases him so to be
called,” the scholiast rightly refers to the sentence in Plato’s
Cratylus: “We know neither the nature nor the true names of
the gods.” The next sentence explains that just for this reason
we address them in prayer by the names they like.
In the Trojan Women of Euripides, on the other hand, the
old queen calls upon Zeus in the following manner:
O Foundation of the earth and above it throned,
Whoever thou art, beyond our mind’s poor grasp,
Whether Zeus or Fate or spirit of men,
I implore thee.
Despite the resemblance of the beginning to the fragment of
Aeschylus, the religious situation is abolished by the total immanence which is considered in what follows as one of the
possibilities. As if one could pray to the “spirit of men”! Fragments of another tragedy of Euripides show us further what is
meant. One of them says:
We are the slaves of gods, whatever gods may be.
and another reads:
Zeus, whoever Zeus indeed may be,—
Only through hearsay know I aught of him.
It is a decisively significant way which leads from the “whoever
he is” of Aeschylus to the seemingly similar “whoever Zeus indeed may be” of the last of the great tragedians. It is, of course,

Religion and Philosophy 23

not the poet who speaks here but his characters, yet they unquestionably express the actual inner situation of his life.
It is the situation of the man who no longer experiences
the divine as standing over against him. It does not matter
whether he does not dare or is unable to experience it as such.
Since he has removed himself from it existentially, he no longer
knows it as standing over against him. Although the chorus of
Aeschylus also speaks of God in the third person, it makes a
genuine invocation from human to divine being. On the other
hand, in the pathos of Hecuba, despite its threefold saying of
“Thou,” no true Thou is in reality implied.
Protagoras once remarked that he could ascertain neither
that gods exist nor that they do not, for the discovery is hindered by the mysteriousness of the subject and the brevity of
human life. This famous saying translates the situation into
the language of philosophical consciousness, but it is a consciousness which is strongly conditioned by the time in which
Protagoras lived. For this particular consciousness, which
caught up and absorbed all that was absolute in the mirror of
a universal relativism, the question about the gods had become
merely the question whether it was possible to ascertain their
existence. To the great thinkers of the preceding age this question would have appeared meaningless. In Heraclitus’ saying,
“Here also are gods,” the word “also” is a strong indication of
the existence of immediately present divine being. And when
he explains that the One which alone is wise wishes and does
not wish to be called by the name of Zeus, he has given philosophical expression to an original relation between religion
and philosophy as that between the meeting with the divine
and its objectification in thought. The dissolution of this relation is proclaimed by the sophist, to whom the myths and
cults of popular tradition are no longer witness and symbol
of a transcendent presence, but rather only something in the

24 Chapter 3

nature of imagination or play. To the man who is no longer
able to meet yet is as able: as ever to think, the only possible
religious question is whether man can ascertain the existence
of the gods. This question, in the absence of any experience,
must be answered in the negative. With the complete separation, however, of philosophy from religion, which latter is now,
at most, of interest to philosophy only from the standpoint of
the history of the human spirit, the possibility and the task of
a radical distinction between the two spheres come into existence for the first time. This possibility and this task encompass,
certainly, not only the epochs of separation but also those early
periods in which each philosophy is still connected with a religion yet cogitative truth and reality of faith are already sharply
distinguished. Indeed, it is just when we examine those early
periods that many important distinguishing marks come most
clearly to light.

3
All great religiousness shows us that reality of faith means
living in relationship to Being “believed in,” that is, unconditionally affirmed, absolute Being. All great philosophy, on
the other hand, shows us that cogitative truth means making
the absolute into an object from which all other objects must
be derived. Even if the believer has in mind an unlimited and
nameless absolute which cannot be conceived in a personal
form, if he really thinks of it as existing Being which stands
over against him, his belief has existential reality. Conversely,
even if he thinks of the absolute as limited within personal
form, if he reflects on it as on an object, he is philosophizing.
Even when the “Unoriginated” is not addressed with voice or
soul, religion is still founded on the duality of I and Thou. Even
when the philosophical act culminates in a vision of unity, phi-

Religion and Philosophy 25

losophy is founded on the duality of subject and object. The
duality of I and Thou finds its fulfilment in the religious relationship; the duality of subject and object sustains philosophy
while it is carried on. The first arises out of the original situation
of the individual, his living before the face of Being, turned toward him as he is turned toward it. The second springs from
the splitting apart of this togetherness into two entirely distinct
modes of existence, one which is able to do nothing but observe
and reflect and one which is able to do nothing but be observed
and reflected upon. I and Thou exist in and by means of lived
concreteness; subject and object, products of abstraction, last
only as long as that power is at work. The religious relationship,
no matter what different forms and constellations it takes, is in
its essence nothing other than the unfolding of the existence
that is lent to us. The philosophical attitude is the product of
a consciousness which conceives of itself as autonomous and
strives to become so. In philosophy the spirit of man gathers
itself by virtue of the spiritual work. Indeed, one might say that
here, on the peak of consummated thought, spirituality, which
has been disseminated throughout the person, first becomes
spiritual substance. But in religion, when this is nothing other
than simple existence which has unfolded as a whole person
standing over against eternal Being, spirituality too becomes a
part of personal wholeness.
Philosophy errs in thinking of religion as founded in a
noetical act, even if an inadequate one, and in therefore regarding the essence of religion as the knowledge of an object
which is indifferent to being known. As a result, philosophy
understands faith as an affirmation of truth lying somewhere
between clear knowledge and confused opinion. Religion, on
the other hand, insofar as it speaks of knowledge at all, does
not understand it as a noetic relation of a thinking subject to a
neutral object of thought, but rather as mutual contact, as the

26 Chapter 3

genuinely reciprocal meeting in the fullness of life between
one active existence and another. Similarly, it understands faith
as the entrance into this reciprocity, as binding oneself in relationship with an undemonstrable and unprovable, yet even
so, in relationship, knowable Being, from whom all meaning
comes.

4
Another attempt at demarcation, the mature attempt of modern philosophy, distinguishes between the intention of each.
According to this conception, philosophy is directed toward
the investigation of essence, religion toward inquiry about
salvation. Now salvation is, to be sure, a genuine and proper
religious category, but the inquiry into salvation differs from
the investigation of essence only in the way in which it is considered. The principal tendency of religion is rather to show
the essential unity of the two. This is illustrated by the Old
Testament phrase, the “way of God,” also preserved in the language of the Gospels. The “way of God” is by no means to be
understood as a sum of prescriptions for human conduct, but
rather primarily as the way of God in and through the world.
It is the true sphere of the knowledge of God since it means
God’s becoming visible in His action. But it is at the same time
the way of salvation of men since it is the prototype for the imitation of God. Similarly, the Chinese Tao, the “path” in which
the world moves, is the cosmic primal meaning. But because
man conforms this his life to it and practises “imitation of the
Tao,” it is at the same time the perfection of the soul.
Something further, however, is to be noted in that regard,
namely, that as high as religion may place the inquiry into salvation it does not regard it as the highest and the essential
intention. What is really intended in the search for salvation

Religion and Philosophy 27

is the attainment of a condition freed from intention, from
arbitrariness. The search for salvation is concerned with the
effect of salvation, but the “Way” itself is the unarbitrary. Philosophy really means philosophizing; the realer religion is, so
much the more it means its own overcoming. It wills to cease
to be the special domain “Religion” and wills to become life.
It is concerned in the end not with specific religious acts, but
with redemption from all that is specific. Historically and biographically, it strives toward the pure Everyday. Religion is
in the religious view the exile of man; his homeland is unarbitrary life “in the face of God.” It goes against the realest will
of religion to describe it in terms of the special characteristics
that it has developed rather than in terms of its life-character.
Religion must, of course, be described in such a way that its
special characteristics do not evaporate into universality but
are instead seen as grounded in the fundamental relation of
religion to the whole of life.

5
When we look at the history of a historical religion, we see the
reoccurrence in different periods and phases of an inner battle
which remains essentially the same. It is the struggle of the religious element against the non-religious elements which invade it from all sides—metaphysics, gnosis, magic, politics, etc.
This medley seeks to take the place of the flowing life of faith
which is renewed in the flux. It finds helpers in myth and cult,
both of which originally served only as expression of the religious relationship. In order to preserve its purity the religious
element must combat the tendency of this conglomerate to
become autonomous and to make itself independent of the
religious life of the person. This battle is consummated in prophetic protest, heretical revolt, reformational retrenchment, and

28 Chapter 3

a new founding which arises through the desire to return to
the original religious element. It is a struggle for the protection
of lived concreteness as the meeting-place between the human
and the divine. The actually lived concrete is the “moment”
in its unforeseeableness and its irrecoverableness, in its undivertible character of happening but once, in its decisiveness,
in its secret dialogue between that which happens and that
which is willed, between fate and action, address and answer.
This lived concreteness is threatened by the invasion of the
extra-religious elements, and it is protected on all fronts by the
religious in its unavoidable aloneness.
The religious essence in every religion can be found in its
highest certainty. That is the certainty that the meaning of existence is open and accessible in the actual lived concrete, not
above the struggle with reality but in it.
That meaning is open and accessible in the actual lived concrete does not mean it is to be won and possessed through
any type of analytical or synthetic investigation or through any
type of reflection upon the lived concrete. Meaning is to be
experienced in living action and suffering itself, in the unreduced immediacy of the moment. Of course, he who aims at
the experiencing of experience will necessarily miss the meaning, for he destroys the spontaneity of the mystery. Only he
reaches the meaning who stands firm, without holding back or
reservation, before the whole might of reality and answers it in
a living way. He is ready to confirm with his life the meaning
which he has attained.
Every religious utterance is a vain attempt to do justice to
the meaning which has been attained. All religious expression
is only an intimation of its attainment. The reply of the people
of Israel on Sinai, “We will do it, we will hear it,” expresses the
decisive with naïve and unsurpassable pregnancy. The meaning

Religion and Philosophy 29

is found through the engagement of one’s own person; it only
reveals itself as one takes part in its revelation.

6
All religious reality begins with what Biblical religion calls the
“fear of God.” It comes when our existence between birth and
death becomes incomprehensible and uncanny, when all security is shattered through the mystery. This is not the relative
mystery of that which is inaccessible only to the present state
of human knowledge and is hence in principle discoverable. It
is the essential mystery, the inscrutableness of which belongs
to its very nature; it is the unknowable. Through this dark gate
(which is only a gate and not, as some theologians believe,
a dwelling) the believing man steps forth into the everyday
which is henceforth hallowed as the place in which he has to
live with the mystery. He steps forth directed and assigned
to the concrete, contextual situations of his existence. That he
henceforth accepts the situation as given him by the Giver is
what Biblical religion calls the “fear of God.”
An important philosopher of our day, Whitehead, asks how
the Old Testament saying that the fear of God is the beginning
of wisdom is to be reconciled with the New Testament saying
that God is love. Whitehead has not fully grasped the meaning of the word “beginning.” He who begins with the love of
God without having previously experienced the fear of God,
loves an idol which he himself has made, a god whom it is easy
enough to love. He does not love the real God who is, to begin
with, dreadful and incomprehensible. Consequently, if he then
perceives, as Job and Ivan Karamazov perceive, that God is
dreadful and incomprehensible, he is terrified. He despairs of
God and the world if God does not take pity on him, as He did

30 Chapter 3

on Job, and bring him to love Him Himself. This is presumably
what Whitehead meant when he said that religion is the passage
from God the void to God the enemy and from Him to God
the companion. That the believing man who goes through the
gate of dread is directed to the concrete contextual situations of
his existence means just this: that he endures in the face of God
the reality of lived life, dreadful and incomprehensible though it
be. He loves it in the love of God, whom he has learned to love.
For this reason, every genuine religious expression has an
open or a hidden personal character, for it is spoken out of a
concrete situation in which the person takes part as a person.
This is true also in those instances where, out of a noble modesty, the word “I” is in principle avoided. Confucius, who spoke
of himself almost as unwillingly as of God, once said: “I do
not murmur against God, and I bear no ill will toward men. I
search here below, but I penetrate above. He who knows me is
God.” Religious expression is bound to the concrete situation.
That one accepts the concrete situation as given to him
does not, in any way, mean that he must be ready to accept
that which meets him as “God-given” in its pure factuality. He
may, rather, declare the extremest enmity toward this happening and treat its “givenness” as only intended to draw forth his
own opposing force. But he will not remove himself from the
concrete situation as it actually is; he will, instead, enter into it,
even if in the form of fighting against it. Whether field of work
or field of battle, he accepts the place in which he is placed. He
knows no floating of the spirit above concrete reality; to him
even the sublimest spirituality is an illusion if it is not bound
to the situation. Only the spirit which is bound to the situation
is prized by him as bound to the Pneuma, the spirit of God.
As an objection to the definition of religion which I have
suggested, one might adduce the ascetic tendencies of some
religions. Insofar, however, as they do not weaken the religious

Religion and Philosophy 31

itself, these tendencies do not mean any turning away from the
lived concrete. The disposition of life and the choice of lifeelements to be affirmed has changed here. But this change is
not in the direction of slackening the relation to the moment,
which one is rather seeking to intensify. One desires to rescue
the relation to the moment by means of asceticism because one
despairs of being able to subjugate the non-ascetic elements, and
hence the fullness of life, to the religious. The meaning no longer
appears to him as open and attainable in the fullness of life.
The ascetic “elevation” is something entirely different from
the philosophical. It is also a form of concretion, though one
which is attained through reduction.

7
Philosophizing and philosophy, in contrast, begin ever anew
with one’s definitely looking away from his concrete situation,
hence with the primary act of abstraction.
What is meant here by abstraction is simple, anthropological
matter of fact and not the “radical abstraction” with which Hegel
demands that the philosopher begin. Hegel can call the creation
of the world an abstraction from nothing, while for us it involves
precisely the establishment of that concrete reality from which
the philosophizing man does and must look away. Hegel can
describe “the highest being” as “pure abstraction” while the religious man, on the contrary, is certain that in the course of this
his mortality he can meet God in God’s very giving and in his,
man’s, receiving of the concrete situation. By primary abstraction
we mean the inner action in which man lifts himself above the
concrete situation into the sphere of precise conceptualization.
In this sphere the concepts no longer serve as a means of apprehending reality, but instead represent as the object of thought
being freed from the limitations of the actual.

32 Chapter 3

The decisiveness of this abstraction, of this turning away, is
sometimes hidden from sight when a philosopher acts as if he
would and could philosophize within his concrete situation. Descartes offers us the clearest example. When we hear him talk in
the first person, we feel as if we were hearing the voice of direct
personal experience. But it is not so. The I in the Cartesian ego
cogito is not the living, body-soul person whose corporality had
just been disregarded by Descartes as being a matter of doubt.
It is the subject of consciousness, supposedly the only function
which belongs entirely to our nature. In lived concreteness, in
which consciousness is the first violin but not the conductor,
this ego is not present at all. Ego cogito means to Descartes,
indeed, not simply “I have consciousness,” but “It is I who have
consciousness.” Ego cogito is, therefore, the product of a triply
abstracting reflection. Reflection, the “bending back” of a person on himself, begins by extracting from what is experienced
in the concrete situation “consciousness” (cogitatio), which is
not as such experienced there at all. It then ascertains that a
subject must belong to a consciousness and calls this subject
“I.” In the end, it identifies the person, this living body-soul
person, with that “I,” that is, with the abstract and abstractlyproduced subject of consciousness. Out of the “That” of the
concrete situation, which embraces perceiving and that which
is perceived, conceiving and that which is conceived, thinking
and that which is thought, arises, to begin with, an “I think
that.” A subject thinks this object. Then the really indispensable “That” (or Something or It) is omitted. Now we reach the
statement of the person about himself: therefore I (no longer
the subject, but the living person who speaks to us) have real
existence; for this existence is involved in that ego.
In this way Descartes sought through the method of abstraction to capture the concrete starting-point as knowledge,
but in vain. Not through such a deduction but only through

Religion and Philosophy 33

genuine intercourse with a Thou can the I of the living person
be experienced as existing. The concrete, from which all philosophizing starts, cannot again be reached by way of philosophical abstraction; it is irrecoverable.
Philosophy is entitled, however, to proclaim and to promise
as the highest reward of this necessary abstraction a looking
upward—no longer a looking here—at the objects of true vision, the “ideas.” This conception, prepared for by the Indian
teaching of the freeing of the knower from the world of experience, is first fully developed by the Greeks. The Greeks established the hegemony of the sense of sight over the other senses,
thus making the optical world into the world, into which the
data of the other senses are now to be entered. Correspondingly, they also gave to philosophizing, which for the Indian
was still only a bold attempt to catch hold of one’s own self, an
optical character, that is, the character of the contemplation of
particular objects. The history of Greek philosophy is that of an
opticizing of thought, fully clarified in Plato and perfected in
Plotinus. The object of this visual thought is the universal existence or as a reality higher than existence. Philosophy is grounded
on the presupposition that one sees the absolute in universals.
In opposition to this, religion, when it has to define itself
philosophically, says that it means the covenant of the absolute with the particular, with the concrete. For this reason, the
central event of Christian philosophy, the scholastic dispute
over the reality or unreality of universals, was in essence a philosophical struggle between religion and philosophy and that is
its lasting significance. In religious-sounding formulas such as
Malebranche’s “we see things in God” it is also philosophical
abstraction that speaks; for these “things” are not those of the
concrete situation but are as general as Platonic ideas (“les idées
intelligibles”). When, on the contrary, the religious man (or
Malebranche no longer as philosophical systematizer but as the

34 Chapter 3

religious man that he was) speaks the same sentence, he transforms it. “Things” mean now to him not archetypes or “perfect essences,” but the actual exemplars, the beings and objects
with which he, this bodily person, spends his life. When he
ventures to say that he sees them in God, he does not speak
of looking upward but of looking here. He acknowledges that
meaning is open and attainable in the lived concreteness of
every moment.
Plato gives us a glorious human and poetic account of the
mysterious fullness of the concrete situation. He also knows
gloriously how to remain silent. When, however, he explains
and answers for his silence in that unforgettable passage of the
seventh epistle, he starts, to be sure, from the concreteness of
“life together,” where “in an instant a light is kindled as from
springing fire.” But in order to explain he turns immediately
to an exposition of the knowing of the known, meaning the
universal. Standing in the concrete situation and even witnessing to it, man is overspanned by the rainbow of the covenant
between the absolute and the concrete. If he wishes in philosophizing to fix his glance upon the white light of the absolute
as the object of his knowledge, only archetypes or ideas, the
transfigurations of the universal, present themselves to him.
The color-free, beyond-color bridge fails to appear. Here also,
in my opinion, is to be found the reason why Plato changed
from the identification of the idea of the good with God, as
presented in his Republic, to the conception appearing in the
Timaeus of the demiurge who contemplates the Ideas.

8
Religion, however, is not allowed, even in the face of the most
self-confident pride of philosophy, to remain blind to philosophy’s great engagement. To this engagement necessarily be-

Religion and Philosophy 35

longs the actual, ever-recurring renunciation of the original
relational bond, of the reality which takes place between I and
Thou, of the spontaneity of the moment. Religion must know
knowledge not only as a need but also as a duty of man. It must
know that history moves along the way of this need and duty,
that, Biblically speaking, the eating of the tree of knowledge
leads out of Paradise but into the world.
The world, the world as objective and self-contained connection of all being, natural and spiritual, would not exist for
us if our thinking, which develops in philosophizing, did not
melt together the world-concreta which are presented to us.
It would not exist if our thinking did not merge these worldconcreta with one another and with all that man has ever experienced and has ever comprehended as experienceable. And
spirit all the more would not genuinely exist for us as objective connection if thought did not objectify it, if spirit itself as
philosophy did not objectify and unite itself. Only through the
fact that philosophy radically abandoned the relation with the
concrete did that amazing construction of an objective thoughtcontinuum become possible, with a static system of concepts
and a dynamic one of problems. Every man who can “think”
may enter this continuum through the simple use of this ability,
through a thinking comprehension of thought. Only through
this is there an “objective” mutual understanding, that is, one
which does not, like the religious, entail two men’s each recognizing the other by the personal involvement in life which he
has achieved. Instead, both fulfil a function of thought which
demands no involvement in life and bear in fruitful dialectic the
tension between the reciprocal ideas and problems.
The religious communication of a content of being takes place
in paradox. It is not a demonstrable assertion (theology which pretends to be this is rather a questionable type of philosophy), but a
pointing toward the hidden realm of existence of the hearing man

36 Chapter 3

himself and that which is to be experienced there and there
alone. Artistic communication, which ought not remain unmentioned here, takes place in the Gestalt, from which a communicated content cannot be detached and given independent
existence. A content of being is objectively communicable and
translatable only in and through philosophy, consequently only
through the objectifying elaboration of the situation.
A sceptical verdict about the ability of philosophy to lead
to and contain truth is in no way here implied. The possibility
of cogitative truth does not, indeed, mean a cogitative possession of being, but a cogitative real relation to being. Systems
of thought are manifestations of genuine thought-relations to
being made possible through abstraction. They are not mere
“aspects,” but rather valid documents of these cogitative voyages of discovery.
A similarity and a difference between the ways in which
religion and philosophy affect the person remain to be mentioned.
In religious reality the person has concentrated himself into
a whole, for it is only as a unified being that he is able to live
religiously. In this wholeness thought is naturally also included
as an autonomous province but one which no longer strives
to absolutize its autonomy. A totalization also takes place in
genuine philosophers but no unification. Instead, thinking
overruns and overwhelms all the faculties and provinces of the
person. In a great act of philosophizing even the finger-tips
think—but they no longer feel.

9
For man the existent is either face-to-face being or passive object. The essence of man arises from this twofold relation to the
existent. These are not two external phenomena but the two

Religion and Philosophy 37

basic modes of existing with being. The child that calls to his
mother and the child that watches his mother—or to give a
more exact example, the child that silently speaks to his mother
through nothing other than looking into her eyes and the same
child that looks at something on the mother as at any other
object—show the twofoldness in which man stands and remains standing. Something of the sort is sometimes even to be
noticed in those near death. What is here apparent is the double structure of human existence itself. Because these are the
two basic modes of our existence with being, they are the two
basic modes of our existence in general—I-Thou and I-It.
I-Thou finds its highest intensity and transfiguration in religious reality, in which unlimited Being becomes, as absolute
person, my partner. I-It finds its highest concentration and illumination in philosophical knowledge. In this knowledge the
extraction of the subject from the I of the immediate lived
togetherness of I and It and the transformation of the It into
the object detached in its essence produces the exact thinking
of contemplated existing beings, yes, of contemplated Being
itself.
Divine truth, according to a saying of Franz Rosenzweig,
wishes to be implored “with both hands,” that of philosophy
and that of theology. “He who prays with the double prayer
of the believer and the unbeliever,” he continues, “to him it
will not deny itself.” But what is the prayer of the unbeliever?
Rosenzweig means by this Goethe’s prayer to his own destiny,
a prayer which, no matter how genuine, brings to mind that
of the Euripidean queen to fate or the human spirit, a prayer
whose Thou is no Thou. But there is another prayer of the philosophers still farther from the Thou, and yet, it seems to me,
more important.
The religious reality of the meeting with the Meeter, who
shines through all forms and is Himself formless, knows no

38 Chapter 3

image of Him, nothing comprehensible as object. It knows only
the presence of the Present One. Symbols of Him, whether
images or ideas, always exist first when and insofar as Thou
becomes He, and that means It. But the ground of human
existence in which it gathers and becomes whole is also the
deep abyss out of which images arise. Symbols of God come
into being, some which allow themselves to be fixed in lasting visibility even in earthly material and some which tolerate
no other sanctuary than that of the soul. Symbols supplement
one another, they merge, they are set before the community
of believers in plastic or theological forms. And God, so we
may surmise, does not despise all these similarly and necessarily untrue images, but rather suffers that one look at Him
through them. Yet they always quickly desire to be more than
they are, more than signs and pointers toward Him. It finally
happens ever again that they swell themselves up and obstruct
the way to Him, and He removes Himself from them. Then
comes round the hour of the philosopher, who rejects both the
image and the God which it symbolizes and opposes to it the
pure idea, which he even at times understands as the negation
of all metaphysical ideas. This critical “atheism” (Atheoi is the
name which the Greeks gave to those who denied the traditional gods) is the prayer which is spoken in the third person
in the form of speech about an idea. It is the prayer of the philosopher to the again unknown God. It is well suited to arouse
religious men and to impel them to set forth right across the
God-deprived reality to a new meeting. On their way they destroy the images which manifestly no longer do justice to God.
The spirit moves them which moved the philosopher.

4
TH E LOVE OF GOD A ND
T HE ID EA OF DEIT Y

1
In those scribbled lines affecting us as cries of the very soul,
which Pascal wrote after two ecstatic hours, and which he carried about with him until his death, sewn into the lining of
his doublet, we find under the heading Fire the note: “God of
Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob—not of the philosophers and scholars.”
These words represent Pascal’s change of heart. He turned,
not from a state of being where there is no God to one where
there is a God, but from the God of the philosophers to the
God of Abraham. Overwhelmed by faith, he no longer knew
what to do with the God of the philosophers; that is, with the
God who occupies a definite position in a definite system of
thought. The God of Abraham, the God in whom Abraham
had believed and whom Abraham had loved (“The entire religion of the Jews,” remarks Pascal, “consisted only of the love
of God”), is not susceptible of introduction into a system of

39

40 Chapter 4

thought precisely because He is God. He is beyond each and
every one of those systems, absolutely and by virtue of His
nature. What the philosophers describe by the name of God
cannot be more than an idea. But God, “the God of Abraham,”
is not an idea; all ideas are absorbed in Him. Nor is that all. If I
think even of a state of being in which all ideas are absorbed, and
think some philosophic thought about it as an idea—then I am
no longer referring to the God of Abraham. The “passion” peculiar to philosophers is, according to a hint dropped by Pascal,
pride. They offer humanity their own system in place of God.
“What!” cries Pascal, “the philosophers recognized God and
desired not merely that men should love him, but that they
should reach their level and then stop!” It is precisely because
the philosophers replace him by the image of images, the idea,
that they remove themselves and remove the rest of us furthest
from him. There is no alternative. One must choose. Pascal
chose, during one of those all-overthrowing moments, when
he felt his sick-bed prayer was answered: “To be apart from the
world, divested of all things, lonely in your Presence, in order
to respond to your justice with all the motions of my heart.”
Pascal himself, to be sure, was not a philosopher but a mathematician, and it is easier for a mathematician to turn his back
on the God of the philosophers than for a philosopher. For the
philosopher, if he were really to wish to turn his back on that
God, would be compelled to renounce the attempt to include
God in his system in any conceptual form. Instead of including God as one theme among others, that is, as the highest
theme of all, his philosophy both wholly and in part would be
compelled to point toward God, without actually dealing with
him. This means that the philosopher would be compelled to
recognize and admit the fact that his idea of the Absolute was
dissolving at the point where the Absolute lives; that it was

The Love of God and the Idea of Deity 41

dissolving at the point where the Absolute is loved; because
at that point the Absolute is no longer the “Absolute” about
which one may philosophize, but God.

2
Those who wish clearly to grasp the nature of the endless and
hopeless struggle which lay in wait for the philosopher of the
critical period should read the very long notes in Kant’s unfinished posthumous work, written over a period of seven years
during his old age. They reveal a scene of incomparable existential tragedy. Kant calls the principle constituting the transition to the completion of the transcendental philosophy by
the name of the “Principle of Transcendental Theology”; here
his concern is with the questions, “What is God?” and “Is there
a God?”
Kant explains: “The function of transcendental philosophy
is still unresolved: Is there a God?” As long as there was no
reply to that question, the task of his philosophy was still unfulfilled; at the end of his days, when his spiritual powers were
waning, it was “still unresolved.” He toiled on at this problem,
constantly increasing his efforts, from time to time weaving the
answer, yet time and again unraveling the woof. He reached an
extreme formulation: “To think Him and to believe in Him is
an identical act.” Furthermore, “the thought of Him is at one
and the same time the belief in Him and his personality.” But
this faith does not result in God’s becoming existent for the
philosophy of the philosopher. “God is not an entity outside
of me, but merely a thought within me.” Or, as Kant says on
another occasion, “merely a moral relation within me.”
Nevertheless, He possesses a certain kind of “reality.” “God is
only an idea of reason, but one possessing the greatest practical

42 Chapter 4

internal and external reality.” Yet it is obvious that this kind of
reality is not adequate to make the thought about God identical with the “belief in Him and His personality.” Transcendental philosophy, whose task was to ascertain whether there is a
God, finally found itself compelled to state: “It is preposterous
to ask whether there is a God.”
The contradiction goes even deeper when Kant treats belief
from this point of view. He incidentally outlines a fundamental
distinction between “to believe God” and “to believe in God.”
“To believe God” obviously means God’s being the ideational
content of one’s faith. This is a deduction from the fact that
“to believe in God” means in the terminology of Kant, as he
himself expressly states, to believe in a living God. To believe
in God means, therefore, to stand in a personal relationship to
that God; a relationship in which it is possible to stand only
toward a living entity.
This distinction becomes still clearer through Kant’s addendum: to believe “not in an entity which is only an idol and is
not a personality.” It follows that a God who is not a living
personality is an idol. Kant comes that close at this point to
the reality of faith. But he does not permit its validity to stand.
His system compels him decisively to restrict what he has said.
The same page of manuscript contains the following passage:
“The idea of God as a living God is nothing but the inescapable fate of man.” But if the idea of God is only that, then it is
totally impossible to “believe in God” legitimately; that is, it is
impossible to stand in a personal relationship with him. Man,
declares the philosopher, is compelled to believe in him the
moment he thinks God. But the philosopher is compelled to
withdraw the character of truth from this faith, and together
with it the character of reality (any reality, that is, which is
more than merely psychological). Here, apparently of necessity,

The Love of God and the Idea of Deity 43

that which was decisive for Pascal, as it was for Abraham, is
missing; namely, the love of God.

3
But a philosopher who has been overwhelmed by faith must
speak of love.
Hermann Cohen, the last in the series of great disciples
of Kant, is a shining example of a philosopher who has been
overwhelmed by faith.
Belief in God was an important point in Cohen’s system
of thought as early as in his youth, when it interested him as
a psychological phenomenon. His explanations of “the origin
of the mythology of gods” and of the “poetic act” involved in
“god-creating fantasy,” contained in his study on “Mythological Conceptions concerning God and Soul” which appeared in
1868 in Steinthal’s periodical, Zeitschrift fuer Voelkerpsychologie,
was an expression of this interest. Faith was there treated as
relative to psychological distinction; but in the course of the
development of Cohen’s philosophical system faith’s status as
an independent concept, distinct from knowledge, was to become questionable.
In his “Ethics of Pure Will” (1904), Cohen writes: “God
must not become the content of belief, if that belief is to mean
something distinct from knowledge.” Of the two kinds of belief which Kant distinguishes in his posthumous work, namely,
“to believe God” (that is, to introduce the idea of God into a
system of knowledge), and “to believe in a living God” (that is,
to have a vital relationship to him as a living entity), Cohen
rejects the second even more strongly than Kant. In this way
he means to overcome the “great equivocality” of the word “belief.” Whereas Kant saw in the idea of God only the “fate” of

44 Chapter 4

the human species, Cohen wishes to “separate the concept of
life from the concept of God.” He finds support for his argument in Maimonides (though he limited the extent of that
support three years later, saying that Maimonides had been
careful to distinguish between the concept of life when applied
to God and the same concept when applied to man; a distinction on the part of Maimonides which entirely differs from
Cohen’s distinction).
God is an idea for Cohen, as he was for Kant. “We call God
an idea,” says Cohen, “meaning the center of all ideas, the idea
of truth.” God is not a personality; as such He only appears
“within the confines of myth.” And He is no existence at all,
neither a natural existence nor a spiritual, “just as in general the
idea cannot be linked with the concept of existence.” The concept of God is introduced into the structure of ethical thought,
because, as the idea of truth, it is instrumental in establishing
the unity of nature and morality. This view of God as an idea
Cohen regards as “the true religiosity,” which can evolve only
when every relation involving belief in a living God is shown
to be problematical, and nullified. God’s only place is within a
system of thought. The system defends itself with stupendous
vigour against the living God who is bound to make questionable its perfection, and even its absolute authority. Cohen, the
thinker, defends himself against the belief which, rising out of
an ancient heritage, threatens to overwhelm him. He defends
himself with success; the success of the system-creator. Cohen
has constructed the last home for the God of the philosophers.
And yet Cohen has been overwhelmed by faith in more exemplary fashion than any other of the contemporary philosophers, although his labours to incorporate God into a system
were in no way hindered. On the contrary: from that moment
his labours turned into an admirable wrestle with his own experience.

The Love of God and the Idea of Deity 45

Cohen objectified the results of his succumbing to faith by
merging it in his system of concepts. Nowhere in his writings
does he directly state it; but the evidence is striking. When was
it that the decisive change occurred?

4
The answer lies in the change that crept into Cohen’s way of
thinking about the love of God. It was only at a late period
that Cohen, who concurrently with the development of his
system was dealing in a series of essays with the heritage of
the Jewish faith, gave an adequate place to the cornerstone of
that faith, the love of God, the essential means by which the
Jewish faith realized its full and unique value. Only three years
after the “Ethics,” in his important research into “Religion and
Morality,” whose formulations, even keener than those of the
“Ethics,” interdict “interest in the so-called person of God and
the so-called living God,” declaring that the prophets of Israel
“combatted” the direct relation between man and God, do we
find a new note about the love of God. “The more that the
knowledge of God is simultaneously felt to be love of God,
the more passionate becomes the battle for faith, the struggle
for the knowledge of God and for the love of God.” It is evident that at this point Cohen is beginning to approach the
vital character of faith. Yet the love of God still remains something abstract and not given to investigation.
Once again, three years later, Cohen’s short essay on “The
Love of Religion” begins with the curious sentence, “The love
of God is the love of religion,” and its first section ends with
the no less curious sentence, “The love of God is therefore the
knowledge of morality.” If we carefully consider the two uses
of the word “is,” we are able to distinguish a purpose: which
is to classify something as yet unclassified but nevertheless

46 Chapter 4

obtruding as central; to classify it by a process of identification
with something else already comprehended, and thus put it in
its place; but that identification does not prove successful. All
that is necessary to see this clearly is to compare the abovecited sentences with any one of the Biblical verses which enjoin or praise the love of God, which are the origin of that
concept. What Cohen is enjoining and praising at this point is
something essentially and qualitatively different from the love
of religion and the knowledge of morality, although it includes
both. Yet in Cohen’s revision of his Berlin lectures of 1913–14,
published in 1915 under the title, “The Concept of Religion in
the System of Philosophy,” he gives expression to a love which
does away once and for all with that curious “is.”
“If I love God,” says Cohen (and this use of his of “I” touches
the heart of the reader, like every genuine “I” in the work of
every genuine philosopher), “then I no longer think Him . . .”
(and that “no longer” is almost direct testimony) “. . . only the
sponsor of earthly morals. . . .” But what? But the avenger of
the poor in world history. “It is that avenger of the poor whom
I love.” And later, to the same effect: “I love in God the father
of man.” At this point “father” means the “shield and aid of the
poor,” for, “Man is revealed to me in the poor man.”
How long a way have we come from the “love of religion”!
Yet the new element in Cohen is expressed with even greater
clarity and energy: “Therefore shall the love of God exceed
all knowledge. . . . A man’s consciousness is completely filled
when he loves God. Therefore, this knowledge, which absorbs
all others, is no longer merely knowledge, but love.” And it is
extremely logical that the Biblical commandment to love God
is cited and interpreted at this point in the same connection: “I
cannot love God without devoting my whole heart as living for
the sake of my fellow-men, without devoting my entire soul as
responsive to all the spiritual trends in the world around me,

The Love of God and the Idea of Deity 47

without devoting all my force to this God in His correlation
with man.”
At this point I wish to introduce an objection related, admittedly, not to these sentences of Cohen’s, but to another
that has a connection with them. Cohen speaks of the paradox
“that I have to love man.” “Worm that I am,” he continues,
“consumed by passions, cast as bait for egoism, I must nevertheless love man. If I am able to do so, and so far as I am able to
do so, I shall be able to love God.” Strong words these, yet the
lives of many important persons controvert the last sentence.
The teaching of the Bible overcomes the paradox in a precisely
contrary fashion. The Bible knows that it is impossible to command the love of man. I am incapable of feeling love toward
every man, though God himself command me. The Bible does
not directly enjoin the love of man, but by using the dative puts
it rather in the form of an act of love (Lev. 19:18, 34). I must
act lovingly toward my rea, my “companion” (usually translated
“my neighbour”), that is toward every man with whom I deal
in the course of my life, including the ger, the “stranger” or
“sojourner”; I must bestow the favours of love on him, I must
treat him with love as one who is “like unto me.” (I must love
“to him”; a construction only found in these two verses in the
Bible.) Of course I must love him not merely with superficial
gestures but with an essential relationship. It lies within my
power to will it, and so I can accept the commandment. It is
not my will which gives me the emotion of love toward my
“neighbour” aroused within me by my behaviour.
On the other hand, the Torah commands one to love God
(Deut. 6:5; 10:12; 11:1); only in that connection does it enjoin
heartfelt love of the sojourner who is one’s “neighbour” (Deut.
10:19)—because God loves the sojourner. If I love God, in the
course of loving Him I come to love the one whom God loves,
too. I can love God as God from the moment I know Him;

48 Chapter 4

and Israel, to whom the commandment is addressed, does know
Him. Thus I can accept the injunction to love my fellow-man.
Cohen is, to be sure, actually referring to something else.
For now he raises the question whether he should take offense
at God’s being “only an idea.” “Why should I not be able,” he
replies, “to love ideas? What is man after all but a social idea,
and yet I can love him as an individual only through and by
virtue of that fact. Therefore, strictly considered, I can only love
the social idea of man.”
To me, it seems otherwise. Only if and because I love this
or that specific man can I elevate my relation to the social idea
of man into that emotional relationship involving my whole
being which I am entitled to call by the name of love. And
what of God? Franz Rosenzweig warned us that Cohen’s idea
of God should not be taken to mean that God is “only an idea”
in Cohen’s eyes. The warning is pertinent: Rosenzweig is right
to emphasize that an idea for Cohen is not “only an idea.” Yet,
at the same time, we must not ignore that other “only,” whose
meaning is quite different indeed in Cohen’s phrase, “a God
who is only an idea.” Let us, if we will, describe our relation to
the idea of the beautiful and the idea of the good by the name
of love—though in my opinion all this has content and value
for the soul only in being rendered concrete and made real. But
to love God differs from that relationship in essential quality.
He who loves God loves Him precisely insofar as He is not
“only an idea,” and can love Him because He is not “only an
idea.” And I permit myself to say that though Cohen indeed
thought of God as an idea, Cohen too loved Him as—God.

5
In the great work prepared after “The Concept of Religion”
and posthumously published under the title of “Religion of

The Love of God and the Idea of Deity 49

Reason, from the Sources of Judaism,” Cohen returns to this
problem with even greater prominence: “How can one love an
idea?”—and replies, “How can one love anything save an idea?”
He substantiates his reply by saying, “For even in the love of
the senses one loves only the idealized person, only the idea
of the person.” Yet even if it were correct that in the love of
“the senses” (or more correctly, in the love which comprehends
sensuality) one loves only the idealized person, that does not
at all mean that nothing more than the idea of the person is
loved; even the idealized person remains a person, and has not
been transformed into an idea. It is only because the person
whom I idealize actually exists that I can love the idealized
one. Even though for Dante it was la gloriosa donna della mia
mente, yet the decisive fact is that first he saw the real Beatrice,
who set the “spirit of life” trembling in him. But does not the
motive force which enables and empowers us to idealize a beloved person arise from the deepest substance of that beloved
person? Is not the true idealization in the deepest sense a discovery of the essential self meant by God in creating the person
whom I love?
“The love of men for God,” says Cohen, “is the love of the
moral ideal. I can love only the ideal, and I can comprehend
the ideal in no other way save by loving it.” Even on this level,
the very highest for the philosopher who is overwhelmed by
faith, he declares what the love of God is, and not what it includes. But man’s love for God is not love of the moral ideal; it
only includes that love. He who loves God only as the moral
ideal is bound soon to reach the point of despair at the conduct of the world where, hour after hour, all the principles of
his moral idealism are apparently contradicted. Job despairs
because God and the moral ideal seem diverse to him. But
He who answered Job out of the tempest is more exalted even
than the ideal sphere. He is not the archetype of the ideal, but

50 Chapter 4

he contains the archetype. He issues forth the ideal, but does
not exhaust himself in the issuing. The unity of God is not the
Good; it is the Supergood. God desires that men should follow
His revelation, yet at the same time He wishes to be accepted
and loved in His deepest concealment. He who loves God
loves the ideal and loves God more than the ideal. He knows
himself to be loved by God, not by the ideal, not by an idea,
but even by Him whom ideality cannot grasp, namely, by that
absolute personality we call God. Can this be taken to mean that
God “is” a personality? The absolute character of His personality, that paradox of paradoxes, prohibits any such statement. It
only means that God loves as a personality and that He wishes
to be loved like a personality. And if He was not a person in
Himself, He, so to speak, became one in creating Man, in order
to love man and be loved by him—in order to love me and be
loved by me. For, even supposing that ideas can also be loved,
the fact remains that persons are the only ones who love. Even
the philosopher who has been overwhelmed by faith, though
he afterward continue to hug his system even more closely
than before, and to interpret the love between God and man
as the love between an idea and a person—even he, nevertheless, testifies to the existence of a love between God and man
that is basically reciprocal. That philosophy too, which, in order
to preserve the Being (esse; Sein) of God, deprives Him of existence (existentia; Dasein), indicates however unintentionally
the bridge standing indestructibly on the two pillars, one imperishable and the other ever crumbling, God and man.

6
Cohen once said of Kant, “What is characteristic of his theology is the non-personal in the usual sense, the truly spiritual
principle: the sublimation of God into an idea.” And he adds,

The Love of God and the Idea of Deity 51

“And nothing less than this is the deepest basis of the Jewish
idea of God.” As far as Kant is concerned, Cohen was correct
in this judgment. But throughout Kant’s posthumous work we
can see emerging every now and then resistance to this sublimation of God into an idea; a sublimation which later even
more prominently prevents in Cohen the linking of the idea
with the concept of existence.
“Under the concept of God,” writes Kant, “Transcendental
Philosophy refers to a substance possessing the greatest existence,” but he also qualifies God as “the ideal of a substance
which we create ourselves.” What we have in these notes, which
sometimes appear chaotic, are the records of a suit at law, the
last phase which the thought of the idea of God assumes for its
thinker, of a suit between the two elements, “idea” and “God,”
which are contained in the idea of God; a suit which time
and again reverts to the same point, until death cuts it short.
Cohen set out to put the idea into a sequence so logical as
to make it impossible for any impulse to opposition to develop. Even when overwhelmed by faith, Cohen continued the
struggle to preserve this sequence. In so doing, he was of the
opinion that “the deepest basis of the Jewish idea of God” was
on his side. But even the deepest basis of the Jewish idea of
God can be achieved only by plunging into that word by which
God revealed Himself to Moses, “I shall be there.”1 It gives
exact expression to the personal “existence” of God (not to His
abstract “being”), and expression even to His living presence,
which most directly of all His attributes touches the man to
whom He manifests Himself. The speaker’s self-designation as
the God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob (Exod.
3:15) is indissolubly united with that manifestation of “I shall be
there,” and He cannot be reduced to a God of the philosophers.
1 Exod. 3:14, part of the phrase commonly translated: “I am that I am.”

52 Chapter 4

But the man who says, “I love in God the father of man”
has essentially already renounced the God of the philosophers
in his innermost heart, even though he may not confess it to
himself. Cohen did not consciously choose between the God
of the philosophers and the God of Abraham, rather believing
to the last that he could succeed in identifying the two. Yet his
inmost heart, that force from which thought too derives its vitality, had chosen and decided for him. The identification had
failed, and of necessity had to fail. For the idea of God, that
masterpiece of man’s construction, is only the image of images,
the most lofty of all the images by which man imagines the imageless God. It is essentially repugnant to man to recognize this
fact, and remain satisfied. For when man learns to love God,
he senses an actuality which rises above the idea. Even if he
makes the philosopher’s great effort to sustain the object of
his love as an object of his philosophic thought, the love itself
bears witness to the existence of the Beloved.

5
RE L I GI O N AND M OD ER N T HIN K IN G

1
I shall speak of the relation of modern thought to religion. By
this I do not mean the attempts to think from the standpoint
of religious reality, or to create an understanding between it
and philosophy based on mutual tolerance. My subject shall
rather be modern thought only insofar as it undertakes to give
a verdict as to whether or under what conditions or within
what limits the character of a living human reality can be ascribed to religion. We find a judgment of this sort in the ontological sense, on the one hand, in the so-called existentialism
of Sartre and Heidegger, and in the psychological sense, on the
other, in Jung’s theory of the collective unconscious. Basic to
both positions is the assumption that the outcome of the crisis in which religion has entered depends essentially upon the
judgments which are made by modern ontological or psychological thought. It is this assumption that we must examine.
In naming Heidegger and Sartre together, I by no means
imply that they have the same attitude toward religion. On the
contrary, in this respect as in so many others they are without

53

54 Chapter 5

doubt radically dissimilar, and accordingly the reply to the one
must be entirely different from the reply to the other.
Sartre proclaims his atheism; he says,1 “The atheistic existentialism, which I represent. . . .” Among the representatives
of this position he has, to be sure, included Heidegger; but
Heidegger has refused to allow himself to be thus classified.
We must therefore deal with Sartre by himself. He clearly
wishes his atheism to be understood as a logical consequence
of his existential philosophy. We undoubtedly have here before
us an atheism which is basically different from any materialistic one. That it follows, however, from an existential conception
of the world, that is, from one which proceeds from the reality
of human existence, cannot be substantiated.
Sartre accepts Nietzsche’s cry, or better shout, “God is dead!”
as a valid statement of fact. Our generation appears to him as
specifically the one which has outlived God. He says once2—
although elsewhere3 he most emphatically asserts, as one who
knows, “Dieu n’existe pas”—that the fact that God is dead does
not mean that he does not exist nor even that he no longer
exists. In place of these interpretations he presents another
which is singular enough. “He is dead,” he says,4 “he spoke to
us and now is silent, all that we touch now is his corpse.” I shall
not deal here with the shockingly trivial concluding sentence.
But let us turn to that which precedes it: “He spoke to us and
now he is silent.” Let us try to take it seriously, that is, let us ignore what Sartre really meant by it, namely, that man in earlier
times believed that he heard God and now is no longer capable
of so believing. Let us ask whether it may not be literally true
that God formerly spoke to us and is now silent, and whether
this is not to be understood as the Hebrew Bible understands
it, namely, that the living God is not only a self-revealing but
also a self-concealing God.5 Let us realize what it means to

Religion and Modern Thinking 55

live in the age of such a concealment, such a divine silence, and
we shall perhaps understand its implication for our existence
as something entirely different from that which Sartre desires
to teach us.
What Sartre desires to teach us, he says to us clearly enough.6
“This silence of the transcendent, combined with the perseverance of the religious need in modern man, that is the great
concern to-day as yesterday. It is the problem which torments
Nietzsche, Heidegger, Jaspers.” In other words, existentialism
must take courage, it must give up once for all the search for
God, it must “forget” God.7 After a century-long crisis of faith
as well as of knowledge, man must finally recover the creative freedom which he once falsely ascribed to God. He must
recognize himself as the being through whose appearance the
world exists. For, says Sartre,8 “there is no universe other than
a human universe, the universe of human subjectivity.” The
sentence that I have just quoted sounds like the thesis of a
resurrected idealism.
The problem that “torments” the existentialist thinker of our
age, insofar as he does not, like Sartre, dismiss it out of hand,
lies deeper than Sartre thinks. It focuses finally in the question
of whether the perseverance of the “religious need” does not
indicate something inherent in human existence. Does existence really mean, as Sartre thinks, existing “for oneself ” encapsuled in one’s own subjectivity? Or does it not essentially
mean standing over against the x—not an x for which a certain
quantity could be substituted, but rather the X itself, the undefinable and unfathomable? “God,” says Sartre,9 “is the quintessence of the Other.” But the Other for Sartre10 is he who
“looks at” me, who makes me into an object, as I make him.
The idea of God, moreover, he also understands as that of an
inescapable witness, and if that is so, “What need have we of

56 Chapter 5

God? The Other is enough, no matter what other.”11 But what
if God is not the quintessence of the Other, but rather its absoluteness? And what if it is not primarily the reciprocal relation
of subject and object which exists between me and the other,
but rather the reciprocal relation of I and Thou? Each empirical other does not, of course, remain my Thou; he becomes
an It, an object for me as I for him. It is not so, however, with
that absolute Other, the Absolute over against me, that undefinable and unfathomable X that I call “God.” God can never
become an object for me; I can attain no other relation to Him
than that of the I to its eternal Thou, that of the Thou to its
eternal I. But if man is no longer able to attain this relation, if
God is silent toward him and he toward God, then something
has taken place, not in human subjectivity but in Being itself.
It would be worthier not to explain it to oneself in sensational
and incompetent sayings, such as that of the “death” of God,
but to endure it as it is and at the same time to move existentially toward a new happening, toward that event in which the
word between heaven and earth will again be heard. Thus the
perseverance of the “religious need,” to which Sartre objects
and which he thinks contradicts the silence of the transcendent, instead points directly to the situation in which man becomes aware of this silence as such.
Still more questionable is Sartre’s demand,12 reminiscent of
Ludwig Feuerbach, that man should recover for himself the
creative freedom which he ascribed to God and that he should
affirm himself as the being through whom a world exists. That
ordering of known phenomena which we call the world is, indeed, the composite work of a thousand human generations,
but it has come into being through the fact that manifold being,
which is not our work, meets us, who are, likewise, together
with our subjectivity, not our work. Nor is this meeting, out
of which arises the whole of the phenomena which we order

Religion and Modern Thinking 57

into the “world,” our work. All that being is established, we are
established, our meeting with it is established, and in this way
the becoming of a world, which takes place through us, is established. This establishment of a universe, including ourselves
and our works, is the fundamental reality of existence which is
accessible to us as living beings. Contrasted with this reality,
the demand that man recover his creative freedom appears as
a demagogic phrase. That “creative freedom” which really belongs to us, our participation in creation, is established, as we
ourselves. It is a question of using this freedom properly, that
is, in a manner worthy of the fact that it is a freedom which
is given to us, nothing less and nothing more. He who sets in
the place of it the postulate of the “recovery of freedom” turns
aside from true human existence, which means being sent and
being commissioned.
Sartre has started from the “silence” of God without asking
himself what part our not hearing and our not having heard
has played in that silence. From the silence he has concluded13
that God does not exist, at any rate not for us, for a god whose
object I am without his being mine does not concern me. This
conclusion is possible for Sartre because he holds the subjectobject relation to be the primary and exclusive relation between
two beings. He does not see the original and decisive relation
between I and Thou, compared with which the subject-object
relation is only a classifying elaboration. Now, however, Sartre
goes further14: One “must draw the consequences.” God is silent, that is, nothing is said to one that is unconditional or unconditionally binding. “There is no sign in the world.”15 Since,
therefore, no universal morality can tell us what to do, since
all possibility of discovering absolute values has disappeared
with God, and since man, to whom henceforth “all is permitted,”16 is at last free, is indeed freedom itself, it is for him to
determine values. “If I have done away with God the father

58 Chapter 5

(si j’ai supprimé Dieu le père),” Sartre says literally,17 “someone
is needed to invent values ( pour inventer les valeurs). . . . Life
has no meaning a priori . . . it is up to you to give it a meaning, and value is nothing else than this meaning which you
choose.” That is almost exactly what Nietzsche said, and it has
not become any truer since then. One can believe in and accept
a meaning or value, one can set it as a guiding light over one’s
life if one has discovered it, not if one has invented it. It can
be for me an illuminating meaning, a direction-giving value
only if it has been revealed to me in my meeting with Being,
not if I have freely chosen it for myself from among the existing possibilities and perhaps have in addition decided with
some fellow-creatures: This shall be valid from now on. The
thesis reminds me of that curious concept of Georges Sorel,
the social myth, the classic example of which is the general
strike. This avowedly unrealizable myth shall show the workers
the direction in which they shall be active, but it can function
naturally only so long as they do not read Sorel and learn that
it is just a myth.
More important than these arguments of a remarkable psychological observer and highly gifted literary man, for whom
genuine ontological considerations are always intermingled with
entirely different matters, is that argument which Heidegger,
who undoubtedly belongs to the historical rank of philosophers in the proper sense of the term, brings forward concerning the problem of religion in our time. These thoughts, it is
true, are first explicitly expressed in the writings of his second
period, from about 1943 on, but we already find indications of
them earlier.
Like Sartre, Heidegger also starts from Nietzsche’s saying
“God is dead,” which he has interpreted at length.18 It is evident to him that Nietzsche wanted in this saying to dispense
with not only God but also the absolute in all its forms, there-

Religion and Modern Thinking 59

fore, in truth, not only religion but also metaphysics. Heidegger
believes that he can erect at the point of this extremest negation a new position which will be a pure ontological thinking. It is the teaching of being as attaining its illumination in
or through man. In this teaching the doctrine of Parmenides
which posits being as the original absolute which is prior to
and above form is curiously interwoven with the Hegelian theory of the original principle which attains self-consciousness
in the human spirit.
It has been possible for Heidegger to erect this new position
despite the “death of God” because being for him is bound to
and attains its illumination through the destiny and history
of man, without its becoming thereby a function of human
subjectivity. But by this it is already indicated that, to use an
image that Heidegger himself avoids, God can rise from the
dead. This means that the unfolding of the new ontological
thought can prepare for a turning-point in which the divine,
or as Heidegger, in agreement with the poet Hölderlin, prefers to say, the holy, will appear in new and still unanticipated
forms. This thinking is consequently, as Heidegger repeatedly
emphasizes, not atheism, for it “decides neither positively nor
negatively about the possibility of God’s existing.”19 Rather
“through its adequate conception of existence” it makes it possible for the first time legitimately to ask “what is the ontological state of the relation of existence to the divine.”
Heidegger not only protests against our regarding this view
as atheism but also20 against our regarding it as an indifferentism
which must deteriorate into nihilism. He by no means wants to
teach an indifference toward the religious question. The single
need of this hour is, to him, much more the thinking through
of the basic religious concepts, the cogitative clarification of the
meaning of words such as God or the Holy. “Must we not first
be able,” he asks, “to understand and hear these words with the

60 Chapter 5

greatest care if we, as men, that is as existing beings, are to
experience a relation of God to man?” But this in his opinion
would belong to a new thinking of being through man. According to Heidegger’s conception,21 to be sure, it is not for
man to decide whether and how the divine will reappear. Such
an appearance, he explains, will take place only through the
fate of being itself. Since, however, he has stated22 as the presupposition for this appearance that “beforehand and in long
preparation being itself is clarified and is experienced in its
truth,” there can be no doubt as to what part is to be ascribed
here to human thought about truth in the determination of
“whether and how the day of the holy will dawn.” It is indeed
precisely in human thought about truth that being becomes
illuminated. Heidegger usually conceives of this still uncertain
sunrise of the holy as the clear background before which “an
appearance of God and the gods can begin anew.”
Once23 in interpreting Hölderlin, who had called our time
an indigent one, he explains this as “the time of the gods who
have fled and of the God who is coming.” It is indigent because
it stands in a double lack: “in the no longer of the departed
gods and the not yet of the Coming One.” As the denominating Word is wanting that could tell “who He Himself is who
dwells in the holy,”24 so is God Himself wanting. This is “the
age in which God is absent”;25 the Word and God are absent
together. The Word is not absent because God is absent, and
God is not absent because the Word is absent. Both are absent
together and appear together because of the nearness of man
to being, which is at times, historically, illuminated in him.
Thus, admonishes Heidegger, man living in this hour should
not strive to make a God for himself, nor call any longer on an
accustomed God.
Heidegger warns in this way against “religion” in general,
but in particular against the prophetic principle in the Judaeo-

Religion and Modern Thinking 61

Christian tradition. “The ‘prophets’ of these religions,” he
says,26 “do not begin by foretelling the word of the Holy. They
announce immediately the God upon whom the certainty of
salvation in a supernatural blessedness reckons.” Incidentally,
I have never in our time encountered on a high philosophical
plane such a far-reaching misunderstanding of the prophets
of Israel. The prophets of Israel have never announced a God
upon whom their hearers’ striving for security reckoned. They
have always aimed to shatter all security and to proclaim in
the opened abyss of the final insecurity the unwished-for God
who demands that His human creatures become real, they become human, and confounds all who imagine that they can
take refuge in the certainty that the temple of God is in their
midst. This is the God of the historical demand as the prophets
of Israel beheld Him. The primal reality of these prophecies
does not allow itself to be tossed into the attic of “religions”: it
is as living and actual in this historical hour as ever.
This is not the place for a critical discussion of Heidegger’s
theory of being. I shall only confess that for me a concept of
being that means anything other than the inherent fact of all
existing being, namely, that it exists, remains insurmountably
empty. That is, unless I have recourse to religion and see in it a
philosophical characterization of the Godhead similar to that
of some Christian scholastics and mystics who contemplate, or
think that they contemplate, the Godhead as it is in itself, thus
as prior to creation. It should also be noted, however, that one
of them, and the greatest of them all, Meister Eckhart, follows
in Plato’s footsteps by placing above the esse est Deus, as the
higher truth, the sentence, “Est enim (Deus) super esse et ens.”
Compare this with Heidegger’s statement:27 “ ‘Being’—that is
not God and it is not a ground of the world. Being is more
than all that exists and is, nonetheless, nearer than any existing
thing, be it . . . an angel or God. Being is the nearest thing.” If

62 Chapter 5

by the last sentence, however, something other is meant than
that I myself am, and not indeed as the subject of a cogito, but
as my total person, then the concept of being loses for me the
character of genuine conceivability that obviously it eminently
possesses for Heidegger.
I shall, however, limit myself to his theses about the divine.
These theses, out of the extremest consciousness of self-drawn
boundaries, are only concerned with the “appearance” of the
divine. They are concerned in particular with those presuppositions of future reappearances which pertain to human thought,
human thought, that is, about being. The most surprising and
questionable thing about these theses to me is the fact that
they designate it or him, the possible reappearance of whom
is their subject, as the divine or God. In all tongues since men
first found names for the eternally nameless, those who have
been named by this word have been transcendent beings. They
have been beings who by their nature were not given to us
as knowable objects, yet beings whom we nonetheless became
aware of as entering into relation with us. They stepped into
relation with us, form-changing, form-preserving, formless,
and allowed us to enter into relation with them. Being turned
toward us, descended to us, showed itself to us, spoke to us in
the immanence. The Coming One came of his own will out
of the mystery of his withdrawnness; we did not cause him to
come.
That has always distinguished religion from magic; for
he whom man imagined that he had conjured up could not,
even if he yet figured as god, be believed in any longer as god.
He had become for man a bundle of powers of which man’s
mysterious knowledge and might could dispose. He who conjured was no longer addressed nor was any answer any longer
awakened in him, and even though he recited a prayer, he no

Religion and Modern Thinking 63

longer prayed. And indeed, as Heidegger once said28 in interpreting the words of Hölderlin, who understood poetry as the
combined work of the inspiring gods and the men inspired
by them, not only does man need god, but also “the heavenly
need the mortal.” God needs man independent—man has divined that from of old—as partner in dialogue, as comrade in
work, as one who loves Him; God needs His creature thus or
wills to need him thus.
In no sphere or time in the history of the relations between
the divine and the human, however, has that proved true which
Heidegger further asserts, namely, that “neither men nor the
gods can ever of themselves bring about the direct relation
to the holy.” Always, again and again, men are accosted by
One who of Himself disconcerts and enraptures them, and,
although overcome, the worshipper prays of himself to Him.
God does not let Himself be conjured, but He also will not
compel. He is of Himself, and He allows that which exists
to be of itself. Both of these facts distinguish divine from demonic powers. It may not be, indeed, unimportant to God
whether man gives himself or denies himself to Him. Through
this giving or denying, man, the whole man with the decision of his whole being, may have an immeasurable part in the
actual revelation or hiddenness of the divine. But there is no
place between heaven and earth for an influence of conceptclarifying thought. He whose appearance can be effected or
co-effected through such a modern magical influence clearly
has only the name in common with Him whom we men, basically in agreement despite all the differences in our religious
teachings, address as God. To talk of a reappearance of this
conjured god of thought is inadmissable.
It is not that Heidegger is not somewhat aware of what is at
stake here. Once in 1936, again in a Hölderlin interpretation,

64 Chapter 5

he came remarkably close to the essential reality to which I
have just pointed. Hölderlin says of us humans,
Since we exist as talk
And can hear from one another.
Heidegger explains this thus,29 “The gods can only enter the
Word if they themselves address us and place their demand
upon us. The Word that names the gods is always an answer
to this demand.” That is a testimony to that which I call the
dialogical principle, to the dialogical relation between a divine
and a human spontaneity.
But since then we have not heard the like from Heidegger.
In fact, if we set next to each other all of his later statements
about the divine, it appears to us as if pregnant seeds have been
destroyed by a force which has passed over them. Heidegger no
longer shows himself as concerned with that which there is in
common between the great God-impressions of mankind and
the “Coming One.” Rather he summons all of the power of his
thoughts and words in order to distinguish him, the “Coming
One,” from all that has been. To one who observes the way in
which Heidegger now speaks of the historical, there can be
no doubt that it is current history which has pulled up those
seeds and planted in their place a belief in the entirely new.
How this has gradually come about can be clearly seen if one
compares with one another the occasional utterances of different stages, e.g., the Rectoral address of May, 1933, with a
manifesto to the students of November 3 of the same year.
In the first,30 Heidegger praises in general terms “the glory
and the greatness” of the successful “insurrection” (“Aufbruch”).
In the second,31 the sinister leading personality of the then
current history is proclaimed as “the present and future German reality and its law.” Here history no longer stands, as in all

Religion and Modern Thinking 65

believing times, under divine judgment, but it itself, the unappealable, assigns to the Coming One his way.
Heidegger, of course, understands by history something
other than a list of dated events. “History,” he said in 1939,32 “is
rare.” And he explained: “History exists only when the essence
of truth is originally decided.” But it is just his hour which he
believes to be history, the very same hour whose problematics
in its most inhuman manifestation led him astray. He has allied his thought, the thought of being,33 in which he takes part
and to which he ascribes the power to make ready for the rise
of the holy, to that hour which he has affirmed as history. He
has bound his thought to his hour as no other philosopher has
done. Can he, the existential thinker, despite all this, existentially wrestle, in opposition to the hour, for a freedom devoted
to the eternal and gain it? Or must he succumb to the fate
of the hour, and with it also to a “holy” to which no human
holiness, no hallowed standing fast of man in the face of historical delusion, responsibly answers? The questions that I ask
are not rhetorical; they are true questions.
Of the two who have taken up Nietzsche’s expression of the
death of God, one, Sartre, has brought it and himself ad absurdum through his postulate of the free invention of meaning
and value. The other, Heidegger, creates a concept of a rebirth
of God out of the thought of truth which falls into the enticing nets of historical time. The path of this existentialism
seems to vanish.

2
In contrast to Heidegger and Sartre, Jung, the leading psychologist of our day, has made religion in its historical and
biographical forms the subject of comprehensive observations.

66 Chapter 5

He is not to be blamed for including among these observations an abundance of phenomena which I must characterize
as pseudo-religious. I characterize them so because they do not
bear witness to an essential personal relation to One who is
experienced or believed in as being absolutely over against one.
Jung properly explains he does not wish to overstep the selfdrawn boundaries of psychology. This psychology offers no
criterion for a qualitative distinction between the two realms,
the religious and the pseudo-religious, even as little as, say, sociology as Max Weber understood it enabled him to make a
distinction in kind between the charisma of Moses and that
of Hitler. What Jung is to be criticized for instead is that he
oversteps with sovereign license the boundaries of psychology
in its most essential point. For the most part, however, he does
not note it and still less account for it.
There is certainly no lack in Jung of exact psychological
statements concerning religious subjects. Many times these are
even accompanied by explicit emphasis on the limited validity
of the statement. An example is when34 revelation, as “the disclosure of the depths of the human soul,” is termed “to begin
with a psychological mode . . . from which, of course, nothing
is to be concluded about what it may otherwise be.” Occasionally, moreover, he declares35 on principle that “any statement
about the transcendent” shall “be avoided,” for such a statement is “always only a ridiculous presumption of the human
mind which is unconscious of its boundaries.” If God is called
a state of the soul, that is “only a statement about the knowable and not about the unknowable, about which [here the
formula which has just been cited is repeated word for word]
simply nothing is to be concluded.” Such sentences express
the legitimate position of psychology, which is authorized, like
every science, to make objectively based assertions so long as in
doing so it takes care not to overstep its boundaries.

Religion and Modern Thinking 67

They have already been overstepped if it is said36 of religion that it is “a living relation to psychical events which do
not depend upon consciousness but instead take place on the
other side of it in the darkness of the psychical hinterland.”
This definition of religion is stated without qualification. Nor
will it tolerate any. For if religion is a relation to psychic events,
which cannot mean anything other than to events of one’s own
soul, then it is implied by this that it is not a relation to a Being
or Reality which, no matter how fully it may from time to time
descend to the human soul, always remains transcendent to it.
More precisely, it is not the relation of an I to a Thou. This is,
however, the way in which the unmistakably religious of all
ages have understood their religion even if they longed most
intensely to let their I be mystically absorbed into that Thou.
But religion is for all that only a matter of the human relation to God, not of God Himself. Consequently, it is more
important for us to hear what Jung thinks of God Himself. He
conceives of Him in general37 as an “autonomous psychic content.” This means he conceives of God not as a Being or Reality to which a psychical content corresponds, but rather as this
content itself. If this is not so, he adds, “then God is indeed not
real, for then He nowhere impinges upon our lives.” According
to this all that which is not an autonomous psychical content
but instead produces or co-produces in us a psychical content
is to be understood as not impinging upon our life and hence
as also not real.
Despite this Jung also recognizes38 a “reciprocal and indispensable relation between man and God.” Jung immediately
observes, to be sure, that God is “for our psychology . . . a function of the unconscious.” However, this thesis is by no means
intended to be valid only inside the boundaries of psychology,
for it is opposed to the “orthodox conception” according to
which God “exists for Himself,” which means psychologically

68 Chapter 5

“that one is unaware of the fact that the action arises from one’s
own inner self.”
It is thus unequivocally declared here that what the believer
ascribes to God has its origin in his own soul. How this assertion is to be reconciled with Jung’s assurance39 that he means
by all this “approximately the same thing Kant meant when he
called the thing in itself a ‘purely negative, borderline concept ”
is to me incomprehensible. Kant has explained that the things
in themselves are not to be recognized through any categories
because they are not phenomena, but are only to be conceived
of as an unknown something. However, that that phenomenon, for example, which I call the tree before my window originates not in my meeting with an unknown something but in
my own inner self Kant simply did not mean.
In contradiction to his assertion that he wishes to avoid
every statement about the transcendent, Jung identifies himself 40 with a view “according to which God does not exist ‘absolutely,’ that is, independent of the human subject and beyond
all human conditions.” This means, in effect, that the possibility is not left open that God—who, if the singular and exclusive word “God” is not to lose all meaning, cannot be limited
to a single mode of existence as if it were only a question of
one among many gods—exists independent of as well as related to the human subject. It is instead made clear that He
does not exist apart from man. This is indeed a statement about
the transcendent. It is a statement about what it is not and
just through this about what it is. Jung’s statements about the
“relativity” of the divine are not psychological but metaphysical assertions, however vigorously he emphasizes “his contentment with the psychically experienceable and rejection of the
metaphysical.”41
Jung could cite in opposition to this a statement he once42
made. “Metaphysical statements are expressions of the soul,

Religion and Modern Thinking 69

and consequently they are psychological.” However, all statements, if they are considered not according to the meaning
and intention of their contents but according to the process of
their psychic origin, could be described as “expressions of the
soul.” If, consequently, that sentence is to be taken seriously,
the boundaries of psychology are forthwith abolished. These
are the same boundaries that Jung says in still another place43
that psychology must guard against “overstepping through
metaphysical statements or other professions of faith.” In the
greatest possible contradiction to this, psychology becomes
here the only admissable metaphysic. It is supposed to remain
at the same time an empirical science. But it cannot be both
at once.
Jung also supplies the idea of the soul which belongs to this
conception. “It is the soul,” he says,44 “that produces the metaphysical expression out of inborn divine creative power; it ‘sets’
the distinctions between metaphysical essences. It is not only
the condition for metaphysical reality, it is that reality itself.”
The term “sets” is not chosen without reason; what is here set
forth is in fact a translation of post-Kantian idealism into psychology.45 But that which has its place within metaphysical
thinking when it is a product of philosophical reflection such
as Fichte’s I, can demand no such place when it is applied to
the concrete individual soul or, more precisely, to the psychic
in an existing human person. Nor can Jung indeed mean anything other than this. According to his explanation,46 even the
collective unconscious, the sphere of the archetypes, can enter
ever again into experience only through the individual psyche,
which has inherited these “typical attitudinal figures.”
The real soul has without question producing powers in
which primal energies of the human race have individually
concentrated. “Inborn divine creative powers” seems to me, to
be sure, an all too lofty and all too imprecise designation for

70 Chapter 5

them. This soul, however, can never legitimately make an assertion, even a metaphysical one, out of its own creative power.
It can make an assertion only out of a binding real relationship to a truth which it articulates. The insight into this truth
cogitatively grows in this soul out of what happens to it and
what is given it to experience. Anything other than this is no
real assertion but merely literary phraseology or questionable
combination.
The real individual soul can never be regarded as “the metaphysically real.” Its essential life, whether it admits it or not,
consists of real meetings with other realities, be they other
real souls or whatever else. Otherwise, one would be obliged
to conceive of souls as Leibnizian monads. The ideal consequences of this conception, in particular God’s eternal interference, Jung would undoubtedly be most unwilling to draw.
Or the empirical real realm of individual souls, that province
given over to psychology, should indeed be overstepped and a
collective being called “soul” or “the soul,” which only reveals
itself in the individual soul and is thus transcendent, admitted.
Such a metaphysical “setting” would then necessitate an adequate philosophical determining and foundation such as, to
my knowledge, we nowhere find in Jung, even in the lecture
on the spirit of psychology which specifically deals with the
conception of the soul.
The decisive significance which this indistinct conception of the soul has for Jung’s essential attitude toward religion becomes evident in the following two sentences47 which
have a common subject. “Modern consciousness, in contrast
to the nineteenth century, turns with its most intimate and
intense expectations to the soul.” “Modern consciousness abhors faith and also as a result the religions that are founded
on it.” Despite his early protest that one can find in his teach-

Religion and Modern Thinking 71

ing no “barbs . . . against faith or trust in higher powers,”48 it
is evident to any careful reader49 that Jung identifies himself
with the modern consciousness that “abhors” faith. According
to Jung, this modern consciousness now turns itself with its
“most intimate and intense expectations” to the soul. This cannot mean anything other than that it will have nothing more
to do with the God believed in by religions, who is to be sure
present to the soul, who reveals Himself to it, communicates
with it, but remains transcendent to it in His being. Modern
consciousness turns instead toward the soul as the only sphere
which man can expect to harbour a divine. In short, although
the new psychology protests50 that it is “no world-view but a
science,” it no longer contents itself with the rôle of an interpreter of religion. It proclaims the new religion, the only one
which can still be true, the religion of pure psychic immanence.
Jung speaks once,51 and with right, of Freud’s inability to
understand religious experience. He himself concludes his
wanderings through the grounds and abysses of religious experience, in which he has accomplished astounding feats, far
outstripping all previous psychology, with the discovery that
that which experiences the religious, the soul, experiences simply itself. Mystics of all ages, upon whom in fact Jung also
rests his position, have proclaimed something similar; yet there
are two distinctions which must be kept in mind. First, they
meant by the soul which has this experience only that soul
which has detached itself from all earthly bustle, from the contradictoriness of creaturely existence, and is therefore capable
of apprehending the divine which is above contradictions and
of letting the divine work in it. Second, they understood the
experience as the oneness and becoming one of the soul with
the self-contained God who, in order to enter into the reality
of the world, “is born” ever again in the soul.

72 Chapter 5

In the place of that detachment of the whole man from the
bustle of life, Jung sets the process of “individuation,” determined by a detachment of the consciousness. In the place of
that becoming one with the Self-contained, he sets the “Self,”
which is also, as is well known, an originally mystical concept.
In Jung, however, it is no longer a genuinely mystical concept
but is transformed instead into a Gnostic one. Jung himself expresses this turning toward the Gnostic. The statement quoted
above that modern consciousness turns itself to the soul is followed by the explication, “and this . . . in the Gnostic sense.”
We have here, if only in the form of a mere allusion, the mature
expression of a tendency characteristic of Jung from the beginning of his intellectual life. In a very early writing, which was
printed but was not sold to the public, it appears in direct religious language as the profession of an eminent Gnostic god,
in whom good and evil are bound together and, so to speak,
balance each other. This union of opposites in an all-embracing
total form runs since then throughout Jung’s thought. It is also
of essential significance for our consideration of his teaching
of individuation and the self.
Jung has given a most precise expression to that which is
in question here in one of his mandala-analyses. Mandalas, as
Jung has found them, not only in different religious cultures,
especially those of the Orient and of the early Christian Middle Ages, but also in the drawings of neurotics and the mentally disturbed, are circular symbolic images. He understands
them as representations, arising in the collective unconscious,
of a wholeness and completeness which is as such a unification of opposites. They are supposed to be “unifying symbols”
which include the feminine as well as the masculine, evil as
well as good in their self-contained unity. Their centre, the seat
of the Godhead according to Jung’s interpretation, is in general, he says, especially accentuated.

Religion and Modern Thinking 73

There are supposed to exist, however, a few ancient mandalas and many modern ones in whose centre “no trace of divinity is to be found.”52 The symbol which takes its place in the
modern images is understood by the creators of these mandalas, according to Jung, as “a centre within themselves.” “The
place of the deity,” Jung explains, “appears to be taken by the
wholeness of man.” This central wholeness, which symbolizes
the divine, Jung, in agreement with ancient Indian teaching,
calls the self. This does not mean, says Jung, that the self takes
the place of the Godhead in these images in which the unconscious of modern man expresses itself. One would grasp
Jung’s idea better if one said that from now on the Godhead no
longer takes the place of the human self as it did in mankind
up till now. Man now draws back the projection of his self on a
God outside of him without thereby wishing to deify himself (as
Jung here emphasizes, in contrast to another passage, in which,
as we shall see, deification is clearly stated as a goal). Man does
not deny a transcendent God; he simply dispenses with Him.
He no longer knows the Unrecognizable; he no longer needs to
pretend to know Him. In His place he knows the soul or rather
the self. It is indeed not a god that “modern consciousness”
abhors, but faith. Whatever may be the case concerning God,
the important thing for the man of modern consciousness is to
stand in no further relation of faith to Him.
This man of “modern consciousness” is not, to be sure, to
be identified with the human race that is living to-day. “Mankind,” says Jung,53 “is still in the main in a psychological state
of infancy—a level which cannot be leaped over.” This is illustrated by the Paulinian overcoming of the law which falls
only to those persons who know to set the soul in the place of
conscience. This is something very few are capable of doing.
What does this mean? By conscience one understands of
old, whether one ascribes to it a divine or a social origin or

74 Chapter 5

simply regards it as belonging to man as man, that court within
the soul which concerns itself with the distinction between the
right and the wrong in that which has been done and is to be
done and proceeds against that which has been determined as
wrong. This is not, of course, simply a question of upholding
a traditional law, whether of divine or social origin. Each one
who knows himself, for example, as called to a work which he
has not done, each one who has not fulfilled a task which he
knows to be his own, each who did not remain faithful to his
vocation which he had become certain of—each such person knows what it means to say that “his conscience smites
him.” And in Jung himself we find54 an excellent explication
of that which we call “vocation.” “Who has vocation (Bestimmung) hears the voice (Stimme) of the inner man.” By this Jung
means,55 it is true, a voice which brings near to us just that
which appears to be evil and to which, in his opinion, it is necessary to succumb “in part.” I think, however, that he who has
vocation hears at times an inner voice of an entirely different
kind. This is just the voice of conscience, which compares that
which he is with that which he was called to become. In clear
distinction from Jung, moreover, I hold that each man in some
measure has been called to something, which, to be sure, he in
general successfully avoids.
But now, once again, what does it mean to set the soul in
the place of the direction-giving and direction-preserving, the
litigating and judging conscience? In the context of Jung’s
thought it cannot be understood in any other way than “in the
Gnostic sense.” The soul which is integrated in the Self as the
unification in an all-encompassing wholeness of the opposites,
especially of the opposites good and evil, dispenses with the
conscience as the court which distinguishes and decides between the right and the wrong. It itself arbitrates an adjustment between the principles or effects the preservation of ac-

Religion and Modern Thinking 75

cord between them or their balancing out or whatever one may
call it. This “way,” which Jung certainly correctly qualifies56 as
“narrow as a knife-edge,” has not been described and obviously
is not suitable to description. The question about it leads to the
question about the positive function of evil.
Jung speaks somewhat more clearly in another place57 of the
condition necessary for “the birth of the ‘pneumatic man.’ ” It is
“liberation from those desires, ambitions and passions, which
imprison us in the visible world,” through “intelligent fulfilment of instinctive demands”; for “he who lives his instincts
can also separate himself from them.” The Taoist book that
Jung interprets in this way does not contain this teaching; it is
well known to us from certain Gnostic circles.58
The “process of development proper to the psyche” which
Jung calls individuation leads through the integration in the
consciousness of the personal and above all the collective, or
archetypal, contents of the unconscious to the realization of
a “new complete form” which, as has been said, he calls the
self. Here a pause for clarification is necessary. Jung wishes59
to see the self understood as “both that or those others and
the I” and individuation as a process which “does not exclude,
but rather includes the world.” It is necessary to grasp exactly
in what sense this holds good and in what it does not. In the
personality structure which arises out of the “relatively rare
occurrence”60 of the development discussed by Jung, “the others” are indeed included. However, they are included only as
contents of the individual soul that shall, just as an individual
soul, attain its perfection through individuation.
The actual other who meets me meets me in such a way that
my soul comes in contact with his as with something that it is
not and that it cannot become. My soul does not and cannot
include the other, and yet can nonetheless approach the other in
this most real contact. This other, what is more, is and remains

76 Chapter 5

over against the self, no matter what completeness the self may
attain, as the other. So the self, even if it has integrated all of its
unconscious elements, remains this single self, confined within
itself. All beings existing over against me who become “included”
in my self are possessed by it in this inclusion as an It. Only then
when, having become aware of the unincludable otherness of a
being, I renounce all claim to incorporating it in any way within
me or making it a part of my soul, does it truly become Thou for
me. This holds good for God as for man.
This is certainly not a way which leads to the goal which
Jung calls the self; but it is just as little a way to the removal
of self. It simply leads to a genuine contact with the existing
being who meets me, to full and direct reciprocity with him.
It leads from the soul which places reality in itself to the soul
which enters reality.
Jung thinks that his concept of the self is also found in Meister
Eckhart. This is an error. Eckhart’s teaching about the soul is
based on the certainty of his belief that the soul is, to be sure, like
God in freedom, but that it is created while He is uncreated.61
This essential distinction underlies all that Eckhart has to say of
the relationship and nearness between God and the soul.
Jung conceives of the self which is the goal of the process
of individuation as the “bridal unification of opposite halves”62
in the soul. This means above all, as has been said, the “integration of evil,”63 without which there can be no wholeness
in the sense of this teaching. Individuation thereby realizes
the complete archetype of the self, in contrast to which it
is divided in the Christian symbolic into Christ and the Antichrist, representing its light and its dark aspects. In the self the
two aspects are united. The self is thus a pure totality and as
such “indistinguishable from a divine image”; self-realization
is indeed to be described as “the incarnation of God.” This god
who unites good and evil in himself, whose opposites-nature

Religion and Modern Thinking 77

also expresses itself in his male-femaleness,64 is a Gnostic figure,
which probably is to be traced back ultimately to the ancient
Iranian divinity Zurvan (not mentioned, so far as I know, among
Jung’s numerous references to the history of religions) as that
out of which the light god and his dark counterpart arose.
From the standpoint of this basic Gnostic view Jung recasts
the Jewish and Christian conception of God. In the Old Testament the Satan, the “Hinderer,” is only a serving element of God.
God allows Himself to be represented by Satan, particularly for
the purpose of “temptation,” that is, in order to actualize man’s
uttermost power of decision through affliction and despair. Out
of this God of the Old Testament Jung makes a demiurge who
is himself half-Satanic. This god then for the sake of his “guilt,”
the miscarried creation of the world (I now quote literally from
Jung’s speech of 1940,65 the like of which is nowhere to be found
in the Gnostic literature to which he refers), “must be subject
to ritual killing.” By this Jung means the crucifixion of Christ.
The Trinity, moreover, is enlarged to a Quaternity in which the
autonomous devil is included as “the fourth.”66
These, to be sure, are all, as Jung emphasizes,67 “projections
of psychic events,” “human spiritual products to which one
may not arrogate any metaphysical validity.” The self seems
to him the prototype of all monotheistic systems, which are
here unmasked as hidden Gnosis. But, on the other hand, he
sees it at the same time as the imago Dei in homine. The soul
must indeed, he says once68 in a formulation which so far as I
know is without analogy in his other statements, have within
it something which corresponds to the being of God. In any
case, the self, the bridal unification of good and evil, is elevated
by him to the throne of the world as the new “Incarnation.” “If
we should like to know,” he says, “what happens in the case in
which the idea of God is no longer projected as an autonomous
essence, then this is the answer of the unconscious soul: the

78 Chapter 5

unconscious creates the idea of a deified or divine man.”69 This
figure, which embraces Christ and Satan within himself,70 is
the final form of that Gnostic god, descended to earth as the
realization of the “identity of God and man,”71 which Jung
once professed. He has remained faithful to this god, repeatedly intimating its prospective appearance.72
Jung’s psychology of religion is to be understood as the announcement of that god as the Coming One. To Nietzsche’s
saying, “All the gods are dead, now we desire that the superman live!” Heidegger, in a note otherwise foreign to him, adds
this warning73: “Man can never set himself in the place of God
because the essence of man does not reach to God’s sphere of
being. On the contrary, indeed, in proportion with this impossibility, something far more uncanny may happen, the nature of which we have still hardly begun to consider. The place
which, metaphysically speaking, belongs to God is the place
in which the production and preservation as created being
of that which exists is effected. This place of God can remain
empty. Instead of it another, that is, a metaphysically corresponding place can appear, which is neither identical with
God’s sphere of being nor with that of man, but which, on
the other hand, man can, in an eminent relation, attain. The
superman does not and never will step into the place of God;
the place rather in which the will to the superman arrives is
another sphere in another foundation of existing things in another being.” The words compel one to listen with attention.
One must judge whether that which is said or intimated in
them does not hold true to-day and here.

Notes
1.

L’existentialisme est un humanisme (1946), 21. All the quotations in this essay except one (see note 54) are trans-

Religion and Modern Thinking 79

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

lated directly and literally from the French or German
original. For the context in translation cf. Existentialism,
translated by Bernard Frechtman (1947), 18.
Situations I (1947), 153, Section “Un nouveau mystique” of
1943.
L’existentialisme, 33 f. Cf. Existentialism, 27 f.
Situations I, loc. cit.
Isaiah 45:15.
Situations I, loc. cit.
Ibid., 154.
L’existentialisme, 93. Cf. Existentialism, 60.
Situations I, 237, Section “Aller et retour,” probably of
1942.
L’être et le néant (1943), Section “L’existence d’autrui.”
Situations I, loc. cit.
Situations I, 334, Section “La liberté cartésienne.”
L’être et le néant, 286 f., 341.
L’existentialisme, 33 ff. Cf. Existentialism, 25 ff.
Ibid., 47. Cf. Existentialism, 33.
Ibid., 36. Cf. Existentialism, 27.
Ibid., 89. Cf. Existentialism, 58.
Holzwege (1950), 193 ff., Section “Nietzsches Wort ‘Gott ist
tot.’ ”
Vom Wesen des Grundes (1929), 28.
Platons Lehre von der Wahrheit. Mit einem Brief über den
Humanismus (1947), 102 f.
Ibid., 75.
Ibid., 85 f.
Erläuterungen zu Hölderlins Dichtungen (1944), 2nd Ed.
(1951), 44, Section “Hölderlin und das Wesen der Dichtung”
of 1936. For an English translation of “Hölderlin und das
Wesen der Dichtung” cf. Martin Heidegger, Existence and
Being (1949), “Hölderlin and the Essence of Poetry.”

80 Chapter 5

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

34.
35.

36.

37.

38.
39.
40.
41.
42.

Ibid., 26.
Ibid., 27.
Ibid., 108, Section “Andenken” of 1943.
Platons Lehre, 76.
Erläuterungen, 66, Section “Wie wenn am Feiertage” of
1941.
Erläuterungen, 37.
Die Selbstbehauptung der deutschen Universität, 22.
Freiburger Studentenzeitung of Nov. 3, 1933.
Erläuterungen, 73.
It should be noticed that the term “thought” (“das Denken”) in the late writings of Heidegger is used in essence
to describe his own thought.
Psychologie und Religion (1942), 133. This passage is not in
the English edition.
Wilhelm-Jung, Das Geheimnis der goldenen Blüte (1929),
73. Cf. Wilhelm-Jung, The Secret of the Golden Flower,
translated by Cary F. Baynes (1935), 135.
Jung-Kerényi, Einführung in das Wesen der Mythologie
(1941), 109. Cf. C. G. Jung and K. Kerényi, Essays on a
Science of Mythology (1949), 102.
Die Beziehungen zwischen dem Ich und dem Unbewussten
(1928), 205. Cf. Two Essays on Analytical Psychology,
translated by H. G. and C. F. Baynes (1928), “The Relation between the Ego and the Unconscious,” 267.
Psychologische Typen (1921), 340. Cf. Psychological Types,
translated by H. G. Baynes (1923), 300 f.
Geheimnis, 73. Cf. The Secret of the Golden Flower, 135.
Typen, 340. Cf. Psychological Types, 300.
Geheimnis, 73. Cf. The Secret of the Golden Flower, 135.
Evans-Wentz, Das tibetanische Totenbuch “Bardo Thödol ”
(1936), 18.

Religion and Modern Thinking 81

43. Psychologie und Alchemie (1944), 28. Psychology and Alchemy, translated by R. F. C. Hull (1952).
44. Totenbuch, 19.
45. There is no expression similar to this to be found in the
philosophers of the preceding century who, like Fries and
Beneke, wished to base metaphysics on psychology.
46. Cf. “Der Geist der Psychologie” (Eranos-Jahrbuch, 1946),
460 ff.
47. Seelenprobleme der Gegenwart (1931), 417. Cf. Modern Man
in Search of a Soul, translated by W. F. Dell and C. F. Baynes
(1933), 239.
48. Geheimnis, 73. Cf. The Secret of the Golden Flower, 135.
49. Cf. especially the second part of the sentence cited above
from “Seelenprobleme,” 417: “Modern consciousness . . .
wishes to know, i.e., to have primal experience” with the
sentence contained in the same book (p. 83): “We moderns are directed to experience again the spirit, i.e., to
make primal experience.” Cf. Modern Man, 140.
50. Ibid., 327. Cf. Modern Man, 217 f.
51. Ibid., 77. Cf. Modern Man, 135.
52. Religion, 145 ff. Cf. Psychology and Religion, 97 ff.
53. Beziehungen, 203 ff. Cf. Two Essays on Analytical Psychology, 267.
54. The Integration of the Personality, translated by S. M. Dell
(1940), “The Development of Personality,” 291 f. Cf.
Wirklichkeit der Seele (1934), Lecture “Vom Werden der
Persönlichkeit” of 1932, 197 f.
55. Wirklichkeit der Seele, 208 f. Cf. The Integration of the Personality, 302 f.
56. Beziehungen, 205. Cf. Two Essays, 267.
57. Geheimnis, 61. Cf. The Secret, 80.
58. Cf. Religion, 139 ff.; Psychology and Religion, 94 ff.

82 Chapter 5

59. “Der Geist der Psychologie,” 477.
60. Ibid., 474.
61. “Since God alone is free and uncreated, he is like the soul
in being free—but not in uncreatedness, for the soul is
created.” Sermon 13, Raymond Blakney, Meister Eckhart, A Modern Translation (1941), 159. For original cf.
Predigten, ed. Quint, 13 f.
62. “Über das Selbst” (Eranos-Jahrbuch, 1948), 315. Cf. Psychologie und Alchemie, 61.
63. Symbolik des Geistes (1948), 385.
64. Ibid., 410.
65. “Das Wandlungssymbol in der Messe” (Eranos-Jahrbuch,
1940–1941), 153 f.
66. Symbolik, 439. Cf. Religion, 108 ff.; “Zur Psychologie der
Trinitätsidee” (Eranos-Jahrbuch, 1940–1941), 51 ff.; Alchemie, 212.
67. Symbolik, 417.
68. Alchemie, 22 f.
69. Religion 172 f. Cf. Psychology and Religion, 106.
70. Symbolik, 409. Cf. “Selbst,” 304.
71. Religion, III. Cf. Psychology and Religion, 74.
72. Cf. especially Religion, 175 f. (Psychology and Religion,
107 ff.)
73. Holzwege, 235. A comparison is to be recommended with
Jung’s expression “The interregnum is full of danger” in
its context (Psychologie und Religion, 158), which means
almost the opposite. (The passage is not in Psychology and
Religion, which differs from the German edition.)

6
R ELIGION A ND ET HICS

1
We grasp an essential element of the path of the human spirit
known to history if we regard it from the standpoint of the
changes in the relationship between the ethical and the religious. But we must consider each, both the ethical and the
religious, not in one or another of its manifestations, but in its
basic form.
We mean by the ethical in this strict sense the yes and no
which man gives to the conduct and actions possible to him,
the radical distinction between them which affirms or denies
them not according to their usefulness or harmfulness for individuals and society, but according to their intrinsic value and
disvalue. We find the ethical in its purity only there where the
human person confronts himself with his own potentiality and
distinguishes and decides in this confrontation without asking anything other than what is right and what is wrong in
this his own situation. The criterion by which this distinction
and decision is made may be a traditional one, or it may be
one perceived by or revealed to the individual himself. What
is important is that the critical flame shoot up ever again out

83

84 Chapter 6

of the depths, first illuminating, then burning and purifying.
The truest source of this is a fundamental awareness inherent
in all men, though in the most varied strengths and degrees of
consciousness, and for the most part stifled by them. It is the
individual’s awareness of what he is “in truth,” of what in his
unique and non-repeatable created existence he is intended to
be. From this awareness, when it is fully present, the comparison between what one actually is and what one is intended to
be can emerge. What is found is measured against the image,
no so-called ideal image, nor anything imagined by man, but
an image arising out of that mystery of being itself that we call
the person. Thus the genius bearing his name confronts the
demonic fullness of the possible conduct and actions given to
the individual in this moment. One may call the distinction
and decision which arises from these depths the action of the
pre-conscience.
We mean by the religious in this strict sense, on the other
hand, the relation of the human person to the Absolute, when
and insofar as the person enters and remains in this relation as
a whole being. This presupposes the existence of a Being who,
though in Himself unlimited and unconditioned, lets other
beings, limited and conditioned indeed, exist outside Himself.
He even allows them to enter into a relation with Him such
as seemingly can only exist between limited and conditioned
beings. Thus in my definition of the religious “the Absolute”
does not mean something that the human person holds it to
be, without anything being said about its existence, but the
absolute reality itself, whatever the form in which it presents
itself to the human person at this moment. In the reality of
the religious relation the Absolute becomes in most cases personal, at times admittedly, as in the Buddhism which arose
out of a personal relation to the “Unoriginated,” only gradually
and, as it were, reluctantly in the course of the development

Religion and Ethics 85

of a religion. It is indeed legitimate to speak of the person of
God within the religious relation and in its language; but in so
doing we are making no statement about the Absolute which
reduces it to the personal. We are rather saying that it enters
into the relationship as the Absolute Person whom we call
God. One may understand the personality of God as His act.
It is, indeed, even permissible for the believer to believe that
God became a person for love of him, because in our human
mode of existence the only reciprocal relation with us that exists is a personal one.
We cannot, on the other hand, speak of the religious in the
strict sense meant here where there is no relation and cannot be one. This is the case when a man means by his concept of God simply all that is, outside of which he himself can
no longer in any way exist as a separate being who is able as
such to enter into relationship with God, even though it be
to lose himself ever anew in it. But this is also the case when
a man means by the concept of God his own self, no matter
under what complicated disguises he hides his meaning. What
happens here in the pseudo-mystical chamber of ghosts and
mirrors has nothing to do with the real relation or even with
the real self. The real self appears only when it enters into relation with the Other. Where this relation is rejected, the real
self withers away—an event which at times, indeed, can evoke
most phosphorescent effects.
We must hold fast to these insights when we consider the
path of the human spirit from the standpoint of the changes in
the relationship between the ethical and the religious.

2
The essence of the relationship between the ethical and the
religious cannot be determined by comparing the teachings of

86 Chapter 6

ethics and religion. One must rather penetrate into that area
within each sphere where they become solidified in a concrete,
personal situation. Thus it is the factual moral decision of the
individual on the one hand and his factual relationship to the
Absolute on the other that concerns us. In both cases it is
not a mere faculty of the person that is involved, whether it
be his thought or his feeling or his will, but the totality of these
faculties, and more than that, the whole man. A third sphere
overlying these two is not given us; we can only let the two
confront each other, and in such a way that in this meeting
each of them determines its relationship to the other. If from
the point of view of the religious we look in such concreteness at the relation between the two spheres, we shall see its
strong tendency to send forth its rays into the whole life of
the person, effecting a comprehensive structural change. Living religiousness wishes to bring forth living ethos. Something
essentially different meets our view if we seek to examine the
connection between the two fields from the standpoint of the
ethical. The man who seeks distinction and decision in his own
soul cannot draw from it, from his soul, absoluteness for his
scale of values. Only out of a personal relationship with the
Absolute can the absoluteness of the ethical co-ordinates arise
without which there is no complete awareness of self. Even
when the individual calls an absolute criterion handed down
by religious tradition his own, it must be reforged in the fire
of the truth of his personal essential relation to the Absolute
if it is to win true validity. But always it is the religious which
bestows, the ethical which receives.
It would be a fundamental misunderstanding of what I am
saying if one assumed that I am upholding so-called moral
heteronomy or external moral laws in opposition to so-called
moral autonomy or self-imposed moral laws. Where the Absolute speaks in the reciprocal relationship, there are no longer

Religion and Ethics 87

such alternatives. The whole meaning of reciprocity, indeed,
lies in just this, that it does not wish to impose itself but to be
freely apprehended. It gives us something to apprehend, but
it does not give us the apprehension. Our act must be entirely
our own for that which is to be disclosed to us to be disclosed,
even that which must disclose each individual to himself. In
theonomy the divine law seeks for your own, and true revelation reveals to you yourself.

3
From this point, from the reality of the relationship between the
spheres in the life of the person, and only from this point can
their relationship in the history of man be adequately grasped.
Twice in the history of mankind—insofar as it can be surveyed and understood by man—there has been an attempt to
bind the radical distinction between good and evil to the Absolute. The two manifestations of this great enterprise of the
spirit are, to be sure, as different as possible in their nature and
course of development.
The first manifestation appeared in Oriental and Greek antiquity. It is the teaching of a universal continuity of meaning, whose principle appears in China as Tao, in India as Rita,
in Iran as Urta (usually pronounced Asha), and in Greece as
Dike. Heavenly powers, we are told, have entrusted to man the
pattern of right behaviour. But this is not an order that they
have devised for man; it is their own order. Heaven does not
wish to establish a special order for earth; it wishes to let it partake in its own order. The moral order is identical with the cosmic. The totality of existing beings is by its nature one society
with one code of laws. It is immaterial whether the ancestors
are themselves represented as gods or whether a relationship
of give-and-take exists between the ancestors and the gods. In

88 Chapter 6

accordance with their sense and destiny, men and gods form,
in the final analysis, a single society with a single order, and it
is an order of righteousness. Men may, indeed, seek to evade it,
as not infrequently even the gods of myth do, yet the power of
this order rules over all and ultimately determines the coherence of events. The Rita, which in the world of our perceptions
distinguishes and decides between good and evil, between the
right and the wrong, is a cosmic, but also a metacosmic, ethos
of Being. Thus the gods are addressed in a Vedic hymn: “Your
Rita, which is hidden behind the Rita [the Rita which can be
perceived in empirical life], stands eternally fast, there, where
the horses of the sun are unyoked.” According to an early
Zoroastrian text, the highest god, who created the material
world, is also the father of the effective good disposition, and
of the devotion that does good works. “Heaven and Earth,”
says the Chinese Book of Transformations, the kernel of which
is very old, “move in devotion; hence neither sun nor moon
steps out of its course.” Heraclitus of Ephesus says essentially
the same thing in different form. “The sun shall not step out of
its course; else, the Erinyes, the helpers of Dike, will find him
out.” The avengers of human guilt also watch over the “holy
order of the world.” As a law of the universe it was formulated
even before Heraclitus by Anaximander of Miletos—“All beings must atone and do justice to one another for the wrong
they have done.” And from the school of Confucius we hear,
“He who accepts responsibility before the Tao of heaven and
earth is called a man.” All these sayings complete one another
as if they stood together in one book.

4
The crisis in this doctrine common to the great cultures of the
Orient, including the Greek societies of Asia Minor, broke out

Religion and Ethics 89

on European soil, in Greece. The philosophical expression of
this crisis is known by the name of Sophistry. Its most characteristic criticism attacks the connection between the ethical
and the absolute by calling in question, from the standpoint of
biological facts, the cosmos as a unified pattern. The heavenly
bodies may indeed appear to us to be in that perfect agreement
which a chorus of Aeschylus calls “the harmony of Zeus”; but
where life is, another law rules, according to which the strong
dispose of the weak. A few Sophists, the radically individualistic among them, conclude from this that the right of the
strong is valid even within human society, but most of them
defend the law of society, which unites the weak into a powerful body. Human society determines what is good and just;
it does so on the basis of what is useful to it. Rather, since
not one single society but many and varied societies exist, one
should say that societies behave thus. The good is therefore not
one and consistent, it is “variegated and manifold.” In other
words, there are only changing customs and manners, values
and regulations; there is no primordial function of assent and
dissent, inherent in Being itself, which underlies all this variety
and manifoldness and, in fact, makes it possible. “Man,” sums
up the greatest of the Sophists, “is the measure of all things.”
It is as a protest against this relativizing of all values that
we must understand Plato’s doctrine of Ideas. It is the great
attempt of ancient thought to restore the connection of the
ethical with the Absolute and thus allow the concrete acting
man to meet once again the primal ground of Being. In line
with this intention Plato formulated at the end of his path, as
an exact counterpart to the saying of Protagoras, the opposing
statement, “God is the measure of all things.” Once the belief
common to the early cultures of the Orient in a unity of the
universe representing what is right had been upset and nature had been split into a harmonious cosmos and a discordant

90 Chapter 6

bios, then the world of things could no longer serve man as a
model and pattern. It itself must be confronted by an inviolable, archetypal world of pure Forms.
But the design leads on as if of necessity even to Plato’s
construction of this higher world, whose highest summit is the
idea of the Good or God. The eternal Ethos itself, the ground of
being of that universal human function that sets the yes against
the no and pushes to a decision, becomes the highest “form” of
the Absolute. It is the “Good and the Should-Be” that binds and
holds together all being. With a clarity of thought never before
attained, man is given here the task of realizing the unconditionality of Right through his person. The objective “imitation”
of Ideas by things becomes transformed in and through the
subjectivity into the spiritual act of becoming just. This positing of the ethical function as transcendental becomes possible through one of the most daring of man’s thoughts. It is
that the Good “towers above being in dignity and power” as
the “primal cause of all that is just and beautiful.” The Good
brings each individual thing into being not simply that it may
exist but that it may perfectly become that which it is meant
to be. The distinction between the affirmed and the negated
that leads to the conquest of the no by the yes stands above
being still undifferentiated as such. In its innermost depths,
one nears the mystery of God, for not Being, but only Perfect
Being, may be called God. “If one does not cease,” says Plato,
“until one has reached the Good itself through knowledge itself, then one reaches the end of the knowable.” But where
does one recognize the Good? To this question Plato gives us
no specific answer, but we remain close to him if we say that
the Good is recognized there where it reveals itself to the individual who decides with his whole being to become that which
he is meant to be. And in fact, whether it takes place in the soul
or in the world, nothing is so mysterious as the appearance of

Religion and Ethics 91

the Good. In its light all secret teachings appear as learnable
conventions; the essential relation of the human person to that
which “towers above being” cannot be learned, it can only be
awakened.

5
Plato’s daring attempt to set a world of Ideas in the place of the
collapsing prototypal heavenly world that guaranteed the absoluteness of the highest values to the great Oriental cultures
did not succeed, however great and persevering its influence.
The process which had begun continued, leading to the dissolution of the absoluteness of the ethical co-ordinates and, in
constant interaction with it, to the disintegration of the old
world.
Long before this, however, the first stage had been completed in the second great attempt in the history of the human
spirit to bind the radical distinction between good and evil
with the Absolute. This attempt, as I said before, was utterly
different from the first in its method and course of development. It did not originate, like the first, in a connected group
of higher cultures stretching over a continent. It originated in
a band of cattle-breeders and occasional farmers who left the
high civilization of Egypt, where, as a foreign people, they had
eked out a half-free, half-slave existence, to become wanderers and land-seekers and who on the way, in an oasis, constituted themselves as a covenantal union of tribes united by their
common faith in God. This “God of Israel” was a giver and
protector of law, like some other Semitic tribal gods, but the
covenant that was made with Him was based on such an earnest, such a genuinely demanded and protected distinction between right and wrong as had not been known in any of those
tribes. The spiritual leaders ever again and ever more clearly

92 Chapter 6

told the people who had then arisen that He was “the Judge of
the whole earth,” who had now chosen just this people as His
immediate following in order that it might begin to fulfil His
righteousness. This righteousness, the confirmation, namely, of
what is just and the overcoming of what is unjust, was here not
already embodied in a heavenly society that should serve as a
model for the human one. It was not the cosmic order which
was decisive but its sovereign, the Lord of heaven and earth,
who taught the human creature formed by His hand to distinguish in their souls between good and evil as He Himself, creating the world, had distinguished between light and darkness.
It is customary to see the connection between the ethical
and the religious in Israel exclusively in the form of a heavenly
command accompanied by a threat of punishment. To do this
is to miss what is essential. For the giving of the law at Sinai
is properly understood as the body of rules which the divine
Ruler conferred upon His people in the hour of His ascension
to the throne. All the prescriptions of this body of rules, both
the ritual and the ethical, are intended to lead beyond themselves into the sphere of the “holy.” The people’s goal was set
not by their being bidden to become a “good” people but a
“holy” one. Thus every moral demand is set forth as one that
shall raise man, the human people, to the sphere where the
ethical merges into the religious, or rather where the difference between the ethical and the religious is suspended in the
breathing-space of the divine. This is expressed with unsurpassable clarity in the reason given for the goal that is set. Israel shall become holy, “for I am holy.” The imitation of God by
man, the “following in His way,” can be fulfilled naturally only
in those divine attributes turned towards the human ethos, in
justice and love, and all the attributes are transparent into the
Holiness above the attributes, to be reproduced in the radi-

Religion and Ethics 93

cally different human dimension. The absolute norm is given
to show the way that leads before the face of the Absolute.
The presupposition for this connection between the ethical
and the religious, however, is the basic view that man, while created by God, was established by Him in an independence which
has since remained undiminished. In this independence he
stands over against God. So man takes part with full freedom
and spontaneity in the dialogue between the two which forms
the essence of existence. That this is so despite God’s unlimited
power and knowledge is just that which constitutes the mystery of man’s creation. In this is founded the lasting reality of
the distinction and decision which man consummates in his
soul.
The stream of Christianity, flowing over the world from the
source of Israel and strengthened by mighty influxes, especially
the Iranian and the Greek, arose at a time in Hellenistic civilization, and especially in its religious life, when the element
of the people was being displaced by that of the individual.
Christianity is “Hellenistic” insofar as it surrenders the concept
of the “holy people” and recognizes only a personal holiness.
Individual religiousness thus attains a hitherto unheard-of intensity and inwardness, especially since the ever-present image
of Christ permits the individual a far more concrete relation of
following after and imitation than does the imageless nature
of the God of Israel, who is a self-revealing but not less a selfconcealing (in no way, to be sure, as people are accustomed
to say, a hidden) God. With this God, not fixing Himself to
any form and withdrawing Himself from every manifestation,
the peoples won to Christianity would certainly not have been
able to enter into an unmediated relation. They did not stand,
like Israel, in a fundamental relationship to Him as the people
of a covenant. In connection with this Christian individualism,

94 Chapter 6

moreover, the relationship between the ethical and the religious was impaired. For when a sanctification of the people as
a people is no longer recognized or no longer taken seriously,
then the peoples accept the new faith not as peoples but as
collections of individuals. Even where mass conversions take
place, the people as a people remains unbaptized; it does not
enter as a people into the new covenant that has been proclaimed.
This means that here a great spiritual power, such as was
prophecy in Israel, no longer executes the task of denouncing
and reproving, for the sake of the people’s holiness, the unholy
both in public life and in the private life of the individual who
has been participating in this public life, so to speak, “in good
conscience.” Certainly in the history of Christian peoples there
has been no lack of men of the spirit afire and ready for martyrdom in the struggle for righteousness; but the injunction,
“You shall become a holy people unto me,” no longer stood
living behind them.
Something else, of still deeper import, was added to this. It
too was connected with the meaningful and legitimate development of the fundamental supremacy of the religious. That
which formed the kernel of the prophetic teaching in Israel was
the work of life to be fulfilled out of the full intention of faith,
and the intention of faith was the innermost action of man. It
was against ritual works emptied of the intention of faith that
the prophets fought. It was against moral works emptied of
the intention of faith that their successors in the time of Jesus
fought, to whom belonged the great Pharisaic teachers and
Jesus himself. The Pauline and the Paulinistic theology depreciated works for the sake of faith. It left undeveloped that
which bound the two together, the demand for intention of
faith, intention of work out of faith, the demand which underlay the proclamation of that which is pleasing to God from the

Religion and Ethics 95

first Biblical prophets to the Sermon on the Mount. But the
tendency from Augustine to the Reformation was to see faith
as a gift of God. This sublime conception, with all that goes
with it, resulted in the retreating into obscurity of the Israelite
mystery of man as an independent partner of God. The dogma
of original sin was not, indeed, adapted to further that especial
connection of the ethical with the religious that true theonomy seeks to realize through the faithful autonomy of man.
In the teachings of the correspondence between heaven
and earth, found in the great Asiatic cultures, the normative
principle is not yet differentiated at all from the theological
(theology being understood as religion’s reflection on itself ).
There only exists a normative side of truth turned toward man.
In the teaching of Israel the ethos is an inherent function of
religion, no longer one side indeed but a direct effect of it. In
Christianity, which gives the character of exclusiveness to the
Israelite belief in the indispensable grace of God, the norm,
even if it steps forth as the “new law,” can no longer occupy
a central place. It is thus made easy for the secular norm to
gain ever more ground at its expense. In its political form, to
be sure, the secular norm seeks to secure an absolute religious
basis through the concept of the divine right of kings and
other means. The true binding of the ethical to the Absolute,
however, is here ever less present.

6
The crisis of the second great attempt to bind the ethical to
the Absolute extends into our time. Like the first, it also found
its intellectual expression in a philosophical movement that
relativized values, though one that was, to be sure, far more differentiated than that of the Sophists. It had its prelude already
in the seventeenth century in views such as that of Hobbes,

96 Chapter 6

which remind one in some points of the formulations of a Sophistical text of the fifth century b.c.1 Its decisive development,
however, takes place in the nineteenth century through an attitude of mind that one might call a philosophy of reduction
or detection. He who consummated it, Nietzsche, called it “the
art of mistrust.”
This philosophy, which, like that of the Sophists, connects
the biological perspective with the historical and the psychological, seeks to unmask the spiritual world as a system of deceptions and self-deceptions, of “ideologies” and “sublimations.”
It finds its actual beginning in Feuerbach’s critique of religion, which developed Protagoras’ saying that man is the
measure of all things in a seemingly inverse way. It is summed
up in the sentence: “What man is not, but what he wills to be
or wishes to be, just that and only that, nothing else, is God.” A
direct path leads from Feuerbach to Marx, except that for Marx
a statement of this sort, being metaphysical and unhistorical,
would have no real meaning. For Marx, following Vico, there
is no knowledge but the historical. He transforms Feuerbach’s
thesis, broadening it on the one hand to include all religious,
moral, political, and philosophical ideas but inserting all these
on the other hand into the historical process. This process, in
turn, is to be understood only through the changes in the conditions of production and the conflicts that arise out of it. In
every morality, he argues, the conditions of the existence of the
ruling class are ideally expressed. As long as the class struggle
exists, all distinction between good and evil is merely a function of it, all life-norms either expressions of power or weapons
for its enforcement. This holds true essentially not only for the
changing moral contents, but also for moral valuing as such.
1 Anonymus Jamblichi.

Religion and Ethics 97

Insofar as Nietzsche’s critique of morals remains in the historical sphere, it can be understood objectively, though Nietzsche
himself was, of course, far from so understanding it, as a modification of Marx’s doctrine of ideologies. He too saw historical
morals as the expression and instruments of the power struggle
between ruling and oppressed classes, only also from the side of
the latter. It is on this side, the “slave morality,” which he understands Christianity to be, that he particularly fixes his attention. Underlying this conception of the historical appearance
of moralities is his view of the genesis of values, according to
which values and their transformations stand “in relationship
to the growth of the power of the setter of values.” Underlying
this view, in turn, is the methaphysical conception that the life
of the spirit, like all life, can be reduced to the single principle
of the “will to power.” But now Nietzsche executes a singular
reversal. The “slave morality,” which turns against the will to
power, is identified with morality as a whole, as if the “master
morality,” of which Nietzsche approves, did not exist at all.
On the one hand, he proclaims a biologically-based morality. “I teach negation of all that weakens. I teach affirmation of
all that strengthens.” But on the other hand, he explains that
scepticism of all morality is that which is decisive and our age
is that of the decline of the moral interpretation of the world.
This decline will end in nihilism, which he himself professes.
This means that “the highest values lose their value” so that
now a goal for existence is wanting. Nihilism shall now, however, be overcome through creating a goal “which will remain
poised above mankind and above the individual.” This means
that a new goal, a new meaning of existence and a new value,
are set by Nietzsche’s teaching of the Superman. He has not
noticed, to be sure, that all this is already basically abrogated
through his other teaching, that of the eternal return of the

98 Chapter 6

same, which he himself calls “the extremest form of nihilism”
and the eternalization of the meaningless.
Nietzsche knew, so basically as not many modern thinkers
before him, that the absoluteness of ethical values is rooted in
our relationship to the Absolute. And he understood this hour
of human history as that in which “the belief in God and in
an essential moral order can no longer be held.” His decisive
utterance is the cry “God is dead.” But he could bear this proclamation only as a turning-point, not as an end-point. Time
and again he seeks a conception that will show a way out that
might save God for those who had become godless. “Religions
are wrecked by their belief in morality,” he says. “The Christian
moral God is untenable.” But this does not yet lead to simple
atheism “as though no other kinds of gods could exist.” From
within man himself must come forth, if not the new god himself, at least a valid substitute for God, the “Superman.” But
this is at the same time the measure of the new, life-affirming
values; on this concept is founded the new biological scale of
values in which the values good-evil are replaced by the values strong-weak. And again Nietzsche does not notice that all
the ambiguity that has ever attached itself to the values goodevil is fatally surpassed by the intrinsic ambiguity of the values
strong-weak. “The Sophists,” says Nietzsche, “have the courage
common to all strong spirits of knowing their immorality. The
Sophists were Greek; when Socrates and Plato took the part of
virtue and righteousness, they were Jews or I know not what.”
Nietzsche himself wanted to conquer the nihilism which he
himself had consummated; as a result he came to grief. This is
not meant in the sense in which one could say of Plato that he
came to grief because he had no success in the historical course
of events. What is meant, rather, is that in contradistinction
to the doctrine of Ideas, the “teaching of the Superman” is no
teaching at all and that in contradistinction to the value-scale

Religion and Ethics 99

defined by the idea of the Good, the value-scale strong-weak
is no value-scale at all.
The situation in which we find ourselves is partially conditioned by this abortive undertaking of nihilism both to fulfil
and to overcome itself at the same time. But there is one thing
that we may learn from nihilism. A purely moral structure of
authority will not lead us out of this situation into a different
one.

7
ON T HE SUSPENSION
OF T HE ET HIC AL

The first book of Kierkegaard’s that I read as a young man was
Fear and Trembling, which is built entirely upon the Biblical
narrative of the sacrifice of Isaac. I still think of that hour today because it was then that I received the impulse to reflect
upon the categories of the ethical and the religious in their
relation to each other.
Through the example of the temptation of Abraham this
book sets forth the idea that there is a “teleological suspension of the ethical,” that the validity of a moral duty can be at
times suspended in accordance with the purpose of something
higher, of the highest. When God commands one to murder
his son, the immorality of the immoral is suspended for the
duration of this situation. What is more, that which is otherwise purely evil is for the duration of this situation purely good
because it has become pleasing to God. In the place of the
universal and the universally valid steps something which is
founded exclusively in the personal relation between God and
“the Single One.” But just through this the ethical, the universal and the universally valid, is relativized. Its values and laws

100

On the Suspension of the Ethical 101

are banished from the absolute into the relative; for that which
is a duty in the sphere of the ethical possesses no absoluteness
as soon as it is confronted with the absolute duty toward God.
“But what is duty?” asks Kierkegaard. “Duty is indeed just the
expression for God’s will!” In other words, God establishes the
order of good and evil, and breaks through it where He wishes.
He does so from person to person, that is, in direct personal
relation with the individual.
On the deadly seriousness of this “from person to person”
Kierkegaard has, it is true, laid the greatest possible stress. He
has declared most clearly that this trial will only be laid upon
one who is worthy of being called God’s chosen one. “But
who,” he asks, “is such a one?” In particular, he assures us time
and again that he himself does not have this courage of faith
which is necessary to plunge confidently, with closed eyes, into
the absurd. It is impossible for him to perform the paradoxical
movement of faith that Abraham performed. One must keep
in mind, however, the fact that Kierkegaard also states that he
has fought to become “the Single One” in the strictest sense
of the term but has not attained it and the fact that he nonetheless once considered having the words “that Single One”
placed upon his grave. There are many indications that when
he described how Abraham gave up his son and nonetheless
believed that he would not lose him (so Kierkegaard understood the event), he had in mind the day, a little more than a
year before, when he himself broke his engagement with his
beloved and yet thought that he would be able to preserve it in
a higher, incomprehensible dimension. In the way of this union
(he once explained) “there stood a divine protest”1 though he
had, to be sure, no lasting confidence in this idea. So little confidence had he, in fact, that in the year of the publication of
1 She also stated once, much later, that he had sacrificed her to God.

102 Chapter 7

Fear and Trembling he was able to set down the sentence, “Had
I had faith, I would have remained with her.”
The event is here removed out of the situation between
Abraham and God, in which God breaks through the ethical
order which He Himself established, into a sphere where what
happens takes place in a much less unequivocal fashion than in
the Biblical narrative. “That which the Single One is to understand by Isaac,” says Kierkegaard, “can be decided only by and
for himself.” That means, clearly and precisely, that he does not
learn it, at least not unmistakably, from God. God demands
a sacrifice of him, but it is left to the Single One to interpret
what that sacrifice is. His interpretation will always be determined by his life-circumstances in this hour. How differently
the Biblical voice speaks here! “Thy son, thine only one, whom
thou lovest, Isaac.” There is nothing here to interpret. The man
who hears learns entirely what is demanded of him; the God
who speaks proposes no riddles.
But we still have not arrived at the decisive problematics.
This first appears to us when Kierkegaard compares his Abraham with Agamemnon, who is getting ready to sacrifice Iphigenia. Agamemnon is the tragic hero, who is called upon by
“the universal” to sacrifice for the welfare of his people. He,
therefore, “remains within the borders of the ethical,” which
Abraham, “the knight of faith,” crosses over. Everything depends upon this, that Abraham crosses over them with the
paradoxical movement of faith. Otherwise all becomes a demonic temptation (“Anfechtung”), the readiness to sacrifice a
readiness to murder, and “Abraham is lost.” This also is decided
in “absolute isolation.” “The knight of faith,” says Kierkegaard,
“is left to his own resources, single and alone, and therein lies
the dreadful.”
This is true insofar as there is no one on earth who can
help him to come to a decision and to perform “the movement

On the Suspension of the Ethical 103

of infinity.” But Kierkegaard here takes for granted something
that cannot be taken for granted even in the world of Abraham,
much less in ours. He does not take into consideration the fact
that the problematics of the decision of faith is preceded by
the problematics of the hearing itself. Who is it whose voice
one hears? For Kierkegaard it is self-evident because of the
Christian tradition in which he grew up that he who demands
the sacrifice is none other than God. But for the Bible, at least
for the Old Testament, it is not without further question selfevident. Indeed a certain “instigation” to a forbidden action
is even ascribed in one place to God (2 Samuel 24:1) and in
another to Satan (1 Chronicles 21:1).
Abraham, to be sure, could not confuse with another the
voice which once bade him leave his homeland and which
he at that time recognized as the voice of God without the
speaker saying to him who he was. And God did indeed
“tempt” him. Through the extremest demand He drew forth
the innermost readiness to sacrifice out of the depths of Abraham’s being, and He allowed this readiness to grow to the full
intention to act. He thus made it possible for Abraham’s relation to Him, God, to become wholly real. But then, when no
further hindrance stood between the intention and the deed,
He contented Himself with Abraham’s fulfilled readiness and
prevented the action.
It can happen, however, that a sinful man is uncertain
whether he does not have to sacrifice his (perhaps also very
beloved) son to God for his sins (Micah 6:7). For Moloch
imitates the voice of God. In contrast to this, God Himself
demands of this as of every man (not of Abraham, His chosen one, but of you and me) nothing more than justice and
love, and that he “walk humbly” with Him, with God (Micah
6:8)—in other words, not much more than the fundamental
ethical.

104 Chapter 7

Where, therefore, the “suspension” of the ethical is concerned, the question of questions which takes precedence over
every other is: Are you really addressed by the Absolute or by
one of his apes? It should be noted in this connection that,
according to the report of the Bible, the divine voice which
speaks to the Single One is the “voice of a thin silence” (1
Kings 19:21).2 The voice of Moloch, in contrast, usually prefers
a mighty roaring. However, in our age especially, it appears to
be extremely difficult to distinguish the one from the other.
Ours is an age in which the suspension of the ethical fills
the world in a caricaturized form. The apes of the Absolute, to
be sure, have always in the past bustled about on earth. Ever
and ever again men are commanded from out of the darkness
to sacrifice their Isaac. Here the sentence is valid, “That which
the Single One is to understand by Isaac, can be decided only
by and for himself.” But stored away in men’s hearts, there were
in all those times images of the Absolute, partly pallid, partly
crude, altogether false and yet true, fleeting as an image in a
dream yet verified in eternity. Inadequate as this presence certainly was, insofar as one bore it concretely in mind one only
needed to call on it in order not to succumb to the deception
of the voices.
That is no longer so since, in Nietzsche’s words, “God is
dead,” that is, realistically speaking, since the image-making
power of the human heart has been in decline so that the
spiritual pupil can no longer catch a glimpse of the appearance of the Absolute. False absolutes rule over the soul, which
is no longer able to put them to flight through the image of
the true. Everywhere, over the whole surface of the human
world—in the East and in the West, from the left and from the
2 A bold visual metaphor for an acoustical event: It is a silence, but not a thick and
solid one, rather one that is of such veil-like thinness that the Word shines through it.

On the Suspension of the Ethical 105

right, they pierce unhindered through the level of the ethical
and demand of you “the sacrifice.” Time and again, when I ask
well-conditioned young souls, “Why do you give up your dearest possession, your personal integrity?” they answer me, “Even
this, this most difficult sacrifice, is the thing that is needed in
order that. . . .” It makes no difference, “in order that equality
may come” or “in order that freedom may come,” it makes no
difference! And they bring the sacrifice faithfully. In the realm
of Moloch honest men lie and compassionate men torture.
And they really and truly believe that brother-murder will prepare the way for brotherhood! There appears to be no escape
from the most evil of all idolatry.
There is no escape from it until the new conscience of men
has arisen that will summon them to guard with the innermost
power of their souls against the confusion of the relative with
the Absolute, that will enable them to see through illusion and
to recognize this confusion for what it is. To penetrate again
and again into the false absolute with an incorruptible, probing glance until one has discovered its limits, its limitedness—
there is to-day perhaps no other way to reawaken the power
of the pupil to glimpse the never-vanishing appearance of the
Absolute.

8
G O D AND T HE SPIR IT OF MAN

This book discusses the relations between religion and philosophy in the history of the spirit and deals with the part that
philosophy has played in its late period in making God and all
absoluteness appear unreal.
If philosophy is here set in contrast to religion, what is meant
by religion is not the massive fulness of statements, concepts,
and activities that one customarily describes by this name and
that men sometimes long for more than for God. Religion is
essentially the act of holding fast to God. And that does not
mean holding fast to an image that one has made of God, nor
even holding fast to the faith in God that one has conceived.
It means holding fast to the existing God. The earth would not
hold fast to its conception of the sun (if it had one) nor to its
connection with it, but to the sun itself.
In contrast to religion so understood, philosophy is here regarded as the process, reaching from the early becoming independent of reflection to its more contemporary crisis, the last
stage of which is the intellectual letting go of God.
This process begins with man’s no longer contenting himself, as did the pre-philosophical man, with picturing the living
God, to whom one formerly only called—with a call of despair

106

God and the Spirit of Man 107

or rapture which occasionally became His first name—as a
Something, a thing among things, a being among beings, an It.
The beginning of philosophizing means that this Something changes from an object of imagination, wishes, and feelings to one that is conceptually comprehensible, to an object
of thought. It does not matter whether this object of thought
is called “Speech” (Logos), because in all and each one hears
it speak, answer, and directly address one, or “the Unlimited”
(Apeiron), because it has already leapt over every limit that one
may try to set for it, or simply “Being,” or whatever. If the living quality of the conception of God refuses to enter into this
conceptual image, it is tolerated alongside of it, usually in an
unprecise form, as in the end identical with it or at least essentially dependent on it. Or it is depreciated as an unsatisfactory
surrogate for the help of men incapable of thought.
In the progress of its philosophizing the human spirit is
ever more inclined to fuse characteristically this conception,
of the Absolute as object of an adequate thought, with itself,
the human spirit. In the course of this process, the idea which
was at first noetically contemplated finally becomes the potentiality of the spirit itself that thinks it, and it attains on the
way of the spirit its actuality. The subject, which appeared to be
attached to being in order to perform for it the service of contemplation, asserts that it itself produced and produces being.
Until, finally, all that is over against us, everything that accosts
us and takes possession of us, all partnership of existence, is
dissolved in free-floating subjectivity.
The next step already takes us to the stage familiar to us, the
stage that understands itself as the final one and plays with its
finality: the human spirit, which adjudges to itself mastery over
its work, annihilates conceptually the absoluteness of the absolute. It may yet imagine that it, the spirit, still remains there
as bearer of all things and coiner of all values; in truth, it has

108 Chapter 8

also destroyed its own absoluteness along with absoluteness in
general. The spirit can now no longer exist as an independent
essence. There now exists only a product of human individuals called spirit, a product which they contain and secrete like
mucus and urine.
In this stage there first takes place the conceptual letting go
of God because only now philosophy cuts off its own hands,
the hands with which it was able to grasp and hold Him.
But an analogous process takes place on the other side, in
the development of religion itself (in the usual broad sense of
the word).
From the earliest times the reality of the relation of faith,
man’s standing before the face of God, world-happening as
dialogue, has been threatened by the impulse to control the
power yonder. Instead of understanding events as calls which
make demands on one, one wishes oneself to demand without
having to hearken. “I have,” says man, “power over the powers I conjure.” And that continues, with sundry modifications,
wherever one celebrates rites without being turned to the Thou
and without really meaning its Presence.
The other pseudoreligious counterpart of the relation of
faith, not so elementally active as conjuration but acting with the
mature power of the intellect, is unveiling. Here one takes the
position of raising the veil of the manifest, which divides the revealed from the hidden, and leading forth the divine mysteries.
“I am,” says man, “acquainted with the unknown, and I make
it known.” The supposedly divine It that the magician manipulates as the technician his dynamo, the Gnostic lays bare, the
whole divine apparatus. His heirs are not “theosophies” and
their neighbours alone; in many theologies also, unveiling gestures are to be discovered behind the interpreting ones.
We find this replacement of I-Thou by an I-It in manifold
forms in that new philosophy of religion which seeks to “save”

God and the Spirit of Man 109

religion. In it the “I” of this relation steps ever more into the
foreground as “subject” of “religious feeling,” as profiter from a
pragmatist decision to believe, and the like.
Much more important than all this, however, is an event
penetrating to the innermost depth of the religious life, an
event which may be described as the subjectivizing of the act
of faith itself. Its essence can be grasped most clearly through
the example of prayer.
We call prayer in the pregnant sense of the term that speech
of man to God which, whatever else is asked, ultimately asks
for the manifestation of the divine Presence, for this Presence’s
becoming dialogically perceivable. The single presupposition of
a genuine state of prayer is thus the readiness of the whole man
for this Presence, simple turned-towardness, unreserved spontaneity. This spontaneity, ascending from the roots, succeeds
time and again in overcoming all that disturbs and diverts. But
in this our stage of subjectivized reflection not only the concentration of the one who prays, but also his spontaneity is
assailed. The assailant is consciousness, the over-consciousness
of this man here that he is praying, that he is praying, that he
is praying. And the assailant appears to be invincible. The
subjective knowledge of the one turning-towards about his
turning-towards, this holding back of an I which does not
enter into the action with the rest of the person, an I to which
the action is an object—all this depossesses the moment, takes
away its spontaneity. The specifically modern man who has not
yet let go of God knows what that means: he who is not present perceives no Presence.
One must understand this correctly: this is not a question
of a special case of the known sickness of modern man, who
must attend his own actions as spectator. It is the confession
of the Absolute into which he brings his unfaithfulness to the
Absolute, and it is the relation between the Absolute and him

110 Chapter 8

upon which this unfaithfulness works, in the middle of the
statement of trust. And now he too who is seemingly holding
fast to God becomes aware of the eclipsed Transcendence.
What is it that we mean when we speak of an eclipse of
God which is even now taking place? Through this metaphor
we make the tremendous assumption that we can glance up to
God with our “mind’s eye,” or rather being’s eye, as with our
bodily eye to the sun, and that something can step between
our existence and His as between the earth and the sun. That
this glance of the being exists, wholly unillusory, yielding no
images yet first making possible all images, no other court in
the world attests than that of faith. It is not to be proved; it is
only to be experienced; man has experienced it. And that other,
that which steps in between, one also experiences, to-day. I
have spoken of it since I have recognized it, and as exactly as
my perception allowed me.
The double nature of man, as the being that is both brought
forth from “below” and sent from “above,” results in the duality
of his basic characteristics. These cannot be understood through
the categories of the individual man existing-for-himself, but
only through the categories of his existing as man-with-man.
As a being who is sent, man exists over against the existing
being before which he is placed. As a being who is brought
forth, he finds himself beside all existing beings in the world,
beside which he is set. The first of these categories has its living
reality in the relation I-Thou, the second has its reality in the
relation I-It. The second always brings us only to the aspects of
an existing being, not to that being itself. Even the most intimate contact with another remains covered over by an aspect if
the other has not become Thou for me. Only the first relation,
that which establishes essential immediacy between me and
an existing being, brings me just thereby not to an aspect of

God and the Spirit of Man 111

it but to that being itself. To be sure, it brings me only to the
existential meeting with it; it does not somehow put me in a
position to view it objectively in its being. As soon as an objective viewing is established, we are given only an aspect and
ever again only an aspect. But it is also only the relation I-Thou
in which we can meet God at all, because of Him, in absolute
contrast to all other existing beings, no objective aspect can be
attained. Even a vision yields no objective viewing, and he who
strains to hold fast an after-image after the cessation of the full
I-Thou relation has already lost the vision.
It is not the case, however, that the I in both relations,
I-Thou and I-It, is the same. Rather where and when the beings around one are seen and treated as objects of observation,
reflection, use, perhaps also of solicitude or help, there and
then another I is spoken, another I manifested, another I exists
than where and when one stands with the whole of one’s being
over against another being and steps into an essential relation
with him. Everyone who knows both in himself—and that is
the life of man, that one comes to know both in himself and
ever again both—knows whereof I speak. Both together build
up human existence; it is only a question of which of the two is
at any particular time the architect and which is his assistant.
Rather, it is a question of whether the I-Thou relation remains
the architect, for it is self-evident that it cannot be employed
as assistant. If it does not command, then it is already disappearing.
In our age the I-It relation, gigantically swollen, has usurped,
practically uncontested, the mastery and the rule. The I of this
relation, an I that possesses all, makes all, succeeds with all, this
I that is unable to say Thou, unable to meet a being essentially,
is the lord of the hour. This selfhood that has become omnipotent, with all the It around it, can naturally acknowledge

112 Chapter 8

neither God nor any genuine absolute which manifests itself
to men as of non-human origin. It steps in between and shuts
off from us the light of heaven.
Such is the nature of this hour. But what of the next? It is a
modern superstition that the character of an age acts as fate for
the next. One lets it prescribe what is possible to do and hence
what is permitted. One surely cannot swim against the stream,
one says. But perhaps one can swim with a new stream whose
source is still hidden? In another image, the I-Thou relation
has gone into the catacombs—who can say with how much
greater power it will step forth! Who can say when the I-It
relation will be directed anew to its assisting place and activity!
The most important events in the history of that embodied
possibility called man are the occasionally occurring beginnings of new epochs, determined by forces previously invisible
or unregarded. Each age is, of course, a continuation of the
preceding one, but a continuation can be confirmation and it
can be refutation.
Something is taking place in the depths that as yet needs
no name. To-morrow even it may happen that it will be beckoned to from the heights, across the heads of the earthly archons. The eclipse of the light of God is no extinction; even
to-morrow that which has stepped in between may give way.

9
S U P P L E M ENT: R EPLY TO C . G. JUN G

In the face of C. G. Jung’s reply to my criticism of him in “Religion and Modern Thinking,”1 it will be sufficient to clarify
anew my position in regard to his arguments.
I have not, as he thinks, placed in question any essential
part of his empirical psychiatric material. That would certainly
be unauthorized. Nor have I criticized any of his psychological theses. This also is not my affair. I have merely pointed
out that he makes assertions about religious subjects which
overstep the realms of the psychiatric and the psychological—
contrary to his assurance that he remains strictly inside them.
Whether I have demonstrated this the conscientious reader
can ascertain through checking my citations in their context.
I have been at pains to facilitate this for him through careful
statement of sources. Jung disputes my demonstration, and the
method he uses to do so is made clear in his reply.
I have pointed out that Jung describes it as a “fact,” “that the
divine action arises from one’s own inner self ” and that he sets
this fact in contrast to the “orthodox conception,” according
1 The chapter “Religion and Modern Thinking” appeared in German in the February, 1952, issue of the periodical Merkur. The May issue carried an answer by Prof.
C. G. Jung and my reply which follows here.

113

114 Chapter 9

to which God “exists for Himself.” He explains that God does
not exist independent of the human subject. The controversial
question is therefore this: Is God merely a psychic phenomenon or does He also exist independently of the psyche of men?
Jung answers, God does not exist for Himself. One can also
state the question in this way: Does that which the man of
faith calls the divine action arise merely from his own inner
self or can the action of a super-psychic Being also be included
in it? Jung answers that it arises from one’s own inner self. I
have remarked in this regard that these are not legitimate assertions of a psychologist who as such has no right to declare
what exists beyond the psychic and what does not, or to what
extent there are actions which come from elsewhere. But Jung
now replies: “I have made judgments only about the unconscious!” He further states, “Why, I say explicitly that all, simply
all [italics mine] that which is stated about God, is human
statement, i.e. psychic.” This view, strange to say, he again limits: He is of the opinion, he says, “that all statements about
God proceed first of all [italics mine] from the soul.”
Compare, to begin with, the first of these sentences with the
theses of Jung which I have quoted above. To explain emphatically that the action of one of the powers of the unconscious
arises from one’s own inner self, or that it does not exist independent of the human subject, would be a nonsensical tautology once the terminology of the “unconscious” is laid down.
It would simply mean that the psychic realm designated as
the unconscious is psychic. The thesis first acquires a meaning through the fact that it reaches out with its No beyond
the sphere of the powers of the unconscious and the psychic
sphere in general. Jung now, to be sure, denies that it has this
meaning. And he refers in this connection to the fact that all
statements about God are “human statements, i.e. psychic.”
This sentence deserves a closer examination.

Supplement: Reply to C. G. Jung 115

I see no possibility certainly of conducting a discussion otherwise than on the ground of this presupposition. (As a rule,
I do not bring my own beliefs into the discussion but hold
them in check for the sake of human conversation. But it must
be mentioned here for the sake of full clarity that my own
belief in revelation, which is not mixed up with any “orthodoxy,” does not mean that I believe that finished statements
about God were handed down from heaven to earth. Rather
it means that the human substance is melted by the spiritual
fire which visits it, and there now breaks forth from it a word,
a statement, which is human in its meaning and form, human
conception and human speech, and yet witnesses to Him who
stimulated it and to His will. We are revealed to ourselves—
and cannot express it otherwise than as something revealed.)
Not only statements about God, but all statements in general are “human.” Yet is anything positive or negative thereby
ascertained about their truth? The distinction which is here
in question is thus not that between psychic and non-psychic
statements, but that between psychic statements to which a
super-psychic reality corresponds and psychic statements to
which none corresponds. The science of psychology, however, is not authorized to make such a distinction; it presumes
too much, it injures itself, if it does so. The only activity that
properly belongs to the science of psychology in this connection is a reasoned restraint. Jung does not exercise such a
restraint when he explains that God cannot exist independent of men. For, once again, if this is a statement about an
archetype called God, then the emphatic assurance that it is
a psychic factor is certainly unnecessary (What else could it
be?). But if it is a statement about some extra-psychical Being
which corresponds to this psychic factor, namely the statement that no such Being exists, then we have here, instead of
the indicated restraint, an illicit overstepping of boundaries.

116 Chapter 9

We should at last extricate ourselves from this ingenious ambiguity!
But Jung now brings to my attention that men do in fact
have many and different images of God, which they themselves make. I think I was already aware of this and have many
times stated and explained it. But that which is essential is still
the fact that they are just images. No man of faith imagines that
he possesses a photograph of God or a reflection of God in
a magic mirror. Each knows that he has painted it, he and
others. But it was painted just as an image, a likeness. That
means it was painted in the intention of faith directed towards
the Imageless whom the image “portrays,” that is, means. This
intention of faith directed towards an existing Being, towards
One Who exists, is common to men who believe out of varied
experience. Certainly “the modern consciousness,” with which
Jung has identified himself in unmistakable places in his writing, “abhors” faith. But to allow this abhorrence to affect statements which are presented as strictly psychological will not
do. Neither psychology nor any other science is competent to
investigate the truth of the belief in God. It is the right of their
representatives to keep aloof; it is not, within their disciplines,
their right to make judgments about the belief in God as about
something which they know.
The psychological doctrine which deals with mysteries without knowing the attitude of faith towards mystery is the modern manifestation of Gnosis. Gnosis is not to be understood
as only a historical category, but as a universal one. It—and
not atheism, which annihilates God because it must reject the
hitherto existing images of God—is the real antagonist of the
reality of faith. Its modern manifestation concerns me specifically not only because of its massive pretensions, but also in
particular because of its resumption of the Carpocratian motif.
This motif, which it teaches as psychotherapy, is that of mysti-

Supplement: Reply to C. G. Jung 117

cally deifying the instincts instead of hallowing them in faith.
That we must see C. G. Jung in connection with this modern
manifestation of Gnosis I have proved from his statements and
can do so in addition far more abundantly. His little “Abraxas”
opus, which every unprejudiced reader will take to be not a
poem as he says, but a confession, I have mentioned because
here there is already proclaimed in all clarity the ambivalent
Gnostic “God” who balances good and evil in Himself.

