The Sorrows of
Young Werther
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Translated by
Bayard Quincy Morgan

AL MA CL AS S I CS

alma classics ltd

London House
243-253 Lower Mortlake Road
Richmond
Surrey TW9 2LL
United Kingdom
www.almaclassics.com
Die Leiden des jungen Werther first published in 1774
This translation first published under the title The Sufferings of Young
Werther by John Calder (Publishers) Ltd in 1957
A revised edition first published by Alma Classics Limited (previously
Oneworld Classics Ltd) in 2010. Reprinted 2011, 2012
This new edition first published by Alma Classics in 2015
English translation and Introduction © Alma Classics, 1957, 2010
Printed in Great Britain by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
isbn:

978-1-84749-404-7

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise), without the prior written permission of the publisher.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not be resold, lent,
hired out or otherwise circulated without the express prior consent of the
publisher.

Contents
Introduction
Chronology
The Sorrows of Young Werther
First Book
Second Book
The Editor to the Reader
Notes

vii
xi

1
5
61
97
133

Introduction

O

n 30th october 1772, Legation Secretary Karl Wilhelm
Jerusalem in Wetzlar shot and killed himself with
a pistol borrowed from J.C. Kestner, a friend of Goethe.
Jerusalem was Goethe’s friend too; he had first met Goethe,
who was two years his junior, as a student in Leipzig, and
their association had been renewed that summer in Wetzlar.
The tragedy made a profound impression on Goethe, and I
see in The Sorrows of Young Werther a certain vindication of
his friend (what his contemporary Lessing might have termed
a Rettung, i.e., a rescue from misjudgement). Jerusalem’s
death must have been discussed with animation and some
heat, and much of what Goethe put into Werther’s letter
of 12th August 1771 was no doubt a digest of arguments
which he had himself used in trying to explain, if not to
justify, Jerusalem’s act. I think even the hero’s name may be
significant, for in German the word wert (old spelling werth)
means “worthy, estimable”.
Not a little of Werther’s story derives from Jerusalem: his
dislike of official conventionality (24th December 1771),
his annoyance at verbal pedantry (ibid.), his aversion to the
Ambassador (17th February 1772), his wounded feelings
at being snubbed by aristocrats (16th March 1772) and his
unhappy (and unrequited) love for a married woman (whose
husband threw him out). The rest is largely supplied by
young Goethe himself, who in his passionate attachment to
Charlotte Buff, later the wife of Kestner, wrote letters just
like Werther’s. It will be noted that Werther’s birthday is the
same as Goethe’s (28th August 1771); quite Goethean is his
rapturous delight in nature; his admiration for Homer; his

vii

the sorrows of young werther

pantheism (letter of 18th August). As to Werther’s suicide,
we may confidently assume that Goethe had entertained
thoughts of ending his life at times when overmastering
emotion resulted in feelings of frustration and defeat.
The result of this combination of actualities was a
milestone in German literature. Werther is the first German
novelette (a form in which German writers have excelled), the
first German epistolary novel and the first German work of
any kind to make both its author and his country’s literature
internationally known. Translations appeared promptly in
France and England, where twenty-six separate editions (of
a translation from the French) were published up to 1800.
No less a realist than Napoleon was a great admirer of the
story, which he is said to have read seven times, and which he
discussed with Goethe when they met in 1808. In Germany
the work created a tremendous sensation: within twelve years
after its first publication twenty unauthorized editions had
been issued. The “Werther costume”, consisting of blue tailed
coat, yellow waistcoat and trousers with high boots (16th
September 1772), was adopted everywhere and was worn at
Weimar by the court when Goethe went there in 1775.
We need to recall such facts when we approach a story
which is in many respects so foreign to our present modes of
thought and expression. Young men today, however greatly
they may be influenced by emotion, do not shed “a thousand
tears” or impress “a thousand kisses” on a lady’s picture.
But this is the way the eighteenth century talked, the way it
liked to think that a lover’s devotion should express itself.
No single work can communicate to us as authentically as
Werther the extravagances of feeling and utterance which
mark the trend in German letters commonly designated as
“Storm and Stress”, a trend which was the precursor of the
Romanticism that took the lead in German literature at the
turn of the century and kept it for more than thirty years.
At the same time, Werther is the first psychological novel
in German. There are few actual happenings, and what we
viii

introduction

experience, with extraordinary clarity and vividness, is the
drama which runs its course in the mind and heart of the
hero. Considering Goethe’s self-imposed limitation – there
are no replies to Werther’s letters – it was a tour de force
hardly equalled in Western literature to make the reader
inhabit Werther’s soul, as it were, without any flagging of
interest and even with peaks of considerable excitement.
A special note on Ossian seems in order, since today the
Ossianic poems are probably deader than any other item in
eighteenth-century literature. We need to remind ourselves that
when Goethe wrote Werther, Macpherson’s fake had not been
disclosed, and that his sentimental fabrications were believed
to represent a genuine, wild primitivity. Hence the vogue of
Ossian can make a signal contribution to our understanding of
eighteenth-century mentality and aid in the correct assessment
of Werther itself. Knowing that Werther’s feeling towards Ossian
was actually Goethe’s, we can better appreciate the artistic
purpose underlying the introduction of a lengthy quotation
from Ossian (in Goethe’s own translation). It was necessary,
he saw, that Lotte should be moved to the depths, lifted out of
herself and thus prepared to be overcome by Werther’s outburst
of passion; to achieve this, she had to be withdrawn from her
own everyday world and immersed in a wholly different one,
in which she should be bathed in beautiful diction, saturated
with sentiment. Assuming her (and the reader’s) enthusiasm
for Ossian, this was the perfect agency for Goethe to employ.
The matter of the long quotation is of little moment: Goethe
wanted merely the emotional build-up. What serves them as
catalyst is the short passage (remote in Ossian from the previous
one, and slightly altered in Goethe’s version) in which the singer
foretells his own death; Werther, by now in a state of the utmost
turmoil, cannot fail to break down at this point, and that in
turn brings on a crisis which makes his suicide inevitable.
So great was Goethe’s success in bringing Werther to life,
so deep was the sympathy he evoked for him, that he was
thought by many to have put the stamp of his approval on
ix

the sorrows of young werther

Werther’s character, and moreover to have written a defence
of human suicide. As to this, it need only be remarked that
Shakespeare could make Hamlet understandable without
sharing his views or living his life. The mere fact that young
Goethe did not take his own life, for all his tempestuous
nature and his passionate grief over Lotte Buff, is sufficient
evidence that he intended Werther’s suicide to be understood
as the necessary culmination of a course of action which was
itself not necessary, although humanly understandable.
It is interesting that Werther-Goethe discovered a prin­
ciple (15th August 1771) which Rudyard Kipling was to put
into practice in his Just so Stories. And it is amusing to find
Werther advising a poet to let his own work alone; for Goethe
did not take his hero’s advice. Originally dashed off in 1774
in a veritable fever of creativeness, Werther was thoughtfully
revised in the years 1783–86, the most substantial addition to
the letters themselves being the episode of the servant in love
with his employer (30th May 1771), who finally murders his
rival. The other important change was a marked enlargement
(about fifty per cent) of the epilogue written by the “editor”. It
is however noteworthy – and to that extent Goethe did abide
by his own prescription – that not only the basic substance of
the story remained unaltered, but that even its external form
was not tampered with. Goethe did not rewrite Werther, he
merely saw to it that his original intent should be even more
effectively carried out than in the first version.
Werther remains, then, along with the Urfaust and some
deathless poems, as the literary monument which young
Goethe erected to himself and to the people from which
he sprang. As long as German literature of the eighteenth
century is studied, Werther must be included.
– Bayard Quincy Morgan

x

Chronology
1749
1765–68
1770–71
1772
1773
1774
1774
1775
1775
1776–85
1779
1781
1786–88
1787
1790
1794
1795–96
1797
1797–99
1803
1808
1808

Born at Frankfurt-am-Main.
Studied at Leipzig.
Studied law at Strasburg.
Spent some months in Wetzlar at the Supreme
Court of the Empire.
Götz von Berlichingen (prose drama).
Clavigo (prose drama).
Die Leiden des jungen Werther (novel; rev.
1783–86).
Stella (prose drama).
Invited to Weimar as companion to young duke,
remained there.
Wilhelm Meisters theatralische Sendung (novel).
Iphigenie auf Tauris (prose drama; changed to
blank verse in 1787).
Torquato Tasso (verse drama; completed 1789).
Journey to Italy, sojourn in Rome.
Egmont (prose drama).
Faust (Fragment) (verse drama).
Reineke Fuchs (verse epic).
Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre (novel, revision of
the Sendung).
Hermann und Dorothea (verse epic).
Achilleis (unfinished verse epic).
Die natürliche Tochter (verse drama).
Faust, erster Teil (verse drama).
Pandora (masque in verse).
xi

the sorrows of young werther

1809
1809
1811–
1819
1829
1831
1832

Die Wahlverwandtschaften (novel).
Farbenlehre (theory of optics).
Dichtung und Wahrheit (autobiography).
Der west-östliche Divan (poems).
Wilhelm Meisters Wanderjahre (novel).
Faust, zweiter Teil (verse drama, printed post­
humously).
Death of Goethe.

xii

The Sorrows of
Young Werther

I

have carefully collected all I could possibly find out
about the history of poor Werther, and I lay it before you
here, knowing that you will thank me for doing so. You
cannot deny his mind and character your admiration and
love, or his fate your tears.
And you, good soul, who are feeling the same anguish as
he, draw consolation from his sufferings, and let this little
book be your friend, if fate or your own fault prevent you
from finding a closer one.

3

First Book

4th May 1771
How happy I am to be gone! Best of friends, what is the heart
of man! To forsake you, whom I love so much, from whom
I was inseparable, and be happy! I know you will forgive me
for it. Were not my other associations so chosen by Fate as to
make a heart like mine uneasy? Poor Leonore! And yet it was
not my fault. Could I help it that while the compelling charms
of her sister gave me agreeable entertainment, that poor heart
developed its own passion? And yet – am I quite without fault?
Did I not nourish her feelings? Did I not myself delight in
those wholly authentic manifestations of nature which so often
made us laugh, little laughable as they were? Did I not – O
what is man, that he has a right to lament what he is? I will,
dear friend, I promise you, I will reform, will no longer harp
on the misfortunes with which fate presents us, as I have always
done; I will enjoy the present, and the past shall be past. You
are certainly right, best of men: there would be fewer sufferings
among men if they did not – God knows why they are so made
– so industriously employ their imagination in recalling the
memories of past evils, rather than endure a colourless present.
Please be so good as to tell my mother that I shall attend
to her affair as best I can and send her a report of it as soon
as possible. I have seen my aunt and find her far from being
the vixen that people at home make of her. She is a lively,
impetuous woman with the best of hearts. I explained to
her my mother’s complaints regarding that portion of the
inheritance which has been withheld; she gave me her reasons
and the facts, and named the conditions under which she
would be ready to hand over everything, and even more than
we demanded – in short, I don’t care to write about it now,
but tell my mother that everything will be all right. And in
7

the sorrows of young werther

connection with this little matter I have again found, my dear
fellow, that misunderstandings and lethargy perhaps produce
more wrong in the world than deceit and malice do. At least the
two latter are certainly rarer.
For the rest, I like it here very much. Solitude in this paradise
is a precious balm to my heart, and this youthful time of year
warms with all its fullness my oft-shivering heart. Every tree,
every hedge is a bouquet of flowers, and one would like to turn
into a cockchafer, to be able to float about in this sea of scents
and find all one’s nourishment in it.
The town itself is unpleasant, but on the other hand all
around it lies inexpressibly beautiful nature. It was this which
induced the late Count M. to lay out a garden on one of the
hills which intersect with the most charming diversity, forming
the loveliest valleys. The garden is unpretentious, and you no
sooner enter it than you feel that it was designed not by a
scientific gardener but by a man with a sensitive heart, who
wanted to use it for the enjoyment of himself. I have already
shed many a tear for the deceased in the decayed little bower
which was his favourite spot and is now mine. Soon I shall be
the master of the garden; the gardener has a liking for me,
even after so few days, and he will not suffer by it.
10th May
A wonderful cheerfulness has taken possession of my whole
soul, similar to the sweet spring mornings which I enjoy with
all my heart. I am alone and glad to be alive in this locality,
which was created for such souls as mine. I am so happy,
dear friend, so completely immersed in the realization of a
tranquil existence, that my art is suffering neglect. I could
not draw at all now, not a line, and yet I have never been a
greater painter than I am now. When the beloved valley
steams around me, and the lofty sun rests on the surface of
the impenetrable darkness of my forest with only single rays
stealing into the inner sanctuary, then I lie in the tall grass
8

first book

beside the murmuring brook, while on the earth near me a
thousand varied grasses strike me as significant; when I feel
the swarming life of the little world between the grass blades,
the innumerable, unfathomable shapes of the tiny worms and
flies, closer to my heart, and feel the presence of the Almighty,
who created us in his image, feel the breath of the all-loving
one, who, afloat in eternal rapture, bears and sustains us –
O my friend! – then when twilight invests my eyes, and the
world about me and the heaven above me rests wholly in my
soul like the image of a woman one loves – then I am often
all longing and I think: ah, could you express all that again,
could you breathe onto paper that which lives in you so fully,
so warmly, so that it would become the reflection of your
soul, as your soul is a mirror of the infinite God! My friend
– but this experience is beyond my strength, I succumb to the
overpowering glory of what I behold.
12th May
I don’t know whether deluding spirits hover about this
region, or whether it is the warm, heavenly fancy in my heart
which turns my whole environment into a paradise. Thus,
directly outside the town there is a well, one to which I am
magically bound like Melusine and her sisters.* You go down
a little slope and find yourself in front of a vault in which
about twenty steps descend to a spot where the clearest water
gushes out of marble rocks. The little wall which serves as
coping at the top, the tall trees which give shade all around,
the coolness of the spot – all this has a suggestive, mysterious
character. Not a day passes without my sitting there for an
hour. Then the maids come from the town and fetch water,
the most innocent and necessary of employments, which in
former days the daughters of kings engaged in themselves.
When I sit there, the patriarchal idea is vividly realized about
me, as all the men of old make friends or go courting at the
well, while beneficent spirits hover about the wellsprings and
9

the sorrows of young werther

fountains. Oh, a man who cannot share that experience must
never have been refreshed, after an arduous journey in the
summer, by the coolness of a wellspring.
13th May
You ask whether to send me my books – friend, I beg you
for the love of God, don’t load me up with them! I do
not wish to be guided, encouraged, enkindled any more;
my heart effervesces enough all by itself. What I need is
lullabies, and I have found an abundance of them in my
Homer. How often do I lull my agitated blood into quiet,
for you have never seen anything as uneven, as unstable, as
this heart. Good friend, do I need to tell that to you, who
have so often borne the burden of seeing me pass from grief
to extravagant joy and from sweet melancholy to disastrous
passion? Moreover, I treat my heart like a sick child, granting
its every wish. Do not pass this on; there are those who
would reproach me for it.
15th May
The lower classes here know me already and love me,
especially the children. When I sought their acquaintance to
begin with, and put friendly questions to them about this and
that, some of them thought I was making fun of them and
snubbed me quite rudely. I did not let this bother me; I only
felt most keenly what I have often observed before: people
of some rank will always keep the common people coolly at
a distance, as if they thought they would lose something by
approaching them, and then too there are social apostates
and practical jokers, who seem to condescend, making their
arrogance all the more painful to the poor.
I am quite aware that we are not equal and cannot be equal,
but I hold that he who thinks it necessary to withdraw from
the so-called rabble in order to keep their respect is just as
10

first book

reprehensible as a coward who hides from his enemy because
he is afraid of defeat.
Recently, as I came to the spring, I found a young servant girl
who had put her pitcher on the lowest step and was looking
around to see if no fellow servant were coming along to help
her get it on her head. I descended and looked at her. “Shall
I help you, girl?” said I. She blushed up to her ears. “Oh no,
sir!” she said. “Don’t stand on ceremony.” She adjusted her
head cushion, and I helped her. She thanked me and mounted
the steps.
17th May
I have made all kinds of acquaintances, but so far I have not
found any companions. I don’t know, something about me
must attract people; so many of them like me and cling to
me, and it pains me when our common journey takes us only
a short distance. If you ask what the people here are like, I
must tell you, “Like people everywhere!” Uniformity marks
the human race. Most of them spend the greater part of their
time in working for a living, and the scanty freedom that is
left to them burdens them so that they seek every means of
getting rid of it. O fate of man!
But these people are a very good sort! If I forget myself
once in a while, tasting with them the joys that are still
granted to me, such as exchanging pleasantries in all
candour and ingenuousness around a prettily set table,
planning an excursion, or arranging for a well-timed dance,
and the like, the effect on me is very good; only I must not
let myself think that in me lie ever so many other powers, all
of which moulder for lack of use, and which I must carefully
conceal. Ah, and that fetters my whole heart ­– and yet! To
be misunderstood is the fate of such as I.
Alas that the friend of my youth is gone! Alas that I ever
knew her! I could say, “You are a fool! For you are seeking
what is not to be found here below!” But I did have her
11

the sorrows of young werther

friendship, I sensed that heart, that great soul, in whose
presence I felt myself to be more than I was, because I was all
that I could be. Good God! Was there a single force in my soul
which remained unused? Could I not, when with her, unfold
that entire power of feeling with which my heart embraces
all nature? Was not our association an endless play of the
subtlest feeling, of the keenest wit, a wit whose variations,
not excluding some flippancy, bore the stamp of genius? And
now! Ah, the years of hers which exceeded mine brought her
before me to the grave. Never shall I forget her, never her
steadfast mind and her divine indulgence.
A few days ago I met a young man named V., an ingenuous
youth with a very happy physiognomy. He has just come from
the university, and though he does not exactly think himself
wise, he does believe he knows more than others. He was diligent
too, as I can tell in all sorts of ways – in short, he is pretty well
informed. Having heard that I draw a great deal and know
Greek (two rare phenomena in these skies), he sought me out
and unloaded much learning, from Batteux to Robert Wood,
from Roger de Piles to Winckelmann, assuring me that he had
read Sulzer’s General Theory of the Fine Arts, that is, the first
part of it, from beginning to end, and that he owned a MS of
Heyne on the study of classical antiquity.* I let it go at that.
Furthermore, I have made the acquaintance of a very fine
person: a steward of the prince, a frank and ingenuous man.
They say it rejoices the soul to see him in the midst of his
children, of whom he has nine; in particular they make a
great fuss over his eldest daughter. He has invited me to his
house, and I will call on him one of these days. He is living in
one of the prince’s hunting lodges, an hour and a half from
here on foot, having received permission to move there after
the death of his wife, since he found residence here in the
town and in the official dwelling too painful.
In addition, a number of eccentric freaks have crossed
my path whom I find insufferable in every respect, most
unendurable being their manifestations of friendship.
12

first book

Farewell! This letter will suit you, for it is nothing but a
report.
22nd May
That the life of man is only a dream has seemed to be so to
many before now, and I too always carry this feeling about
with me. When I behold the narrow bounds which confine
man’s powers of action and investigation; when I see how
all his efficiency aims at the satisfaction of needs which in
their turn have no purpose save to prolong our unhappy
existence, and then see that all our reassurance regarding
certain matters of inquiry is merely a resigned kind of
dreaming, whereby we paint the walls within which we are
confined with cheerful figures and bright prospects – all this,
Wilhelm, forces me into silence. I return into myself, and
find a world! But again a world of groping and vague desires
rather than one of clear delineation and active force. And
then everything grows hazy to my senses, and in a sort of
dream I keep on smiling at the world.
All learned schoolmasters and educators agree that
children do not know why they want what they want, but
that adults too, as well as children, stagger around on this
earth, like them not knowing whence they come and whither
they go, pursue true goals just as little as they, and are just
as completely governed by biscuits and cakes and birch rods:
nobody will believe that, and yet it seems to me palpable.
I am ready to grant – for I know what you would say to
this – that the happiest are those who like children live for
the day, drag their dolls around, dressing and undressing
them, slink with bated breath about the drawer where
Mama keeps the sweets locked up and, when they finally get
hold of what they want, gobble it down by the mouthful and
cry, “More!” – those are happy creatures. Happy are those
too who give sumptuous titles to their shabby occupations,
perhaps even to their passions, recommending them to
13

the sorrows of young werther

the human race as gigantic operations contributing to
man’s salvation and welfare. Happy the man who can be
like that! But one who recognizes in all humility what all
this comes to, who sees how amiably every happy citizen
manages to shape his little garden into a paradise, and how
indefatigably even the unhappy man plods along panting
under his burden, while all of them take the same interest in
having one more minute to see the light of this sun – ah, he
holds his peace, and he too creates his world in himself, and
is moreover happy because he is a human being. And then,
confined and fettered as he is, still he continues to keep in
his heart the sweet feeling of freedom, knowing that he can
quit this prison whenever he will.
26th May
You have long known my way of settling down, pitching
my tent in some spot I like, and lodging there in a modest
fashion. Here too I have again come upon a nook that I found
attractive.
About an hour’s walk from town lies a place called
Wahlheim.* Its situation on a hill is very interesting, and
when you leave the village on the upper footpath, all at once
you are overlooking the entire valley. A good-hearted hostess,
who is obliging and lively for her age, dispenses wine, beer
and coffee, and rising above everything else are two lindens
whose spreading branches cover the small space before the
church, which is completely ringed about with farmhouses,
barns and courtyards. So private, so homelike a spot I have
not readily found, and I have my little table carried out there
from the inn, and my chair, and there I drink my coffee and
read my Homer. The first time when I chanced to walk in
under the lindens on a fine afternoon, I found the little spot
so lonely. Everyone was in the fields, and only a boy of about
four was sitting on the ground and holding close to his breast
with both arms another one, perhaps half a year old, sitting
14

first book

between his feet, so that he made a kind of armchair for
the baby and, for all the liveliness with which his black eyes
looked about him, sat quite still. I found the sight charming:
I sat down on a plough across the way and sketched this
brotherly posture with great enjoyment. I added the nearest
fence, a barn door and some broken wheels, all of it just as it
stood there, and after the lapse of an hour I found that I had
completed a well-disposed, very interesting drawing, without
putting in the least imaginary detail. This strengthened me in
my resolve to keep henceforth exclusively to nature. Nature
alone is infinitely rich, and she alone forms the great artist.
One can say much in favour of rules, about the same things
as can be said in praise of civil society. A person who trains
himself by the rules will never produce anything absurd or
bad, just as one who lets himself be modelled after laws and
decorum can never become an intolerable neighbour, never
an outright villain; on the other hand any “rule”, say what
you like, will destroy the true feeling for nature and the true
expression of her! I hear you say that that is too severe, that the
rule merely restrains, prunes rank shoots, etc. – good friend,
shall I give you a comparison? It may be likened to loving. A
young heart is wholeheartedly bound up in a maiden, spends
every daytime hour with her, squanders all its talents, all its
fortune, in order to employ every moment in expressing its
complete devotion to her. And now suppose some pedant
comes along, a man who holds a public office, and says to
him, “Fine young gentleman, to love is human, only you must
be human in your loving! Apportion your hours, keeping
some for work, and devote the hours of recreation to your
maiden. Figure up your fortune, and whatever is in excess of
your needs I will not forbid you to spend on a present for her,
only not too often, say on her birthday or name day, etc.” – if
the youth obeys, then a useful young person will be the result,
and I would even advise any prince to make him a counsellor;
however, it will be the end of his love and, if he is an artist,
of his art. O my friends! You ask why the stream of genius
15

the sorrows of young werther

so seldom bursts forth, so seldom sends its sublime floods
rushing in, to make your souls quake with astonishment?
Dear friends, why, there along both banks of the river dwell
the placid gentlemen whose summer houses, tulip beds
and cabbage fields would be ruined, and who consequently
manage to avert betimes, with dams and drainage ditches,
any future threat.
27th May
I see that I have lapsed into raptures, parables and oratory,
and have thus forgotten to complete the story of my further
doings with the children. Wholly engrossed in the feelings of
an artist, which my letter of yesterday presents to you in very
fragmentary form, I sat on my plough for a good two hours.
Then towards evening a young woman with a small basket on
her arm came towards the children, who had not moved all
this while, calling from a distance, “Philip, you’re a good boy.”
She spoke to me, I thanked her, got up, approached her, and
asked if she was the children’s mother. She said yes and, giving
the older one half a roll, she picked up the baby and kissed it
with all a mother’s love. “I told my Philip to hold the baby,”
said she, “and went into town with my oldest boy to get white
bread and sugar, and an earthenware saucepan.” I saw all this
in the basket, the cover of which had fallen off. “I want to
cook my Hans (that was the name of the youngest) a bit of
soup for supper; the big boy, the scamp, broke my saucepan
yesterday while quarrelling with Philip over the scrapings of
the porridge.” I asked about the oldest, and she had hardly
told me that he was racing around the meadow with some
geese when he came running and brought the second boy a
hazel switch. I went on talking with the woman and learnt
that she was the daughter of the schoolmaster, and that her
husband had gone on a trip to Switzerland to get the legacy of
a cousin. “They wanted to cheat him out of it,” said she, “and
didn’t answer his letters; so he went there himself. I only hope
16

