CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE
HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY

IMMANUEL KANT

Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals

CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE
HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
Series editors
KARL AMERIKS

Professor of Philosophy at the University of Notre Dame
DESMOND M.

CLARKE

Professor of Philosophy at University College Cork
The main objective of Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy is to expand
the range, variety and quality of texts in the history of philosophy which are available in English. The series includes texts by familiar names (such as Descartes and
Kant) and also by less well-known authors. Wherever possible, texts are published in
complete and unabridged form, and translations are specially commissioned for the
series. Each volume contains a critical introduction together with a guide to further
reading and any necessary glossaries and textual apparatus. The volumes are
designed for student use at undergraduate and postgraduate level and will be of
interest not only to students of philosophy but also to a wider audience of readers in
the history of science, the history of theology and the history of ideas.

For a list of titles published in the series, please see end of book.

IMMANUEL KANT

Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals
TRANSLATED AND EDITED BY

MARY GREGOR
WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

CHRISTINE M. KORSGAARD
Harvard University

CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE

The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, vie 3207, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcon 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa
http://www.cambridge.org
© Cambridge University Press 1997
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 1998
Eleventh printing 2006
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge
Typeset in 10/12 Ehrhardt
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data
Kant, Immanuel, 1724-1804.
[Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten. English]
Groundwork of the metaphysics of morals/Immanuel Kant;
translated and edited by Mary Gregor; with an introduction by
Christine M. Korsgaard.
p.
cm. - (Cambridge texts in the history of philosophy)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0 521 62235 2 (hardback). - ISBN 0 521 62695 l (paperback)
1. Ethics. - Early works to 1800. I. Gregor, Mary J. II. Title. III. Series.
B2766.E6G7 1998
I7o-dc2i 97-30153 CIP
ISBN o 521 62235 2 hardback
ISBN o 521 62695 1 paperback

Contents

Introduction
Chronology
Further reading

page vii
xxxi
xxxiii

Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals
Preface
Section I
Section 11
Section in

i
Transition from common rational to philosophic moral
cognition
Transition from popular moral philosophy to metaphysics
of morals
Transition from metaphysics of morals to the critique
of pure practical reason

Notes
Selected glossary
Index

7
19
52

67
68
71

Introduction

A life devoted to the pursuit of philosophical discovery may be inwardly
as full of drama and event - of obstacle and overcoming, battle and victory, challenge and conquest - as that of any general, politician, or
explorer, and yet be outwardly so quiet and routine as to defy biographical narration. Immanuel Kant was born in 1724 in Konigsberg, East
Prussia, to a Pietist family of modest means.l Encouraged by his mother
and the family pastor to pursue the career marked out by his intellectual
gifts, Kant attended the University of Konigsberg, and then worked for
a time as a private tutor in the homes of various families in the neighborhood, while pursuing his researches in natural science. Later he got a
position as a Privatdozent, an unsalaried lecturer who is paid by student
fees, at the University. There Kant lectured on logic, metaphysics,
ethics, geography, anthropology, mathematics, the foundations of natural
science, and physics. In 1770, he finally obtained a regular professorship,
the Chair of Logic and Metaphysics, at Konigsberg. Because of limited
means and variable health, Kant never married or travelled. He remained
in the Konigsberg area, a quiet, hardworking scholar and teacher, until
his death in 1804.
But some time in the 1770s — we do not know exactly when — Kant
began to work out ideas that were destined to challenge our conception
of reason's relationship — and so of our own relationship - to the world
around us. Kant himself compared his system to that of Copernicus,
which explained the ordering of the heavens by turning them inside out,
that is, by removing the earth - the human world - from the center, and
making it revolve around the sun instead. Kant's own revolution also
turns the world inside out, but in a very different way, for it places
humanity back in the center. For Kant argued that the rational order
which the metaphysician looks for in the world is neither something that
we discover through experience, nor something that our reason assures
us must be there. Instead, it is something which we human beings
impose upon the world, in part through the construction of our knowledge, but also, in a different way, through our actions.
The implications for moral philosophy, first presented in the
1

Pietism was a religious movement which emphasized inner religious experience, self-examination, and morally good works. Its emphasis on the importance of morality is often thought
to have been a strong influence on Kant.
Vll

Introduction

Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, are profound. The Groundwork is an acknowledged philosophical classic, an introduction to one of
the most influential accounts of our moral nature which the tradition
has ever produced. Some of its central themes - that every human being
is an end in himself or herself, not to be used as a mere means by others;
that respect for one's own humanity finds its fullest expression in
respect for that of others; and that morality is freedom, and evil a form
of enslavement — have become not only well-established themes in moral
philosophy, but also part of our moral culture.
But the Groundwork owes its popularity to its power, not to its accessibility. For like all of Kant's works, it is a difficult book. It is couched in
the technical vocabulary which Kant developed for the presentation of
his ideas. It presents us with a single, continuous argument, each of
whose steps is itself an argument, which runs the length of the book.
But the particular arguments which make up the whole are sufficiently
difficult in themselves that their contribution to the larger argument is
easy to lose sight of. The main aim of this Introduction will be to provide a kind of road map through the book, by showing how the material
presented in each of the main sections contributes to the argument as a
whole. First, however, we must situate the project of the Groundwork
within Kant's general project, and explain some of the basic terminology
he employs.
Kant's philosophical project
Kant was led to his revolutionary views about reason through an investigation of the question "What contribution does pure reason make to our
knowledge of the world and to the government of our actions?" The
empiricists of Kant's day had claimed that all of our knowledge, as well
as our moral ideas, is derived from experience. The more extreme of the
rationalists, on the other hand, believed that, at least in principle, all
truths could be derived from self-evident rational principles. And all
rationalists believe that at least some important truths, such as the existence of God, the immortality of the soul, and truths about what we
ought to do, are either self-evident or can be deductively proved. In
order to formulate the issue between these two schools of thought more
clearly, Kant employed two distinctions that apply to judgments. Since
he uses these two distinctions in the Groundwork in order to formulate
the question he wants to raise about morality, it is necessary for the
reader to be acquainted with them.
The first is the analytic/synthetic distinction, which concerns what
makes a judgment true or false. A judgment is analytic if the predicate is
contained in the concept of the subject; otherwise, the predicate adds
something new to our conception of the subject and the judgment is
Vlll

Introduction

synthetic. Analytic judgments are, roughly, true by definition: when we
say that a moon is a satellite of a planet, we are not reporting the results
of an astronomical discovery, but explaining the meaning of a term. The
second is the a priori/a posteriori distinction, which concerns the way we
know a judgment is true. A judgment is known a posteriori if it is known
from experience, while it is a priori if our knowledge of it is independent
of any particular experience. Putting these two distinctions together
yields three possible types of judgment. If a judgment is analytically
true, we know this a priori, for we do not need experience to tell us what
is contained in our concepts. For this reason, there are no analytic a
posteriori judgments. If a judgment is known a posteriori, or from experience, it must be synthetic, for the subject and the predicate are "synthesized" in our experience: we learn from experience that the sky is blue,
rather than yellow, because we see that the sky and blueness are joined.
The remaining kind of judgment, synthetic a priori, would be one which
tells us something new about its subject, and yet which is known independently of experience — on the basis of reasoning alone. If pure reason
tells us anything substantial and important, either about the world or
about what we ought to do, then what it tells us will take the form of
synthetic a priori judgments. So for Kant, the question whether pure
reason can guide us, either in metaphysical speculation or in action,
amounts to the question whether and how we can establish any synthetic
a priori judgments.2

The Preface, and the project of the Groundwork
We can make these abstract ideas more concrete by turning to the Preface
of the Groundwork. Here Kant divides philosophy into three parts: logic,
which applies to all thought; physics, which deals with the way the world
is; and ethics, which deals with what we ought to do. Kant thinks of each
of these as a domain of laws: logic deals with the laws of thought; physics
with the laws of nature; and ethics with what Kant calls the laws of freedom, that is, the laws governing the conduct of free beings. Logic is a
domain of pure reason, but physics and ethics each have both a pure and
an empirical part. For instance, we learn about particular laws of nature,
such as the law that viruses are the cause of colds, from experience. But
2

For Kant's own introductory discussion of these distinctions see the Introduction to the
Critique of Pure Reason (trans. Paul Guyer and Allen Wood, the Cambridge Edition of the
Works of Immanuel Kant, Cambridge University Press, 1998). The relevant passages may be
found at A 6-1 i/B 10—14, using the standard method of citing this work, according to the
page numbers in the first (A) and second (B) editions. The analytic/synthetic distinction has
been challenged in the twentieth century, most famously by W V. Quine in his "Two Dogmas
of Empiricism" (in From a Logical Point of View, 2nd edn., Cambridge, MA, Harvard
University Press, 1961). How damaging this attack is to Kant's project is a matter of philosophical debate.

Introduction

how do we learn that the world in general behaves in a lawlike way - that
every event has a cause?3 This judgment is not based on experience, for
we can have no experience of every possible event; nor is it an analytic
judgment, for it is not part of the concept of an event that it has a cause. If
we do know, then, that the world in general behaves in a lawlike way, we
must have synthetic a priori knowledge. A body of such knowledge is
called a "metaphysics." If it is true that every event has a cause, then this
truth is part of the metaphysics of nature.
That there must be a metaphysics of morals is even more obvious. For
morality is concerned with practical questions — not with the way things
are, but with the way things ought to be. Since experience tells us only
about the way things are, it cannot by itself provide answers to our practical questions. Moral judgments must therefore be a priori. Yet it is clear
that moral laws are not analytic, for if they were, we could settle controversial moral questions simply by analyzing our concepts. So if there are
any moral requirements, then there must be a metaphysics of morals, a
body of synthetic a priori judgments concerning what we ought to do.
The Groundwork, however, is not Kant's entire metaphysics of morals,
but only its most fundamental part. Kant wrote another book under the
title The Metaphysics of Morals, in which our duties are categorized and
expounded in considerable detail. There the reader may learn what conclusions Kant himself thought could be derived from his theory about a
wide variety of issues, ranging from questions of personal morality —
such as the legitimacy of suicide, the permissibility of using alcohol and
drugs, the proper treatment of animals, and the nature and conduct of
friendship and marriage — to larger political questions, such as the
proper form of the political state, the legitimacy of revolution, and the
permissibility of war.
This book is only a Groundwork, and its aim is to establish the most
preliminary and fundamental point of the subject: that there is a domain
of laws applying to our conduct, that there is such a thing as morality.
Its aim is, as Kant himself says, "the search for and establishment of the
supreme principle of morality" (AK 4: 392).4 That supreme principle,
3

4

The principle that every event has a cause has been challenged by modern physics; modern
scientists believe that at the level of the most fundamental particles and events it does not
hold. An obvious question is what impact this has on Kant's argument. Must he give up the
idea that the causal principle is a synthetic a priori truth, or is it enough for his purposes that
events at the macro level must still be causally ordered if the world is to be knowable? For our
purposes here, the causal principle may still be used as an example of a synthetic a priori truth.
The standard German edition of Kant's works is being issued under the auspices of the
German Academy (1900- ). The standard method of citing passages from Kant's works,
except for the Critique of Pure Reason (see note 2), refers to the pagination of this edition, and
the page numbers are given in the margins of most translations. The citation method used in
this Introduction also gives the volume number in which the work is found. The citation says
that the passage quoted is on page 392 of volume 4 of the Academy (AK) edition. A complete
English translation of Kant's works is also under way, published by Cambridge University
Press under the general editorship of Paul Guyer and Allen Wood.

Introduction

which Kant calls the categorical imperative, commands simply that our
actions should have the form of moral conduct; that is, that they should
be derivable from universal principles. When we act, we are to ask
whether the reasons for which we propose to act could be made universal, embodied in a principle. Kant believed that this formal requirement
yields substantive constraints on our conduct — not every proposed
reason for action can be made universal, and so not every action can be
squared with the requirement of acting on principle. We have already
seen that the principle that tells us that nature in general behaves in a
lawlike way must be synthetic a priori, if it can be established at all. In
the same way, Kant thinks, the principle that tells us that we ought to
behave in a lawlike way must be synthetic a priori, if ethics exists at all.
The project of the Groundwork is simply to establish that there is a categorical imperative - that we have moral obligations.

Section I
In each section of the Groundwork, Kant carries out a specific project,
which in turn forms part of the argument of the whole. In the Preface,
Kant says that his project in the first section will be "to proceed analytically from common cognition to the determination of its supreme principle" (AK 4: 392). In other words, Kant is going to start from our
ordinary ways of thinking about morality and analyze them to discover
the principle behind them. It is important to keep in mind that because
he is analyzing our ordinary views, Kant is not, in this section, trying to
prove that human beings have obligations. Instead, he is trying to identify
what it is that he has to establish in order to prove that. What must we
show, in order to show that moral obligation is real?
The "common cognition" from which Kant starts his argument is
that morally good actions have a special kind of value. A person who
does the right thing for the right reason evinces what Kant calls a good
will, and Section I opens with the claim that a good will is the only thing
to which we attribute "unconditional worth." The good will is good
"through its willing" (AK 4: 394), which means that it is in actions
expressive of a good will that we see this special kind of value realized.
Kant does not mean that the good will is the only thing we value for its
own sake, or as an end. A number of the things which Kant says have
only "conditional" value, such as health and happiness, are things obviously valued for their own sake. Instead, he means that the good will is
the only thing which has a value which is completely independent of its
relation to other things, which it therefore has in all circumstances, and
which cannot be undercut by external conditions.
A scientist may be brilliant at his work, and yet use his gifts for evil
ends. A political leader may achieve fine ends, but be ruthless in the cost
XI

Introduction

she is willing to impose on others in order to carry out her plans. A
wealthy aesthete may lead a gracious and happy life, and yet be utterly
regardless of the plight of less fortunate people around him. The evil
ends of the scientist, the ruthlessness of the politician, and the thoughtlessness of the aesthete undercut or at least detract from what we value
in them and their lives. But suppose that someone performs a morally
fine action: say, he hurries to the rescue of an endangered enemy, at considerable risk to himself. Many things may go wrong with his action.
Perhaps the rescuer fails in his efforts to save his enemy. Perhaps he
himself dies in the attempt. Perhaps the attempt was ill judged; we see
that it could not have worked and so was a wasted effort. In spite of all
this, we cannot withhold our tribute from this action, and from the rescuer as its author. Nothing can detract from the value of such an action,
which is independent of "what it effects or accomplishes" (AK 4: 394).5
When we attribute unconditional value to an action, it is because we
have a certain conception of the motives from which the person acted. If
we found out, for instance, that the rescuer had acted only because he
hoped he would get a reward, and had no idea that there was any risk
involved, we would feel quite differently. So what gives a morally good
action its special value is the motivation behind it, the principle on the
basis of which it is chosen or, in Kantian terms, willed. This implies that
once we know how actions with unconditional value are willed — once we
know what principle a person like the rescuer acts on — we will know
what makes them morally good. And when we know what makes actions
morally good, we will be able to determine which actions are morally
good, and so to determine what the moral law tells us to do. This is
what Kant means when he says he is going to "explicate the concept of a
good will" (AK 4: 397): that he is going to find out what principle the
person of good will acts on, in order to determine what the moral law
tells us to do.
In order to do this, Kant says, he is going to focus on a particular class
of morally good actions, namely those which are done "from duty." Duty
is the good will operating under "certain subjective limitations and hindrances, which . . . far from concealing it and making it unrecognizable
. . . bring it out by contrast and make it shine forth all the more brightly"
5

At AK 4: 395-7, Kant supports these ideas with an argument to the effect that in a teleologically organized system of nature, the natural purpose of the rational will would be to realize
the good will, or moral worth. Kant argues that in a teleological system of nature, we can
never say that an organ, faculty, or arrangement exists to serve some natural purpose unless it
is the fittest and best adapted organ, faculty, or arrangement for that purpose. The rational
will, Kant argues, is not especially well-adapted to produce happiness or any end outside of
itself. Its purpose must therefore be to realize its own value. This argument is offered as a
supplement, and the main argument does not depend on it. Kant himself did not believe that
a teleological conception of nature has the status of knowledge, although he did consider it an
importantly useful way of looking at things. The reader is referred to the Critique of Judgment
(trans. J. H. Bernard, New York, Hafner, 1951) for Kant's views on teleology.
Xll

Introduction

(AK 4: 397). The hindrance Kant has in mind is that the person of whom
we say that he acts "from duty" has other motives which, in the absence
of duty, would lead him to avoid the action. When such a person does
his duty, not otherwise wanting to, we know that the thought of duty
alone has been sufficient to produce the action. Looking at this kind of
case, where the motive of duty produces an action without any help
from other motives, gives us a clearer view of what that motive is.6
Kant proceeds to distinguish three kinds of motivation: you may perform an action from duty, that is, do it because you think it is the right
thing to do; you may perform it from immediate inclination, because you
want to do it for its own sake, or you enjoy doing actions of that kind; or,
finally, you may perform an action because you are "impelled to through
another inclination," that is, as a means to some further end (AK 4: 397).
In order to discover what is distinctive about good-willed actions and so
what their principle is, Kant invites us to think about the contrast
between right actions done from duty and right actions motivated
in these other ways. To illustrate this contrast, he provides some
examples.
The first one involves a merchant who refrains from overcharging
gullible customers, because this gives him a good reputation which helps
his business. This is an example of the third kind of motivation - doing
what is right, but only as a means to some further end - and Kant mentions it only to lay it aside. The difference between doing the right thing
from duty and doing it to promote some other end is obvious, for someone who does the right thing from duty does it for its own sake, and not
for any ulterior motive. Yet in order that an action should evince a good
will, it is not enough that it should be done for its own sake. This is the
point of the other three examples, in which Kant contrasts someone who
does an action from immediate inclination with someone who does the
same action from duty. For instance, Kant says, there are people
so sympathetically attuned, that without any other motive of vanity or
self-interest they find an inner satisfaction in spreading joy around
them and can take delight in the satisfaction of others so far as it is
their own work. (AK 4: 398)

A person like this helps others when they are in need, and, unlike the
prudent merchant, but like the dutiful person, does so for its own sake.
A sympathetic person has no ulterior purpose in helping; he just enjoys
"spreading joy around him." The lesson Kant wants us to draw from
6

According to a common misreading of the text at this point and of the examples that follow,
Kant believes that actions can have moral worth only if they are done reluctantly or without
the support of inclination. This is not Kant's view. He focuses on cases in which the moral
motive operates by itself because he wants to get a clear view of it, not because he thinks that
the presence of other possible motives somehow prevents an agent from acting on it.

Introduction

this is that the difference between the sympathetic person and the person who helps from the motive of duty does not rest in their purposes.
They have the same purpose, which is to help others. Yet the sympathetic person's action does not have the moral worth of the action done
from duty. According to Kant, reflection on this fact leads us to see that
the moral worth of an action does not lie in its purpose, but rather in the
"maxim" on which it is done, that is, the principle on which the agent
acts (AK 4: 399).
In order to understand these claims it is necessary to understand the
psychology behind them: the way that, as Kant sees it, human beings
decide to act. According to Kant, our nature presents us with "incentives" which prompt or tempt us to act in certain ways. Among these
incentives are the psychological roots of our ordinary desires and inclinations (as sympathy is the root of the desire to help); later, we will learn
that moral thoughts - thoughts about what is required of us — also provide us with incentives. These incentives do not operate on us directly
as causes of decision and action; instead, they provide considerations
which we take into account when we decide what to do. When you
decide to act on an incentive, you "make it your maxim" to act in the
way suggested by the incentive. For instance, when you decide to do
something simply because you want to, you "make it your maxim" to act
as desire prompts.
Kant claims that the difference between the naturally sympathetic
person and the dutiful person rests in their maxims. The sympathetic
person decides to help because helping is something he enjoys. His
maxim, therefore, is to do those things he likes doing. The point here is
not that his purpose is simply to please himself. His purpose is to help,
but he adopts that purpose — he makes it his maxim to pursue that end —
because he enjoys helping. The reason his action lacks moral worth is
not that he wants to help only because it pleases him. The reason his
action lacks moral worth is that he chooses to help only because he wants
to: he allows himself to be guided by his desires in the selection of his
ends. The person who acts from duty, by contrast, makes it her maxim
to help because she conceives helping as something that is required of
her. Again we must understand this in the right way. The point is not
that her purpose is "to do her duty." Her purpose is to help, but she
chooses helping as her purpose because she thinks that is what she
is required to do: she thinks that the needs of others make a claim on
her.
Kant thinks that performing an action because you regard the action
or its end as one that is required of you is equivalent to being moved by
the thought of the maxim of the action as a kind of law. The dutiful person takes the maxim of helping others to express or embody a requirement, just as a law does. In Kant's terminology, she sees the maxim of
xiv

Introduction

helping others as having the form of a law? When we think that a certain
maxim expresses a requirement, or has the form of a law, that thought
itself is an incentive to perform the action. Kant calls this incentive
"respect for law."
We now know what gives actions done from duty their special moral
worth. They get their moral worth from the fact that the person who
does them acts from respect for law. A good person is moved by the
thought that his or her maxim has the form of a law. The principle of a
good will, therefore, is to do only those actions whose maxims can be
conceived as having the form of a law. If there is such a thing as moral
obligation — if, as Kant himself says, "duty is not to be everywhere an
empty delusion and a chimerical concept" (AK 4: 402) - then we must
establish that our wills are governed by this principle: "I ought never to
act except in such a way that I could also will that my maxim should
become a universal law."

Section II
Although the argument of Section I proceeded from our ordinary ideas
about morality, and involved the consideration of examples, it is not
therefore an empirical argument. The examples do not serve as a kind of
data from which conclusions about moral motivation are inductively
drawn. Instead, the argument is based on our rational appraisal of the
people in the examples, taking the facts about their motivation as given:
if these people act from respect for law, as the examples stipulate, then
their actions have moral worth. Whether anyone has ever actually acted
from respect for law is a question about which moral philosophy must
remain silent. So demonstrating that the categorical imperative governs
7

Both here and later on in the discussion of the Formula of Universal Law, Kant makes it
clear that he thinks the lawlike character of a maxim is a matter of its form rather than its
matter. What does this mean? The distinction between form and matter is an inheritance of
Aristotelian metaphysics, in which the matter of a thing is the materials or parts of which it is
constructed, while the form is the arrangement of those parts that enables the object to serve
its characteristic function. For instance if the function of a house is to serve as a shelter, we
would say that the matter of the house is the walls and the roof, and the form is the way those
parts are arranged so as to keep the weather out and the objects within protected. The parts
of a maxim are usually the act which is done and the end for the sake of which it is done. We
can show that the lawlike character of the maxim is a matter of the way the parts are
arranged, the form, by considering a triple of maxims like this:
1 I will keep my weapon, because I want it for myself.
2 I will keep your weapon, because I want it for myself.
3 I will keep your weapon, because you have gone mad and may hurt someone.
Maxims i and 3 are maxims of good actions, while maxim 2 is of a bad action. Yet maxims 1
and 2 have the same purpose, and maxims 2 and 3 involve the same act. So the lawlike character
of the maxim rests neither in the purpose, nor in the act, which are the parts or matter of the
maxim. Instead it rests in the way those parts are combined - the form of the maxim. In a good
maxim, the parts are so combined that the maxim can serve as a law: everyone could act on it.
XV

Introduction

our wills is not a matter of showing that we actually act on it. Instead, it
is a matter of showing that we act on it insofar as we are rational. A comparison will help here. Showing that the principle of non-contradiction
governs our beliefs is not a matter of showing that no one ever in fact
holds contradictory beliefs, for people surely do. Nor is it a matter of
showing that people are sometimes moved, say, to give up cherished
beliefs when they realize those beliefs will embroil them in contradiction. Instead, it is a matter of showing that insofar as they are rational,
that is what they do. Kant's project in Section II therefore is to "present
distinctly the faculty of practical reason, from its general rules of
determination to the point where the concept of duty arises from it"
(AK 4: 412). In other words, in Section II Kant lays out a theory of practical reason, in which the moral law appears as one of the principles of
practical reason.
It is a law of nature, very roughly speaking, that what goes up must
come down. Toss this book into the air, and it will obey that law. But it
will not, when it reaches its highest point, say to itself "I ought to go
back down now, for gravity requires it." As rational beings, however, we
do in this way reflect on, and sometimes even announce to ourselves, the
principles on which we act. In Kant's words, we act not merely in accordance with laws, but in accordance with our representations or conceptions of laws (AK 4: 412).
Yet we human beings are not perfectly rational, since our desires, fears,
and weaknesses may tempt us to act in irrational ways. This opens up the
possibility of a gap between the principles upon which we actually act —
our maxims or subjective principles — and the objective laws of practical
reason. For this reason, we conceive the objective laws of practical reason
as imperatives, telling us what we ought to do. The theory of practical
reason is therefore a theory of imperatives.
Imperatives may be either hypothetical or categorical. A hypothetical
imperative tells you that if you will something, you ought also to will
something else: for example, if you will to be healthy, then you ought to
exercise. That is an imperative of skill, telling you how to achieve some
particular end. Kant believes that there are also hypothetical imperatives
of prudence, suggesting what we must do given that we all will to be
happy. A categorical imperative, by contrast, simply tells us what we
ought to do, not on condition that we will something else, but unconditionally.
Kant asks how all these imperatives are "possible" (AK 4: 417), that is,
how we can establish that they are legitimate requirements of reason,
binding on the rational will. He thinks that in the case of hypothetical
imperatives the answer is easy. A hypothetical imperative is based on the
principle that whoever wills an end, insofar as he is rational, also wills
the means to that end. This principle is analytic, since willing an end, as
xvi

Introduction

opposed to merely wanting it or wishing for it or thinking it would be
nice if it were so, is setting yourself to bring it about, to cause it. And
setting yourself to cause something just is setting yourself to use the
means to it. Since willing the means is conceptually contained in willing
the end, if you will an end and yet fail to will the means to that end, you
are guilty of a kind of practical contradiction.
Since a categorical imperative is unconditional, however, there is no
condition given, like the prior willing of an end, which we can simply
analyze to derive the "ought" statement. The categorical imperative
must therefore be synthetic, so morality depends on the possibility of
establishing a synthetic a priori practical principle.
The Formula of Universal Law

Kant does not, however, move immediately to that task; in fact, he will
not be in a position to take that up until Section in. Section II is, like
Section I, an analysis. Kant is still working towards uncovering what we
have to prove in order to establish that moral requirements really bind
our wills. The first step is to analyze the very idea of a categorical imperative in order to see what it "contains." Kant says:
when I think of a categorical imperative I know at once what it contains. For since the imperative contains, beyond the law, only the
necessity that the maxim be in conformity with this law, while the law
contains no condition to which it would be limited, nothing is left with
which the maxim of action is to conform but the universality of a law
as such; and this conformity alone is what the imperative properly
represents as necessary, (AK 4: 420-1)

This is the sort of thing that makes even practiced readers of Kant
gnash their teeth. A rough translation might go like this: the categorical
imperative is a law, to which our maxims must conform. But the reason
they must do so cannot be that there is some further condition they must
meet, or some other law to which they must conform. For instance, suppose someone proposed that one must keep one's promises because it is
the will of God that one should do so - the law would then "contain the
condition" that our maxims should conform to the will of God. This
would yield only a conditional requirement to keep one's promises — if
you would obey the will of God, then you must keep your promises whereas the categorical imperative must give us an unconditional
requirement. Since there can be no such condition, all that remains is
that the categorical imperative should tell us that our maxims themselves must be laws - that is, that they must be universal, that being the
characteristic of laws.
There is a simpler way to make this point. What could make it true

xvn

Introduction

that we must keep our promises because it is the will of God? That
would be true only if it were true that we must indeed obey the will of
God, that is, if "obey the will of God" were itself a categorical imperative. Conditional requirements give rise to a regress; if there are unconditional requirements, we must at some point arrive at principles on
which we are required to act, not because we are commanded to do so by
some yet higher law, but because they are laws in themselves. The categorical imperative, in the most general sense, tells us to act on those
principles, principles which are themselves laws. Kant continues:
There is, therefore, only a single categorical imperative and it is this:
act only in accordance with that maxim through which you can at the same
time will that it become a universal law. (AK 4: 421)

Kant next shows us how this principle serves to identify our duties,
by showing us that there are maxims which it rules out — maxims which
we could not possibly will to become universal laws. He suggests that
the way to test whether you can will your maxim as a universal law is by
performing a kind of thought experiment, namely, asking whether you
could will your maxim to be a law of nature in a world of which you
yourself were going to be a part. He illustrates this with four examples,
the clearest of which is the second.
A person in financial difficulties is considering "borrowing" money
on the strength of a false promise. He needs money, and knows he will
get it only if he says to another person, "I promise you I will pay you
back next week." He also knows perfectly well that he will not be able to
repay the money by then. His question is whether he can will that the
maxim of making a false promise in order to get some money should
become a law of nature. Although Kant does not do this, it helps to set
out the test in a series of steps.
The first step is to formulate the maxim. In most cases, the person is
considering doing a certain action for a certain end, so the basic form of
the maxim is "I will do Action-A in order to achieve Purpose-R"
Suppose then that your maxim is:
I will make a false promise in order to get some ready cash.
Next we formulate the corresponding "law of nature." It would be:
Everyone who needs some ready cash makes a false promise.
At least where duties to others are concerned, Kant's test may be
regarded as a formalization of the familiar moral challenge: "What if
everybody did that?" In order to answer this question, you are to imagine a world where everybody does indeed do that. We might call this the
"World of the Universalized Maxim." At this point it is important to
notice that Kant says the categorical imperative tells you to act on a
xvin

Introduction

maxim which you can at the same time will to be a universal law: he
means at the same time as you will the maxim itself. So you are to imagine that you are in the World of the Universalized Maxim, trying to act
on your maxim. For instance, you imagine that you are attempting to
secure some ready cash by means of a false promise in a world where
everyone who needs a little ready cash tries to secure it by means of a
false promise. Now, finally, you are to ask whether you could will this
state of affairs, in particular, whether any contradiction arises when you
try to do so. Kant says, in the example at hand, that it does,
For, the universality of a law that everyone, when he believes himself to
be in need, could promise whatever he pleases with the intention of not
keeping it would make the promise and the end one might have in it
itself impossible, since no one would believe what was promised him
but would laugh at all such expressions as vain pretenses. (AK 4: 422)

Why is this a contradiction? This question has attracted an enormous
amount of philosophical attention and many interpretations have been
proposed. The views that have been suggested may be divided into three
broad categories.
Proponents of a logical contradiction interpretation think Kant means
there is a straightforward logical contradiction in the proposed law of
nature. One might argue, for instance, that universalization of the
maxim of false promising would undercut the very practice of making
and accepting promises, thus making promises impossible and the
maxim literally inconceivable.8
Kant's use of teleological language in some of the examples has suggested to proponents of the teleological contradiction interpretation that
the contradiction emerges only when the maxim is conceived as a possible teleological law of nature. False promising violates the "natural purpose" of promising, which is to create trust and cooperation, so that a
universal law of false promising could not serve as part of a teleological
system of natural laws.
According to proponents of the practical contradiction interpretation,
the maxim's efficacy in achieving its purpose would be undercut by its
universalization. In willing its universalization, therefore, the agent
would be guilty of the same sort of practical contradiction involved in
the violation of a hypothetical imperative. In fact, the maxim in the
example is derived from a hypothetical imperative - "if you need some
ready cash, you ought to make a false promise" — which in turn is
derived from a "law of nature" or "causal law" - namely that false
promising is a cause of, and so a means to, the possession of ready cash.
8

For the notion of a practice and the logical dependence of actions falling under the practice
on the existence of the practice itself, see John Rawls, "Two Concepts of Rules," Philosophical
Review 64 (January 1955), 3-32.
XIX

Introduction

In the World of the Universalized Maxim, however, this law no longer
obtains. So in willing the World of the Universalized Maxim the agent
undercuts the causal law behind the hypothetical imperative from which
his own maxim is derived, making his method of getting the money ineffective. Language supporting all of these interpretations can be found in
Kant's texts, and different interpretations fit different examples better.
The problem of finding a single account of the contradiction test that
produces the right answers in all cases is one on which Kantians are still
at work.
The question is complicated by the fact that Kant himself thinks contradictions may arise in two different ways (AK 4: 421, 424). In some
cases, he says, the maxim cannot even be thought as a universal law of
nature: the contradiction is in the very conception of the universalized
maxim as a law. The example we have been considering is of that kind:
there could not be a law that everyone who needs money should make
false promises, so the maxim fails what is often called "the contradiction
in conception test." Maxims which fail this test are in violation of strict
or perfect duties, particular actions or omissions we owe to particular
people, such as the duty to keep a promise, tell the truth, or respect
someone's rights. But there are also maxims which we can conceive as
universal laws, but which it would still be contradictory to will as laws:
these maxims fail what is often called "the contradiction in the will
test." They violate wide or imperfect duties, such as the duty to help
others when they are in need, or to make worthwhile use of your
talents.9 Here again, there is disagreement about exactly what the
contradiction is. Kant suggests that "all sorts of possible purposes"
(AK 4: 423) would have to go unfulfilled in a world in which we had
neglected our abilities and in which we could not count on the help
9

In the Groundwork, Kant lines up the distinction between the contradiction in conception
test and the contradiction in the will test with the traditional distinction between perfect and
imperfect duties (described above) at AK 4: 421, and with a less familiar distinction between
strict or narrow duties and wide duties at AK 4: 424. This parallel might be taken to suggest
that these are just two sets of names for the same distinction, or at any rate that they coincide. But in the later Metaphysics of Morals Kant describes a category of duties which are
characterized as perfect duties and yet which, because they are duties of virtue and all of
those are wide, must be wide (AK 6: 42 iff). Kant explains the distinction between narrow
and wide obligation in the Metaphysics of Morals at AK 6: 390-4. We have a duty of narrow
obligation when we are required to perform a particular action, while we have a duty of wide
obligation when we are required to adopt a certain general maxim (e.g. to promote the happiness of others) but have leeway as to how to carry the duty out. This explanation leaves the
difference between the two distinctions unclear, and Kant never directly addresses the question how the two distinctions are related. If Kant's considered view is that these two distinctions do not coincide, we are left uncertain whether the contradiction in conception test is
best understood as a test for perfect duties, or as a test for strict duties. These rather intricate
issues about the categorization of duties matter to the reader of the Groundwork because one
of the duties Kant uses as an example here - the duty not to commit suicide in order to avoid
misery - is one of those apparently identified in the later work as a perfect duty of wide
obligation. This should perhaps make us cautious about this example.
XX

Introduction

of others when we are in need. Since rationality commits us to willing
the means to our ends, we must will a world in which these most
general means - our own abilities and the help of others - would be
available to us.
These examples are offered simply as a few illustrations to show how
the categorical imperative works to establish the moral status of our
actions. Generally, if a maxim passes the categorical imperative test, the
action is permissible; if it fails, the action is forbidden, and, in that case,
the opposite action or omission is required. The maxims in the examples fail the test, showing, for instance, that making a false promise is
forbidden, and that helping others when they are in need is required.
For a more complete account of what Kant thinks morality requires of
us, however, the reader must look to the Metaphysics of Morals.
The thought experiment we have just considered shows us how to
determine whether a maxim can be willed as a universal law, not why we
should will only maxims that can be universal laws. Kant is not claiming
that it is irrational to perform immoral actions because it actually
embroils us in contradictions. The contradictions emerge only when we
attempt to universalize our maxims, and the question why we should do
that remains to be answered. It is to this question Kant turns next.
The Formula of Humanity

We have now seen what the categorical imperative says. In order to show
that we actually have unconditional requirements, and so that ethics is
real, we have to show that this principle is one that necessarily governs
our wills. This investigation is in part a motivational one. Although Kant
denies that we can ever know for sure that someone has been morally
motivated, the moral law cannot have authority over our wills unless it is
possible for us to be motivated by it. But Kant warns us that we cannot
appeal to any empirical and contingent sources of motivation when making this argument. As we saw earlier, the sense in which we are trying to
show that the moral law governs our wills is not that it actually moves
us, either always or sometimes, but that it moves us insofar as we are
rational. So the argument must show that the moral law has authority
for any rational being, and this means it must appeal only to the principles of pure rational psychology.
As rational beings, as Kant said before, we act in accordance with our
representations or conceptions of laws. But what inspires us to formulate a maxim or a law ("what serves the will as the objective ground of its
self-determination") is an end (AK 4: 427). Whenever we actually decide
to take action, it is always with some end in view: either we regard the
action as good in itself, or we are doing it as a means to some further
end. If there are unconditional requirements, incumbent on all rational

Introduction

beings, then there must be ends that are necessarily shared by all rational beings — objective ends. Are there any such ends?
The ends that we set before ourselves in our ordinary actions, Kant
urges, do not have absolute but only relative value: "their mere relation
to a specially constituted faculty of desire on the part of the subject gives
them their worth" (AK 4: 427). The point here is that most objects of
human endeavor get their value from the way in which they serve our
needs, desires, and interests. Just as technology is valuable because it
serves our needs, so pure science is valuable because human beings, as
Aristotle says, desire to know; the visual arts and music are valuable
because they arouse the human capacity for the disinterested enjoyment
of sensory experience; literature and philosophy are valuable because
they serve our thirst for self-understanding, and so forth. Although
these other things are not mere means like technology, yet still their
value is not absolute or intrinsic, but relative to our nature. Yet, since we
are rational beings, and we do pursue these things, we must think that
they really are important, that there is reason to pursue them, that they
are good. If their value does not rest in themselves, but rather in the fact
that they are important to us, then in pursuing them, we are in effect
taking ourselves to be important. In that sense, Kant says, it is a "subjective principle of human actions" that we treat ourselves as ends
(AK4I429).
This suggests that the objective end which we need in order to
explain why the moral law has authority for us is "the human being, and
in general every rational being." Accordingly, the categorical imperative
can now be reformulated as a law instructing us to respect the value of
this objective end:
So act that you use humanity, whether in your own person or in the person
of any other, always at the same time as an end, never merely as a means.
(AK 4: 429)

Using the same examples he did before, Kant proceeds to demonstrate how this principle can serve as a moral guide. Being of absolute
value, human beings should not sacrifice themselves or one another for
merely relatively valuable ends. Since it is insofar as we are rational
beings that we accord ourselves this absolute value, the formula enjoins
us to respect ourselves and each other as rational beings. We should
develop our rational capacities, and promote one another's chosen ends.
Respecting someone as a rational being also means respecting her right
to make her own decisions about her own life and actions. This leads to
particularly strong injunctions against coercion and deception, since
these involve attempts to take other people's decisions out of their own
hands, to manipulate their wills for one's own ends. Someone who
makes you a false promise in order to get some money, for instance,
xxn

Introduction

wants you to decide to give him the money. He predicts that you will not
decide to give him the money unless he says he will pay it back, and
therefore he says he will pay it back, even though he cannot do so. His
decision about what to say to you is entirely determined by what he
thinks will work to get the result he wants. In that sense he treats your
reason, your capacity for making decisions, as if it were merely an
instrument for his own use. This is a violation of the respect he owes to
you and your humanity.
This example brings out something important about Kant's conception of morality. What is wrong with the false promiser is not merely
that he does not tell the truth. What is wrong with him is the reason that
he does not tell the truth - because he thinks it will not get the result he
wants — and the attitude towards you which that reason embodies. Even
if he told you the truth, if it were only because he thought it would get
the result he wanted, he would still be regarding you as a mere means.
Instead, we must tell the truth so that others may exercise their own
reason freely — and that means that, in telling them the truth, we are
inviting them to reason together with us, to share in our deliberations.
When we need the cooperation of others, we must also be prepared to give
them a voice in the decision about what is to be done. This leads Kant to
a vision of an ideal human community, in which people reason together
about what to do. Because this is the community of people who regard
themselves and one another as ends in themselves, Kant calls it the kingdom of ends.
Autonomy and the kingdom of ends

To be rational is, formally speaking, to act on your representation of a
law, whatever that law might be; but we have now seen that the content
or material of the maxims or laws on which we act is given by the value
we necessarily set upon our own humanity or rational nature. Putting
these two ideas together leads us to a third idea, which is that as rational
beings we make the law, we legislate it. Suppose, for instance, I undertake a program of scientific research. I am curious, and wish to know; in
treating my curiosity as a reason to undertake the research, I am in
effect taking it to be good that I should know. Furthermore, since we
have a duty to pursue one another's ends, my decision to pursue scientific research involves a claim on others: that they should recognize the
value of my pursuit of this end, should not hinder it, and perhaps, under
certain conditions, should even offer help with it when I am in need.
Thus my choice is an act of legislation: I lay it down, for myself and
others, that this research is a good, and shall be pursued. We may say
that I confer a value upon scientific research, when I choose to pursue it.
At the same time, the very fact that I make this claim on others serves as
xxin

Introduction

a "limiting condition" on my own choice (AK 4: 431). If the end that I
choose, or the means by which I choose to pursue it, are inconsistent
with the value of humanity, then I cannot legislate it, and my choice is
null and void: my maxim is not a law. This line of thought leads to what
Kant describes as "the principle of every human will as a will giving universal law through all its maxims" (AK 4: 432).

This principle, Kant tells us, "would be very well suited to be the categorical imperative" (AK 4: 432), because it suggests that the reason we
are bound to obey the laws of morality is that we legislate these laws ourselves, that they are our own laws. According to Kant there are two ways
in which we may be motivated to conform to a law. Sometimes, we conform to a law because of some interest we have that is served by such
conformity - for instance, when the law is supported by a sanction. If
disobedience to the law will lead to our being fined, socially ostracized,
thrown into prison, or dispatched to hell; or if obedience means we will
be loved, saved, rewarded, or well-pleasing to God, we may well be
motivated to obey it for those reasons. At other times, however, we obey
a law because we endorse the law itself, considered as a law: we think
that this is indeed how people in general ought to act, and so we act that
way ourselves. Kant calls the first sort of motivation heteronomous,
because we are bound to the law by something outside of ourselves —
God, the state, or nature — that attaches the sanction to the law. The second kind of motivation is autonomous, because we bind ourselves to the
law. The principle that we give universal law through our maxims suggests that moral motivation is autonomous.
And on reflection it seems that moral motivation must be
autonomous. For if we are motivated to obey a law heteronomously, by a
sanction, then the imperative we follow in obeying that law is a hypothetical imperative: */you would stay out of prison, or go to heaven, or
whatever, then you must obey this law. And in that case, of course, the
requirement is not unconditional after all. If categorical imperatives
exist, then, it must also be true that human beings are capable of
autonomous motivation. There can be only one reason why we must do
what duty demands, and that is that we demand it of ourselves.
Earlier we saw that, according to Kant's Copernican Revolution, the
laws of reason are not something we find in the world, but rather something we human beings impose upon the world. We have now come
around to the practical expression of that idea. Kant's predecessors, he
believes, failed to discover the principle of morality, because they looked
outside of the human will for the source of obligation, whereas obligation arises from, and so can only be traced to, the human capacity for
self-government. Morality, on Kant's conception, is a kind of metaphysics in practice. We ourselves impose the laws of reason on our
actions, and through our actions, on the world, when we act morally.
xxiv

Introduction

The principle of autonomy provides us with a third way of formulating the moral law: we should so act that we may think of ourselves as
legislating universal laws through our maxims.10 When we follow this
principle we conceive ourselves as legislative citizens in the kingdom of
ends. The kingdom of ends may be conceived either as a kind of democratic republic, "a systematic union of rational beings through common
laws" which the citizens make themselves; or as a system of all good
ends, "a whole both of rational beings as ends in themselves and of the
ends of his own that each may set himself" (AK 4: 433). The laws of the
kingdom of ends are the laws of freedom, both because it is the mark of
free citizens to make their own laws, and because the content of those
laws directs us to respect each citizen's free use of his or her own reason.
The conception of ourselves as legislative citizens is the source of the
dignity we accord to human beings, a dignity which Kant, bringing the
argument full circle, now equates with the unconditional value of a good
will. We now know what gives the good will its unconditional value: "It
is nothing less than the share it affords a rational being in the giving of
universal laws, by which it makes him fit to be a member of a possible
kingdom of ends" (AK 4: 435). But we also now know what we need to
do in order to complete the argument. Recall that morality is real if the
moral law has authority for our wills. The argument of Section II has not
yet shown this, but it has prepared the way, for we now know what has
to be true of us if the moral law is to have authority for our wills. We
must be autonomous beings, capable of being motivated by the conception of ourselves as legislative citizens in the kingdom of ends. If Kant
can show that we are autonomous, he will have shown that we are bound
by the moral law. This is the project of Section III.

Section III
Up until now, the argument has proceeded "analytically" (AK 4: 392). By
analyzing our ordinary conception of moral value, and our conception of
rational action, we have arrived at an idea of what the moral law says - it
says to act on a maxim one can will as a universal law - and at an idea of
the characteristic in virtue of which a person is governed by the moral
law - autonomy of the will. To complete the argument, Kant has to
show that we and all rational beings really have the kind of autonomous
wills for which the moral law is authoritative. This is not an analytic
10

Kant supposes that his three formulations are equivalent, not only in the sense that they
direct us to perform the same actions, but in the sense that they are different ways of saying
the same thing. All of them embody the view that a rational being must be governed only by
his or her own reason. Yet the claim that they are equivalent has been challenged by commentators, some of whom have argued that the Formulas of Humanity and Autonomy or the
Kingdom of Ends are stronger formulas, yielding a more well-defined set of duties, than the
Formula of Universal Law.

Introduction

claim, yet if it is to hold for all rational beings it must be an a priori one.
When a proposition is synthetic a priori, Kant now tells us, its two terms
must be "bound together by their connection with a third in which they
are both to be found"; that is, it must be deduced (AK 4: 447).
Kant opens the third section by making one of the two connections
that his argument requires. The will is the causality of a rational being,
for our will determines our actions, and it is through our actions that we
have effects in the world. If the will's actions - its choices and decisions
— were in turn determined by the laws of nature, then it would not be a
free will. Suppose that all your choices were determined by a psychological law of nature, say, "a person's will is always determined by the
strength of his desires." Although you would always do what you most
strongly desire, your will would not, according to Kant's definition, be
free. A free person is one whose actions are not determined by any
external force, not even by his own desires.
This is merely a negative conception of freedom. But Kant thinks it
points us towards a more positive conception of freedom. The will is a
cause, and the concept of causality includes the idea of acting according
to laws: since we identify something as a cause by observing the regularity of its effects, the idea of a cause which functions randomly is a
contradiction. To put it another way, the will is practical reason, and we
cannot conceive a practical reason that chooses and acts for no reason.
Since reasons are derived from principles, the will must have a principle.
A free will must therefore have its own law or principle, which it gives to
itself. It must be an autonomous will. But the moral law just is the law of
an autonomous will. Kant concludes that "a free will and a will under
moral laws are one and the same" (AK 4: 447).
Readers are often taken aback by the ease with which Kant draws this
conclusion. In the previous section, Kant showed that moral motivation
must be autonomous — that moral laws must be laws which we give to
ourselves. So any being who is governed by the moral law must be
autonomous. But this argument depends on a reciprocal claim that looks
at first as if it were stronger - namely, that any autonomous being must
be governed by the moral law. Why does Kant think he has shown this?
To see why, consider what the categorical imperative, in particular the
Formula of Universal Law, says. The Formula of Universal Law tells us
to choose a maxim that we can will as a law. The only condition that it
imposes on our choices is that they have the form of law. Nothing determines any content for that law; all that it has to be is a law. As we have just

seen, Kant thinks that a will, as a cause, must operate according to a law.
If the will is free, then nothing determines any content for that law; all that
it has to be is a law. What this shows is that the moral law just is the principle of a free will: to have a free will and to operate in accordance with
the Formula of Universal Law are, as Kant puts it, "one and the same."
xxvi

Introduction

Freedom and morality are therefore analytically connected. A free
will is one governed by the moral law, so if we have free wills, we are
governed by the moral law. But do we have free wills? Kant points out
that insofar as we are rational, we necessarily act "under the idea of freedom" (AK 4: 448). When you act rationally, you take yourself to choose
your actions, not to be impelled into them, and you think that you could
have chosen otherwise. Even if you act on a desire, you do not take the
desire to impel you into the action — you think, rather, that you choose to
satisfy it. Rational choices are therefore undertaken under a kind of presupposition of freedom. And this being so, Kant proposes, we must,
when we make such choices, see ourselves as being bound by the laws of
freedom. Rationality requires that we act under the idea of freedom, and
freedom is government by the moral law, so rationality requires that
we regard ourselves as governed by the moral law. Kant's argument
seems complete.
But Kant is not satisfied with the argument.11 He complains that the
argument does not explain the interest we take in the ideas of morality.
He reminds us of a conclusion already established: if we are morally
motivated, we cannot be moved by any interest outside of morality, for if
we do our duty for the sake of something else, we are acting on a hypothetical, rather than a categorical, imperative. But now Kant points out
that we must nevertheless take an interest in moral ideas if we are to act
on them. This is clearest when morality demands that we do something
contrary to our happiness. Here, on the one hand, is something you
badly want to do, something on which your happiness depends; but you
find, on reflection, that it would be wrong. If you are to be moved by
this reflection to refrain from the action, the thought that you cannot
will your maxim as a universal law must motivate you not to perform the
action. You must assign a worth to autonomous action, and to yourself
as capable of it, in comparison with which your happiness "is to be held
as nothing" (AK 4: 450). The argument, Kant complains, has not shown
how this is possible. It has shown how we arrive at the consciousness of
the moral law, but it has not shown how in such a case we can be motivated by that consciousness. And unless we can be motivated this way,
we are not after all free and autonomous.
Kant does not doubt that we do in fact sometimes take an interest in
autonomous action and in ourselves as capable of it. But for all that the
11

At this point, we arrive at the most difficult passages in the book. There is scholarly controversy over the questions why exactly Kant was unsatisfied, and whether he should have
been. Interpretation is complicated by the fact that Kant himself continued to work on this
part of the argument in later writings, especially in the Critique of Practical Reason
(AK 5: 30-50), and the version of the argument he presents there seems, at least on the surface, to be different, although there is also controversy about whether it really is so. In any
case, for a full understanding of Kant's views on this point, study of the Critique of Practical
Reason is indispensable.
XXV11

Introduction

argument has shown so far, this may be only because of the importance
we already assign to morality itself. If we can do no better than this, the
argument will be circular: we will have derived moral obligation from a
freedom of will which we have attributed to ourselves only because of
the importance we in any case grant to morality.
Now at this point, although Kant does not say so, he begins to appeal
to ideas he worked out in the Critique of Pure Reason, so a brief digression will be useful. In the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant distinguishes
two different ways of thinking about the world that are available to us.
We can think of the world as it is in itself, or as he calls it there the
noumenal world, or we can think of the world as it appears to us, or as he
calls it there the phenomenal world. These two conceptions arise from
reflection on our cognitive relation to the world. The world is given to
us through our senses, it appears to us, and to that extent we are passive
in the face of it. We must therefore think of the world as generating, or
containing something which generates, those appearances — something
which is their source, and gives them to us. We can only know the world
insofar as it is phenomenal, that is, insofar as it is given to sense. But we
can think of it as noumenal. This way of looking at things is important
here for two reasons.
Part of the project of the Critique of Pure Reason, as we have already
seen, is to provide an argument for the synthetic a priori principle that
every event has a cause. The argument which Kant presents there has an
important consequence for our task here: namely, that the law that every
event has a cause can be established, but only for the phenomenal world,
that is, only for the world insofar as it is knowable, and not for the world
as it is in itself. Now the law that every event has a cause is at odds with
the idea of freedom, for freedom is the idea of a first or uncaused causality, a cause that is not determined by any other cause. The upshot of
Kant's limitation of the causal principle to the sensible or phenomenal
world is this: freedom cannot be an object of knowledge; the knowable
world is deterministic. But this does not mean that there is no freedom,
for freedom might characterize things as they are in themselves. Indeed,
in a sense we must think of things in themselves this way, for we conceive them as the first causes or ultimate sources of the appearances.
This means that what Kant is seeking here cannot be evidence or knowledge that we really are free. In his philosophy, that is impossible. Instead
he is asking whether we have grounds for regarding ourselves as free.
And - to return now to the Groundwork — Kant does think there are
such grounds, provided precisely by this distinction between appearances and things in themselves. For this distinction provides a person
with "two standpoints from which he can regard himself and cognize
laws for the use of his powers and consequently for all of his actions"
(AK 4: 452).When we view ourselves as members of the sensible or
xxvin

Introduction

phenomenal world, we regard everything about ourselves, including
inner appearances such as our own thoughts and choices, as parts of the
sensible world, and therefore as governed by its causal laws. But insofar
as we are rational beings, we also regard ourselves as the authors of our
own thoughts and choices. That is to say, we regard ourselves as the first
causes or ultimate sources of these inner appearances. Insofar as we do so,
we necessarily think of ourselves as members of the noumenal world, or
as Kant calls it here the world of understanding. And because we must
think of ourselves as members of the world of understanding, we
inevitably think of ourselves as free, and so as autonomous. With this
independent reason for regarding ourselves as free, the suspicion of a
circle is removed.
Kant is now ready to explain how a categorical imperative is possible
- what makes it authoritative for the rational will. We must see ourselves
as belonging to both the world of sense and the world of understanding.
Insofar as we are members of the world of sense, our choices and
actions, like everything else, fall under the laws of nature. But insofar as
we are members of the world of understanding, we are free and so our
wills are governed by the moral law. Now because "the world of understanding contains the ground of the world of sense and so too of its laws"

(AK 4: 453), we must suppose that in our capacity as members of the
world of understanding, we give laws to ourselves as members of the
world of sense. And this is what gives us obligations. The conception of
ourselves as members of the world of understanding is a conception
of ourselves as self-governing, and so as autonomous or moral beings.
Kant ends with some reflections on the nature and limits of practical philosophy. The argument we have just considered requires that we view
ourselves in two different ways. As members of the world of understanding, we are free, yet as members of the world of sense, our actions
are determined. Furthermore, determinism is an object of knowledge, or
at least a feature of the world in so far as it is known, while freedom is
only an object of thought or understanding. The two views we take of
ourselves may at first seem incompatible, and, if they are, the fact that
determinism is a feature of the knowable world may seem to give it priority. But in fact the two standpoints are so far from being incompatible
that both are absolutely necessary. For we realize that something must
furnish us with the appearances from which the sensible world is constructed, that there must be a world of things in themselves which provides us with the appearances. And we know that if we are ourselves
agents, who are the sources of some of these appearances (our own
actions), then we must be among these things in themselves.
This is why we affirm that our freedom is real; but this does not mean
thatwe can explain how freedom, or, to put the same thing another way,
pure practical reason, is possible. To explain something just is to subsume
xxix

Introduction

it under causal laws, so freedom by its very nature cannot be explained.
Nor, for a parallel reason, can we explain the interest we take in moral
ideas, if we must explain an interest in terms of some other interest that
it promotes, or some pleasure that it causes. Yet we can now say more
about what the object of moral interest is. For if we act as befits members of the world of understanding, we may claim to be citizens of the
real kingdom of ends, the community of rational beings who, through
their actions, try to impose a rational order on the natural world of
sense. What interests us in morality is
the noble ideal of a universal kingdom of ends in themselves
(rational beings) to which we can belong as members only
when we carefully conduct ourselves in accordance with
maxims of freedom as if they were laws of nature.

Chronology

1724
1730-2
1732-40
1740-6
1747-54
1755
1755
1755
1755

1756
1759
1762
1763
1764
1764
1766
1770

1781
1783
1783
1784
1784
1785
1785
1785
1786
1786
1786
1787
1788

Immanuel Kant born 22 April in Konigsberg, East Prussia
Attended Vorstadter Hospitalschule (elementary school)
Attended the Collegium Fridericianum (a parochial Pietist school)
Attended the University of Konigsberg
Served as a private tutor for various families in the neighborhood of
Konigsberg
Completed his dissertation, Concise Outlines of Some Reflections on
Fire, and received his degree from the University of Konigsberg
A New Elucidation of the First Principles of Metaphysical Cognition
Appointed Privatdozent at the University of Konigsberg
Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens, in which Kant
proposed an astronomical theory now known as the Kant—Laplace
hypothesis
Three essays on the cause of the Lisbon earthquake
An Attempt at Some Reflections on Optimism
The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures
The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the
Existence of God
Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and the Sublime
Inquiry Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural
Theology and Morals
Dreams of a Spirit-Seer Elucidated by Dreams of Metaphysics
Appointed Professor of Logic and Metaphysics at the University of
Konigsberg; Inaugural Dissertation entitled Concerning the Form and
Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible World
Critique of Pure Reason, first (A) edition
Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics
Review ofSchultz 's Attempt at the Introduction to a Doctrine of Morals
for all Human Beings regardless of different Religions
Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Purpose
An Answer to the Question: What is Enlightenment?
Review of Herder's Ideas on the Philosophy of the History of Humanity
On the Wrongfulness of Unauthorized Publication of Books
Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals
Conjectures on the Beginning of Human History
Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science
What is Orientation in Thinking?
Critique of Pure Reason, second (B) edition
Critique of Practical Reason
XXXI

Chronology
1788
1790
1791
J
793
I

793
1793
1794
1794
1795
1796
1797
1797
1798
1798

1800
1803
1804

Concerning the Use of Teleological Principles in Philosophy
Critique of Judgment, first edition
On the Failure of All Philosophical Attempts at Theodicy
On tne Common Saying: That may be Correct in Theory, but it is of no
use in Practice
Critique of Judgment, second edition
Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone
Kant is censured by King Friedrich Wilhelm II for distorting and
debasing Christianity in Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone
The End ofAll Things
Toward Perpetual Peace
Kant's last lecture
The Metaphysics of Morals
On a Supposed Right to Lie from Philanthropy
Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View
The Conflict of the Faculties. Part II, An Old Question Raised Again: Is
the Human Race Constantly Progressing? is one of Kant's important
essays on morality.
Logic
Kant becomes ill
Immanuel Kant dies on 12 February

xxxii

Further reading

The Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals is, as its title states, only
the groundwork of a more complete ethical system, which the reader
will find developed in Kant's other ethical works. In the Groundwork's
Preface, Kant mentions his plan to issue a Metaphysics of Morals and
seems to suggest that a complete Critique of Practical Reason may not
be necessary (AK 4: 391). But in the event he did first write the Critique
of Practical Reason (1788; trans, and ed. Mary Gregor with an Introduction
by Andrews Reath, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1997), the
first part of which covers much of the same territory as the Groundwork,
but in a rather different way. The foundational argument, in particular,
is presented very differently, and it is a matter of debate whether the
argument really is different, and whether that was one of Kant's reasons
for deciding to write the book. But the second Critique also explores the
connections between Kant's ethical ideas and the ideas of the Critique of
Pure Reason, and raises important questions about the differences
between theoretical and practical reason.
The Metaphysics of Morals (1797; trans, and ed. Mary Gregor with an
Introduction by Roger Sullivan, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1996) consists of two parts. In the first part, the Metaphysical
First Principles of the Doctrine of Right, Kant integrates ideas from his
moral theory with elements drawn from the natural law and social contract traditions to produce his own theory of law and the political state.
In the second part, the Metaphysical First Principles of the Doctrine of
Virtue, Kant explicates his views on personal morality. Kant also discussed moral issues in his course lectures, some of which have been published. (These are based on students' notes. Some of them are available
in Lectures on Ethics, trans. Louis Infield, Indianapolis, Hackett, 1963;
others in Lectures on Ethics, trans, and ed. Peter Heath and J. B.
Schneewind, the Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant,
Cambridge University Press, 1997) In the Introduction to the
Metaphysics of Morals Kant explains why moral theory falls into these
two parts, and in both the general introduction and the introduction to
the second part he discusses his theory of moral psychology. For a complete understanding of Kant's views on moral psychology, however, one
must turn to an unexpected place - the first book of Religion
within the Limits of Reason Alone (1793; trans, and ed. Allen W. Wood
xxxin

Further reading

and George diGiovanni in Religion and Rational Theology, the
Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant, 1996; or trans.
Theodore Green and Hoyt H. Hudson, New York: Harper Torchbooks,
i960), where Kant turned his attention to questions about the nature of
choice and moral responsibility.
In Kant's view moral philosophy naturally extends to religion and
politics for two reasons. First, Kant believed that political and religious
ideas that have had a long history or that recur in many different cultures are likely to have a basis in pure practical reason — that is, in
morality. In all three Critiques, Kant argues that the rational basis for
belief in God and immortality rests in morality, rather than in theoretical proofs or in an inference to be drawn from our observation of the
design in nature. The most detailed account appears in the second part
of the Critique of Practical Reason. In Religion within the Limits of Reason
Alone and in his class lectures on philosophical theology (available in
Religion and Rational Theology, the Cambridge Edition of the Works of
Immanuel Kant), Kant also explores the rational roots of some of the
more particular ideas of religion, such as atonement, salvation, grace,
miracles, and the need for a church. In a similar way, the Metaphysical
First Principles of the Doctrine of Right explores the rational roots of concepts used in the Roman and European legal traditions, such as the
concept of a right and of the social contract.
The other reason for attention to religion and politics springs from
Kant's conviction that the committed moral agent has a deep need to
place faith in some vision of how the kingdom of ends may actually be
realized. In the three Critiques and in Religion within the Limits of Reason
Alone, Kant explains how this need may legitimately lead us to hope for
a moral deity and an afterlife. But Kant also explored the possibility of a
more secular faith in the inevitable progress of history towards the realization of the good. This last idea is touched on at the very end of the
Metaphysical First Principles of the Doctrine of Right (AK 6: 354-5), and
spelled out in more detail in some of Kant's essays on history, especially
"Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Purpose," "Perpetual
Peace," and "An Old Question Raised Again: Is the Human Race
Constantly Progressing?" (All of these may be found in Kant: Political
Writings, trans. H. B. Nisbet, ed. Hans Reiss, 2nd edn., Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1991.)
The secondary literature on Kant's ethics in general and the
Groundwork in particular is vast. A disproportionately large part of it has
been provoked by Hegel's famous contention that Kant's Formula of
Universal Law is "empty" (see Elements of the Philosophy of Right
[1821], trans. H. B. Nisbet, ed. Allen W. Wood, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1991). One of the best discussions is to be found in the
two chapters devoted to Kant in Marcus Singer's Generalization in

Further reading

Ethics (New York, Atheneum, 1961). Another important discussion is
found in Onora Nell (O'Neill), Acting on Principle: An Essay on Kantian
Ethics (New York, Columbia University Press, 1975).
H. J. Paton's The Categorical Imperative: A Study in Kant's Moral
Philosophy (London, Hutchinson, 1947; later reprinted in Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, 1948, and in Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania Press, 1971) was a standard commentary on the
Groundwork in the middle years of the twentieth century. Roger Sullivan's
Immanuel Kant's Moral Theory (Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 1989) deals with Kant's ethical theory as a whole and contains an
extensive and useful bibliography. Interest in Kant's ethics has been
lively since the 1970s, and there are a number of recent collections of
essays in which interpretation and reconstruction of the Kantian texts
serves as the background to philosophical defenses of his theory. See, for
instance, Barbara Herman, The Practice of Moral Judgment (Cambridge,
MA, Harvard University Press, 1993); Thomas Hill, Jr., Dignity and
Practical Reason in Kant's Moral Theory (Ithaca, Cornell University
Press, 1992); Christine M. Korsgaard, Creating the Kingdom of Ends
(Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996); and Onora O'Neill,
Constructions of Reason (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1989).
The practical implications of Kant's theory, sometimes for moral issues
which Kant himself never had occasion to consider, have also received
recent attention. Thomas Hill, Jr. considers such issues as affirmative
action, our treatment of the environment, and terrorism in Autonomy
and Self-Respect (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1991) and in
Dignity and Practical Reason. Onora O'Neill applies Kantian concepts to
the problem of famine in Faces of Hunger (London, Allen & Unwin,
1986).
The present flourishing state of work on Kant's ethics owes a great
deal to the teaching of John Rawls, who lectured regularly on Kant's
ethical theory at Harvard, and whose political theory in A Theory of
Justice (Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1971) and Political
Liberalism (New York, Columbia University Press, 1993) is strongly
influenced by Kant's moral theory. Rawls himself has published only
one essay directly about Kant, "Themes in Kant's Moral Philosophy"
(in Eckart Forster [ed.], Kant's Transcendental Deductions, Stanford,
Stanford University Press, 1989). But quite a few contemporary defenders of Kant studied with Rawls. Reclaiming the History of Ethics: Essays
for John Rawls (ed. by Andrews Reath, Barbara Herman, and Christine
M. Korsgaard, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1997), a collection of essays assembled in Rawls's honor by his former students,
includes eight essays primarily devoted to Kant.
Rawls is not the only contemporary philosopher whose work on ethics
and politics has been inspired by Kant's, and the reader may wish to
xxxv

Further reading

explore what other philosophers have done with Kantian ideas in the
construction of their own views. Examples include Stephen Darwall,
Impartial Reason (Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 1983); Alan
Donagan, The Theory of Morality (Chicago, University of Chicago
Press, 1977); Alan Gewirth, Reason and Morality (Chicago, University
of Chicago Press, 1978); Christine M. Korsgaard, The Sources of
Normativity (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996); Thomas
Nagel, The Possibility of Altruism (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1970, and
Princeton University Press, 1978); and Onora O'Neill, Towards Justice
and Virtue (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996). Kant's
impact on moral philosophy remains pervasive and profound.

xxxvi

Groundwork of
The metaphysics ofmorals

4:387

Preface

Ancient Greek philosophy was divided into three sciences: physics, ethics, and logic. This division is perfectly suitable to the nature of the
subject and there is no need to improve upon it except, perhaps, to add its
principle, partly so as to insure its completeness and partly so as to be able
to determine correctly the necessary subdivisions.
All rational cognition is either material and concerned with some object, or formal and occupied only with the form of the understanding and
of reason itself and with the universal rules of thinking in general, without
distinction of objects. Formal philosophy is called logic, whereas material
philosophy, which has to do with determinate objects and the laws to
which they are subject, is in turn divided into two. For these laws are
either laws of nature or laws of freedom. The science of the first is
called physics, that of the other is ethics; the former is also called the
doctrine of nature, the latter the doctrine of morals/
Logic can have no empirical part, that is, no part in which the universal
and necessary laws of thinking would rest on grounds taken from experience; for in that case it would not be logic, that is, a canon for the
understanding or for reason, which holds for all thinking and which must
be demonstrated. On the other hand natural as well as moral philosophy*
can each have its empirical part, since the former must determine laws of
nature as an object of experience, the latter, laws of the human being's will
insofar as it is affected by nature - the first as laws in accordance with 4:388
which everything happens, the second as laws in accordance with which
everything ought to happen, while still taking into account the conditions
under which it very often does not happen.
All philosophy insofar as it is based on grounds of experience can be
called empirical; but insofar as it sets forth its teachings simply from a
priori principles it can be called pure philosophy. When the latter is merely
formal it is called logic; but if it is limited to determinate objects of the
understanding it is called metaphysics.
In this way there arises the idea of a twofold metaphysics, a metaphysics
a

Naturlehre. . . Sittenlehre. According to the Critique of Judgment, the doctrinal (doktrinat), as
distinguished from the critical, part of philosophy is the metaphysics of nature and of morals
(5:170).
h
Weltweisheit, a common eighteenth-century word for Philosophie

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:389

of nature and a metaphysics ofmorals. Physics will therefore have its empirical part but it will also have a rational part; so too will ethics, though here
the empirical part might be given the special name practical anthropology,
while the rational part might properly be called morals.'
All trades, crafts, and arts have gained by the division of labor, namely
when one person does not do everything but each limits himself to a certain
task that differs markedly from others in the way it is to be handled, so as to
be able to perform it most perfectly and with greater facility. Where work is
not so differentiated and divided, where everyone is a jack-of-all-trades,
there trades remain in the greatest barbarism. Whether pure philosophy in
all its parts does not require its own special man might in itself be a subject
not unworthy of consideration, and it might be worth asking whether the
whole of this learned trade would not be better off if a warning were given to
those who, in keeping with the taste of the public, are in the habit of vending
the empirical mixed with the rational in all sorts of proportions unknown to
themselves, who call themselves "independent thinkers,'"* and others, who
prepare the rational part only, "hair-splitters":' the warning not to carry on
at the same time two jobs which are very distinct in the way they are to be
handled, for each of which a special talent is perhaps required, and the
combination of which in one person produces only bunglers. Here, however, I ask only whether the nature of science does not require that the
empirical part always be carefully separated from the rational part, and that
a metaphysics of nature be put before physics proper (empirical physics)
and a metaphysics of morals before practical anthropology, with metaphysics carefully cleansed of everything empirical so that we may know how
much pure reason can accomplish in both cases and from what sources it
draws this a priori teaching of its own^- whether the latter job be carried on
by all teachers of morals (whose name is legion) or only by some who feel a
calling to it.
Since my aim here is directed properly to moral philosophy, I limit the
question proposed only to this: is it not thought to be of the utmost
necessity to work out for once a pure moral philosophy, completely
cleansed of everything that may be only empirical and that belongs to
anthropology? For, that there must be such a philosophy is clear of itself
from the common idea of duty and of moral laws. Everyone must grant
that a law, if it is to hold morally, that is, as a ground of an obligation, must
carry with it absolute necessity; that, for example, the command "thou
c

eigentlich Moral, perhaps, "morals strictly speaking." Moral and Sitten are translated as
"morals," Moralitdt and Sittlichkeit as "morality," sittliche Weltweisheit and Moralphilosophie as
"moral philosophy," and Sittenlehre as "the doctrine of morals." Kant occasionally uses
Moral in the sense of "moral philosophy."
d

Selbstdenker
Griibler
f sie selbst diese ihre Belehrung a priori schb'pfe
e

Preface
shalt not lie" does not hold only for human beings, as if other rational
beings did not have to heed it, and so with all other moral laws properly so
called; that, therefore, the ground of obligation here must not be sought in
the nature of the human being or in the circumstances of the world in
which he is placed, but a priori simply in concepts of pure reason; and that
any other precept, which is based on principles of mere experience - even
if it is universal in a certain respect - insofar as it rests in the least part on
empirical grounds, perhaps only in terms of a motive/ can indeed be
called a practical rule but never a moral law.
Thus, among practical cognitions, not only do moral laws, along with
their principles, differ essentially from all the rest/ in which there is something empirical, but all moral philosophy is based entirely on its pure part;
and when it is applied to the human being it does not borrow the least thing
from acquaintance with him (from anthropology) but gives to him, as a
rational being, laws a priori, which no doubt still require a judgment sharpened by experience, partly to distinguish in what cases they are applicable
and partly to provide them with access1 to the will of the human being and
efficacy for his fulfillment of them;7 for the human being is affected by so
many inclinations that, though capable of the idea of a practical pure reason, he is not so easily able to make it effective in concreto in the conduct of
his life.
A metaphysics of morals is therefore indispensably necessary, not
merely because of a motive to speculation - for investigating the source of
the practical basic principles* that lie a priori in our reason - but also 4:390
because morals themselves remain subject to all sorts of corruption as long
as we are without that clue' and supreme norm by which to appraise them
correctly. For, in the case of what is to be morally good it is not enough that it
conform with the moral law but it must also be Aontfor the sake of the lam;
without this, that conformity is only very contingent and precarious, since a
ground that is not moral will indeed now and then produce actions in
conformity with the law, but it will also often produce actions contrary to the
* Bewegungsgriinde. Kant subsequently (4:427) distinguishes this from an "incentive" (Triebfeder), and the force of some passages depends upon this distinction. However, he does not
abide by the distinction, and no attempt has been made to bring his terminology into accord
with it. He occasionally uses Bewegursache, in which case "motive," which seems to be the
most general word available, has been used.
h
Here, as elsewhere, the difference between German and English punctuation creates
difficulties. It is not altogether clear from the context whether the clause "in which there is
something empirical" is restrictive or nonrestrictive.
1
Or "entry," "admission," Eingang
;
Nachdruck zurAusiibung
k
Grundsdtze. Kant does not draw a consistent distinction between Grundsatz and Prinzip and
often uses one where the other would seem more appropriate. Prinzip is always, and
Grundsatz often, translated as "principle."
1
Leitfaden

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:391

law. Now the moral law in its purity and genuineness (and in the practical
this is what matters most) is to be sought nowhere else than in a pure
philosophy; hence this (metaphysics) must come first, and without it there
can be no moral philosophy at all. That which mixes these pure principles
with empirical ones does not even deserve the name of philosophy (for what
distinguishes philosophy from common rational cognition is just that it sets
forth in separate sciences what the latter comprehends only mixed together); much less does it deserve the name of a moral philosophy, since by
this very mixture it even infringes uponw the purity of morals themselves
and proceeds contrary to its own end.
Let it not be thought, however, that what is here called for already
exists in the celebrated Wolff's1 propaedeutic to his moral philosophy,
namely in what he called universal" practical philosophy, and that we do not
therefore have to break into an entirely new field. Just because it was to be
a universal practical philosophy it took into consideration, not a will of any
special kind, such as one that would be completely determined from a
priori principles without any empirical motives and that could be called a
pure will, but rather volition generally,0 with all the actions and conditions
that belong to it in this general^ sense; and by this it differs from a
metaphysics of morals in the same way that general logic, which sets forth
the actions and rules of thinking in general, differs from transcendental
philosophy, which sets forth the special actions and rules of pure thinking, that is, of thinking by which objects are cognized completely a priori.
For, the metaphysics of morals has to examine the idea and the principles
of a possible pure will and not the actions and conditions of human volition
generally, which for the most part are drawn from psychology. That this
universal practical philosophy also discusses (though without any warrant)^ moral laws and duties is no objection to my assertion. For the
authors of that science remain true to their idea of it in this too; they do
not distinguish motives that, as such, are represented completely a priori
by reason alone and are properly moral from empirical motives, which the
understanding raises to universal concepts merely by comparing experiences; instead they consider motives only in terms of the greater or
smaller amount of them, without paying attention to the difference of their
sources (since all of them are regarded as of the same kind); and this is
how they form their conceptr of obligation, which is anything but moral,
m

Abbruch tut. For Kant's explanation of this term, taken from the context of rights, see The

Metaphysics of Morals (6:429).
" allgemeinen
0
uberhaupt
p
allgemeinen
q

Or "authorization," Befugnis. For an explanation of this term in its moral use, see The

Metaphysics of Morals (6:222).
r
und machen sich dadurch ihren Begrijf

Preface
although the way it is constituted is all that can be desired in a philosophy
that does not judge at all about the origin of all possible practical concepts,
whether they occur only a posteriori or a priori as well.
Intending to publish some day a metaphysics of morals,2 I issue this
groundwork in advance. Indeed there is really no other foundation for a
metaphysics of morals than the critique of a pure practical reason, just as
that of metaphysics is the critique of pure speculative reason, already
published. But in the first place the former is not of such utmost necessity
as the latter, because in moral matters human reason can easily be brought
to a high degree of correctness and accomplishment, even in the most
common understanding, whereas in its theoretical but pure use it is wholly
dialectical; and in the second place I require that the critique of a pure
practical reason, if it is to be carried through completely, be able at the
same time to present the unity of practical with speculative reason in a
common principle, since there can, in the end, be only one and the same
reason, which must be distinguished merely in its application. But I could
not yet bring it to such completeness here without bringing into it considerations of a wholly different kind and confusing the reader. Because of
this I have made use of the title Groundwork of the Metaphysics ofMorals
instead of Critique ofPure Practical Reason.
But in the third place, since a metaphysics of morals, despite its
intimidating title, is yet capable of a great degree of popularity and
suitability for the common understanding, I find it useful to separate
from it this preliminary work of laying its foundation, so that in the 4:392
future I need not add subtleties, which are unavoidable in it, to teachings
more easily grasped.
The present groundwork is, however, nothing more than the search for
and establishment of the supreme principle of morality, which constitutes by
itself a business that in its purpose is complete and to be kept apart from
every other moral investigation. No doubt my assertions on this important
and central question, discussion of which has till now been far from
satisfactory, would receive a great deal of light from the application of the
same principle to the whole system, and of confirmation through the
adequacy that it would everywhere show; but I had to forgo this advantage, which would be after all more gratifying to me than commonly useful
since the facility with which a principle can be used and its apparent
adequacy furnish no quite certain proof of its correctness but, instead,
awaken a certain bias against rigorously investigating and weighing it in
itself and without any regard for what follows from it.
I have adopted in this work the method that is, I believe, most suitable
if one wants to proceed analytically from common cognition to the determination of its supreme principle, and in turn synthetically from the examination of this principle and its sources back to the common cognition in
which we find it used. Accordingly, the division turns out as follows:

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
1. First section: Transition from common rational to philosophic moral
cognition.
2. Second section: Transition from popular moral philosophy to metaphysics of morals.
3. Third section: Final step from metaphysics of morals to the critique
of pure practical reason.

4:393

Section I
Transition from common rational to
philosophic moral cognition

It is impossible to think of anything at all in the world, or indeed even
beyond it, that could be considered good without limitation except a good
will. Understanding, wit, judgment3 and the like, whatever such talents of
mind5 may be called, or courage, resolution, and perseverance in one's
plans, as qualities of temperament, are undoubtedly good and desirable for
many purposes/ but they can also be extremely evil and harmful if the will
which is to make use of these gifts of nature, and whose distinctive
constitution" is therefore called character, is not good. It is the same with
gifts of fortune. Power, riches, honor, even health and that complete wellbeing and satisfaction1 with one's condition called happiness, produce boldness and thereby often arrogance"' as well unless a good will is present
which corrects the influence of these on the mind and, in so doing, also
corrects the whole principle of action and brings it into conformity with
universal ends* - not to mention that an impartial rational spectator can
take no delight in seeing the uninterrupted prosperity of a being graced
with no feature of a pure and good will, so that a good will seems to
constitute the indispensable condition even of worthiness to be happy.
Some qualities are even conducive^ to this good will itself and can
s

Geistes. Compare Kant's use of Geist in Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View (7:225)
and of Geisteskrdfte in The Metaphysics of Morals (6:445).
* in mancher Absicht, perhaps "in many respects"
u
Beschaffenheit, occasionally translated as "character." "Constitution" is also used to translate
Einrichtung and sometimes Anlage, which is used rather loosely in the Groundwork.
v
Kant uses a great variety of words for what could be called "pleasure" {Lust) in the most
general sense. Although he later draws broad distinctions among pleasures in terms of their
origins (e.g., between the pleasure of taste and that of sensation, and between both of these and
moral pleasure), these distinctions still leave a number of words problematic. Within the
Groundwork (4:396) he suggests a distinction between Zufriedenheit or "satisfaction" in general
and reason's own kind of Zufriedenheit, which in that context I have translated as "contentment." However, his vocabulary is not consistent, and I have not attempted to make it so.
" Mut. . . Ubermut
x
allgemein-zweckmdfiig mache
y
beforderlich. Compare The Metaphysics of Morals (6:407-9). Befordern is usually translated as
"to further" or "to promote."

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
4:394

4:395

make its work much easier; despite this, however, they have no inner
unconditional worth but always presuppose a good will, which limits the
esteem one otherwise rightly has for them and does not permit their being
taken as absolutely good. Moderation in affects and passions, self-control,
and calm reflection are not only good for all sorts of purposes but even
seem to constitute a part of the inner worth of a person; but they lack
much that would be required to declare them good without limitation
(however unconditionally they were praised by the ancients); for, without
the basic principles of a good will they can become extremely evil, and the
coolness of a scoundrel makes him not only far more dangerous but also
immediately more abominable in our eyes than we would have taken him
to be without it.
A good will is not good because of what it effects or accomplishes,
because of its fitness to attain some proposed end, but only because of its
volition, that is, it is good in itself and, regarded for itself, is to be valued
incomparably higher than all that could merely be brought about by it in
favor of some inclination and indeed, if you will, of the sum of all inclinations. Even if, by a special disfavor of fortune or by the niggardly provision
of a stepmotherly nature, this will should wholly lack the capacity to carry
out its purpose - if with its greatest efforts it should yet achieve nothing
and only the good will were left (not, of course, as a mere wish but as the
summoning of all means insofar as they are in our control) - then, like a
jewel, it would still shine by itself, as something that has its full worth in
itself. Usefulness or fruitlessness can neither add anything to this worth
nor take anything away from it. Its usefulness would be, as it were, only
the setting to enable us to handle it more conveniently in ordinary commerce or to attract to it the attention of those who are not yet expert
enough, but not to recommend it to experts or to determine its worth.
There is, however, something so strange in this idea of the absolute
worth of a mere will, in the estimation of which no allowance is made for
any usefulness, that, despite all the agreement even of common understanding with this idea, a suspicion must yet arise that its covert basis is
perhaps mere high-flown fantasy and that we may have misunderstood the
purpose of nature in assigning reason to our will as its governor. Hence we
shall put this idea to the test from this point of view.
In the natural constitution of an organized being, that is, one constituted purposively for life,2 we assume as a principle that there will be
found in it no instrument for some end other than what is also most
appropriate to that end and best adapted to it. Now in a being that has
reason and a will, if the proper end of nature were its preservation, its
welfare, in a word its happiness, then nature would have hit upon a very bad
z

zweckmdfiig zum Leben eingerichteten. Zweck is translated as "end" except when it occurs as
part of zweckmdfiig, Zweckmdfiigkeit, and zwecklos.

FROM COMMON RATIONAL COGNITION TO PHILOSOPHY
arrangement in selecting the reason of the creature to carry out this
purpose. For all the actions that the creature has to perform for this
purpose, and the whole rule of its conduct, would be marked out for it far
more accurately by instinct, and that end would have thereby been attained much more surely than it ever can be by reason; and if reason
should have been given, over and above, to this favored creature, it must
have served it only to contemplate the fortunate constitution of its nature,
to admire this, to delight in it, and to be grateful for it to the beneficent
cause, but not to submit its faculty of desire* to that weak and deceptive
guidance and meddle with nature's purpose. In a word, nature would have
taken care that reason should not break forth into practical use and have
the presumption, with its weak insight, to think out for itself a plan for
happiness and for the means of attaining it. Nature would have taken
upon itself the choice not only of ends but also of means and, with wise
foresight, would have entrusted them both simply to instinct.
And, in fact, we find that the more a cultivated reason purposely
occupies itself with the enjoyment of life and with happiness, so much the
further does one get away from true satisfaction; and from this there arises
in many, and indeed in those who have experimented most with this use of
reason, if only they are candid enough to admit it, a certain degree of
misology, that is, hatred of reason; for, after calculating all the advantages
they draw - 1 do not say from the invention of all the arts of common
luxury, but even from the sciences (which seem to them to be, at bottom,
only a luxury of the understanding) - they find that they have in fact only
brought more trouble upon themselves instead of gaining in happiness; 4:396
and because of this they finally envy rather than despise the more common run of people, who are closer to the guidance of mere natural instinct
and do not allow their reason much influence on their behavior. And to
this extent we must admit that the judgment of those who greatly moderate, and even reduce below zero, eulogies extolling the advantages that
reason is supposed to procure for us with regard to the happiness and
satisfaction of life is by no means surly or ungrateful to the goodness of
the government of the world; we must admit, instead, that these judgments have as their covert basis the idea of another and far worthier
purpose of one's existence, to which therefore, and not to happiness,
reason is properly destined/ and to which, as supreme condition, the
private purpose of the human being must for the most part defer.
Since reason is not sufficiently competent to guide the will surely with
a

Begehrungsvermogen. For Kant's definition of this term see Critique of Practical Reason (5:8 n)
and The Metaphysics of Morals (6:211). Vermogen by itself is sometimes translated as "capacity"
or "ability."
* bestimmt. Except when it has this sense of "vocation," Bestimmung and its cognates are
translated in terms of "determination."

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:397

regard to its objects and the satisfaction of all our needs (which it to some
extent even multiplies) - an end to which an implanted natural instinct
would have led much more certainly; and since reason is nevertheless
given to us as a practical faculty, that is, as one that is to influence the mill;
then, where nature has everywhere else gone to work purposively in distributing its capacities/ the true vocation of reason must be to produce a
will that is good, not perhaps as a means to other purposes, but good in
itself for which reason was absolutely necessary. This will need not, because of this, be the sole and complete good, but it must still be the
highest good and the condition of every other, even of all demands for
happiness. In this case it is entirely consistent with the wisdom of nature if
we perceive that the cultivation of reason, which is requisite to the first
and unconditional purpose, limits in many ways - at least in this life - the
attainment of the second, namely happiness, which is always conditional;
indeed it may reduce it below zero without nature proceeding unpurposively in the matter, because reason, which cognizes its highest practical
vocation in the establishment of a good will, in attaining this purpose is
capable only of its own kind of satisfaction, namely from fulfilling an end
which in turn only reason determines, even if this should be combined
with many infringements upon the ends of inclination.
We have, then, to explicate** the concept of a will that is to be esteemed
in itself and that is good apart from any further purpose, as it already
dwells in natural sound understanding and needs not so much to be
taught as only to be clarified - this concept that always takes first place in
estimating the total worth of our actions and constitutes the condition of
all the rest. In order to do so, we shall set before ourselves the concept of
duty, which contains that of a good will though under certain subjective
limitations and hindrances, which, however, far from concealing it and
making it unrecognizable, rather bring it out by contrast and make it shine
forth all the more brightly.
I here pass over all actions that are already recognized as contrary to duty,
even though they may be useful for this or that purpose; for in their case the
question whether they might have been done from duty never arises, since
they even conflict with it. I also set aside actions that are really in conformity
with duty but to which human beings have no inclination immediately* and
c

Anlagen

d

entwickeln. In the context of organisms generally, and more specifically with reference to
man's talents and capacities, this is translated as "to develop." However, in the context of
analytic and synthetic propositions, see the Jasche Logik (9:111, Anmerkung 1), where it is
said that in an implicitly identical proposition (as distinguished from a tautology), a predicate
that lies unentwickelt (implicite) in the concept of the subject is made clear by means of
Entwicklung (explicatio).
e

unmittelbar. Kant occasionally uses direkt as a synonym; no temporal reference is intended.

10

FROM COMMON RATIONAL COGNITION TO PHILOSOPHY
which they still perform because they are impelled^to do so through another inclination. For in this case it is easy to distinguish whether an action
in conformity with duty is done from duty or from a self-seeking purpose. It
is much more difficult to note this distinction when an action conforms with
duty and the subject has, besides, an immediate inclination to it. For example, it certainly conforms with duty that a shopkeeper not overcharge an
inexperienced customer, and where there is a good deal of trade a prudent
merchant does not overcharge but keeps a fixed general price for everyone,
so that a child can buy from him as well as everyone else. People are thus
served honestly; but this is not nearly enough for us to believe that the
merchant acted in this way from duty and basic principles of honesty; his
advantage required it; it cannot be assumed here that he had, besides, an
immediate inclination toward his customers, so as from love, as it were, to
give no one preference over another in the matter of price. Thus the action
was done neither from duty nor from immediate inclination but merely for
purposes of self-interest.
On the other hand, to preserve one's life is a duty, and besides everyone has an immediate inclination to do so. But on this account the often
anxious care that most people take of it still has no inner worth and their
maxim has no moral content. They look after their lives in conformity with
duty but not from duty. On the other hand, if adversity and hopeless grief
have quite taken away the taste for life; if an unfortunate man, strong of
soul and more indignant about his fate than despondent or dejected,
wishes for death and yet preserves his life without loving it, not from
inclination or fear but from duty, then his maxim has moral content.
To be beneficent^ where one can is a duty, and besides there are many
souls so sympathetically attuned that, without any other motive of vanity or
self-interest they find an inner satisfaction in spreading joy around them
and can take delight in the satisfaction of others so far as it is their own
work. But I assert that in such a case an action of this kind, however it may
conform with duty and however amiable it may be, has nevertheless no
true moral worth but is on the same footing with other inclinations, for
example, the inclination to honor, which, if it fortunately lights upon what
is in fact in the common interest and in conformity with duty and hence
honorable, deserves praise and encouragement but not esteem; for the
maxim lacks moral content, namely that of doing such actions not from
inclination but from duty. Suppose, then, that the mind of this philanthropist were overclouded by his own grief, which extinguished all sympathy
with the fate of others, and that while he still had the means to benefit
f getrieben. Antrieb is translated as "impulse."
g
Wohltdtig sein. In view of Kant's distinction between Wohltun and Wohlwollen (6:393, 450
ff.), Wohltun and its cognates are translated in terms of "beneficence" and Wohlwollen in
terms of "benevolence."

11

4:398

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:399

others in distress their troubles did not move him because he had enough
to do with his own; and suppose that now, when no longer incited to it by
any inclination, he nevertheless tears himself out of this deadly insensibility and does the action without any inclination, simply from duty; then the
action first has its genuine moral worth. Still further: if nature had put
little sympathy in the heart of this or that man; if (in other respects an
honestA man) he is by temperament cold and indifferent to the sufferings
of others, perhaps because he himself is provided with the special gift of
patience and endurance toward his own sufferings and presupposes the
same in every other or even requires it; if nature had not properly fashioned such a man (who would in truth not be its worst product) for a
philanthropist, would he not still find within himself a source from which
to give himself a far higher worth than what a mere good-natured temperament might have? By all means! It is just then that the worth of character
comes out, which is moral and incomparably the highest, namely that he is
beneficent not from inclination but from duty.
To assure one's own happiness is a duty (at least indirectly); for, want
of satisfaction with one's condition, under pressure from many anxieties
and amid unsatisfied needs, could easily become a great temptation to
transgression of duty. But in addition, without looking to duty here, all
people have already, of themselves, the strongest and deepest inclination
to happiness because it is just in this idea that all inclinations unite in one
sum. However, the precept of happiness is often so constituted that it
greatly infringes upon some inclinations, and yet one can form no determinate and sure concept of the sum of satisfaction of all inclinations under
the name of happiness. Hence it is not to be wondered at that a single
inclination, determinate both as to what it promises and as to the time
within which it can be satisfied, can often outweigh a fluctuating idea, and
that a man - for example, one suffering from gout - can choose to enjoy
what he likes and put up with what he can since, according to his calculations, on this occasion at least he has not sacrificed the enjoyment of the
present moment to the perhaps groundless expectation of a happiness that
is supposed to lie in health. But even in this case, when the general'
inclination to happiness did not determine his will; when health, at least
for him, did not enter as so necessary into this calculation, there is still left
over here, as in all other cases, a law, namely to promote his happiness not
from inclination but from duty; and it is then that his conduct first has
properly moral worth.
It is undoubtedly in this way, again, that we are to understand the
* ehrlicher. I have translated this as "honest" because Kant gives the Latin honestas as a
parenthetical equivalent of such derivatives oiEhre as Ehrbarkeit. However, the context often
makes it clear that he is not thinking of "honesty" in the narrow sense.
' allgemeine

12

FROM COMMON RATIONAL COGNITION TO PHILOSOPHY
passages from scripture in which we are commanded to love our neighbor,
even our enemy. For, love as an inclination cannot be commanded, but
beneficence from duty - even though no inclination impels us to it and,
indeed, natural and unconquerable aversion opposes it - is practical and
not pathologicaP love, which lies in the will and not in the propensity of
feeling/ in principles of action and not in melting sympathy; and it alone
can be commanded.
The second proposition is this: an action from duty has its moral worth
not in the purpose to be attained by it but in the maxim in accordance with
which it is decided upon, and therefore does not depend upon the realization of the object of the action but merely upon the principle of volition in
accordance with which the action is done without regard for any object of
the faculty of desire. That the purposes we may have for our actions, and
their effects as ends and incentives of the will, can give actions no unconditional and moral worth is clear from what has gone before. In what, then,
can this worth lie, if it is not to be in the will in relation to the hoped for
effect of the action? It can lie nowhere else than in the principle of the will
without regard for the ends that can be brought about by such an action.
For, the will stands between its a priori principle, which is formal, and its a
posteriori incentive, which is material, as at a crossroads; and since it must
still be determined by something, it must be determined by the formal
principle of volition as such when an action is done from duty, where every
material principle has been withdrawn from it.
The third proposition, which is a consequence of the two preceding, I
would express as follows: duty is the necessity of an action from respectfor lam.

For an object as the effect of my proposed action I can indeed have
inclination but never respect, just because it is merely an effect and not an
activity of a will. In the same way I cannot have respect for inclination as
such, whether it is mine or that of another; I can at most in the first case
approve it and in the second sometimes even love it, that is, regard it as
favorable to my own advantage. Only what is connected with my will
merely as ground and never as effect, what does not serve my inclination
but outweighs it or at least excludes it altogether from calculations in
making a choice'-hence the mere law for itself-can be an object of
respect and so a command. Now, an action from duty is to put aside
entirely the influence of inclination and with it every object of the will;
hence there is left for the will nothing that could determine it except
J

pathologische, i.e., dependent upon sensibility
Empfindung. In the Critique of Judgment (5:206) Kant distinguishes an "objective sensation"
(e.g., green) from a "subjective sensation" (e.g., pleasure) and suggests that misunderstanding could be avoided if "feeling" (Gefiiht) were used for the latter. I have followed his
suggestion, while indicating the German word in a note.
l
beiderWahl

k

13

4:400

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
4:401

4:402

objectively the law and subjectively pure respect for this practical law, and so
the maxim* of complying with such a law even if it infringes upon all my
inclinations.
Thus the moral worth of an action does not lie in the effect expected
from it and so too does not lie in any principle of action that needs to
borrow its motive from this expected effect. For, all these effects (agreeableness of one's condition, indeed even promotion of others' happiness)
could have been also brought about by other causes, so that there would
have been no need, for this, of the will of a rational being, in which,
however, the highest and unconditional good alone can be found. Hence
nothing other than the representation of the law in itself, which can of course
occur only in a rational being, insofar as it and not the hoped-for effect is the
determining ground of the will, can constitute the preeminent good we
call moral, which is already present in the person himself who acts in
accordance with this representation and need not wait upon the effect of
his action. +
But what kind of law can that be, the representation of which must
determine the will, even without regard for the effect expected from it, in
order for the will to be called good absolutely and without limitation?
Since I have deprived the will of every impulse that could arise for it from
obeying some law, nothing is left but the conformity of actions as such
with universal law,w which alone is to serve the will as its principle, that is,

#
A maxim is the subjective principle of volition; the objective principle (i.e., that which would
also serve subjectively as the practical principle for all rational beings if reason had complete
control over the faculty of desire) is the practical law.
tit could be objected that I only seek refuge, behind the word respect, in an obscure feeling,
instead of distinctly resolving the question by means of a concept of reason. But though
respect is a feeling, it is not one received by means of influence; it is, instead, a feeling selfwrought by means of a rational concept and therefore specifically different from all feelings of
the first kind, which can be reduced to inclination or fear. What I cognize immediately as a
law for me I cognize with respect, which signifies merely consciousness of the subordination
of my will to a law without the mediation of other influences on my sense. Immediate
determination of the will by means of the law and consciousness of this is called respect, so
that this is regarded as the effect of the law on the subject, and not as the cause of the law.
Respect is properly the representation of a worth that infringes upon my self-love. Hence
there is something that is regarded as an object neither of inclination nor of fear, though it
has something analogous to both. The object of respect is therefore simply the law, and
indeed the law that we impose upon ourselves and yet as necessary in itself. As a law we are
subject to it without consulting self-love; as imposed upon us by ourselves it is nevertheless a
result of our will; and in the first respect it has an analogy with fear, in the second with
inclination. Any respect for a person is properly only respect for the law (of integrity and so
forth) of which he gives us an example. Because we also regard enlarging our talents as a
duty, we represent a person of talents also as, so to speak, an example of the law (to become
like him in this by practice), and this is what constitutes our respect. All so-called moral
interest consists simply in respect for the law.
m

die allgemeine Gesetzmdfiigkeit der Handlungen uberhaupt

14

FROM COMMON RATIONAL COGNITION TO PHILOSOPHY
/ ought never to act except in such a way that I could also will that my maxim

should become a universal law. Here mere conformity to law as such, without having as its basis some law determined for certain actions, is what
serves the will as its principle, and must so serve it, if duty is not to be
everywhere an empty delusion and a chimerical concept. Common human
reason also agrees completely with this in its practical appraisals and
always has this principle before its eyes. Let the question be, for example:
may I, when hard pressed, make a promise with the intention not to keep
it? Here I easily distinguish two significations the question can have:
whether it is prudent or whether it is in conformity with duty to make a
false promise. The first can undoubtedly often be the case. I see very well
that it is not enough to get out of a present difficulty by means of this
subterfuge but that I must reflect carefully whether this lie may later give
rise to much greater inconvenience for me than that from which I now
extricate myself; and since, with all my supposed cunning, the results
cannot be so easily foreseen but that once confidence in me is lost this
could be far more prejudicial to me than all the troubles" I now think to
avoid, I must reflect whether the matter might be handled more prudently
by proceeding on a general maxim and making it a habit to promise
nothing except with the intention of keeping it. But it is soon clear to me
that such a maxim will still be based only on results feared. To be truthful
from duty, however, is something entirely different from being truthful
from anxiety about detrimental results, since in the first case the concept
of the action in itself already contains a law for me while in the second I
must first look about elsewhere to see what effects on me might be
combined with it. For, if I deviate from the principle of duty this is quite
certainly evil; but if I am unfaithful to my maxim of prudence this can 4:403
sometimes be very advantageous to me, although it is certainly safer to
abide by it. However, to inform myself in the shortest and yet infallible
way about the answer to this problem, whether a lying promise is in
conformity with duty, I ask myself: would I indeed be content that my
maxim (to get myself out of difficulties by a false promise) should hold as a
universal law (for myself as well as for others)? and could I indeed say to
myself that every one may make a false promise when he finds himself in a
difficulty he can get out of in no other way? Then I soon become aware
that I could indeed will the lie, but by no means a universal law to lie; for
in accordance with such a law there would properly be no promises at all,
since it would be futile to avow my will with regard to my future actions to
others who would not believe this avowal or, if they rashly did so, would
pay me back in like coin; and thus my maxim, as soon as it were made a
universal law, would have to destroy itself.
I do not, therefore, need any penetrating acuteness to see what I have
" alles Ubel. Ubeln is translated as "troubles" or "ills." "Evil" is reserved for Bose.

15

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:404

to do in order that my volition be morally good. Inexperienced in the
course of the world, incapable of being prepared for whatever might come
to pass in it, I ask myself only: can you also will that your maxim become a
universal law? If not, then it is to be repudiated, and that not because of a
disadvantage to you or even to others forthcoming from it but because it
cannot fit as a principle into a possible giving of universal law,0 for which
lawgiving reason, however, forces*' from me immediate respect. Although
I do not yet seeq what this respect is based upon (this the philosopher may
investigate), I at least understand this much: that it is an estimation of a
worth that far outweighs any worth of what is recommended by inclination, and that the necessity of my action from pure respect for the practical
law is what constitutes duty, to which every other motive must give way
because it is the condition of a will good in itself, the worth of which
surpasses all else.
Thus, then, we have arrived, within the moral cognition of common
human reason, at its principle, which it admittedly does not think so
abstractly in a universal formr but which it actually has always before its
eyes and uses as the norm for its appraisals. Here it would be easy to show
how common human reason, with this compass in hand, knows very well
how to distinguish in every case that comes up what is good and what is
evil, what is in conformity with duty or contrary to duty, if, without in the
least teaching it anything new, we only, as did Socrates, make it attentive
to its own principle; and that there is, accordingly, no need of science and
philosophy to know what one has to do in order to be honest and good,
and even wise and virtuous. We might even have assumed in advance that
cognizance of what it is incumbent upon everyone to do, and so also to
know, would be the affair of every human being, even the most common.
0

allgemeine Gesetzgebung. This phrase, which recurs frequently throughout Kant's works in
practical philosophy, presents a number of difficulties. First, it is not always clear whether,
within the compound word Gesetzgebung, "universal" is intended to modify "law" or "giving."
If the context suggests the latter, I have used "universal lawgiving" and indicated the phrase
in a footnote. Second, Kant distinguishes between positive law, which is willkiirlich
("chosen" by the Gesetzgeber) and zufdllig ("contingent"), and natural law, which can be
known a priori. See The Metaphysics of Morals (6:224 and 227). Since "legislation" and
"legislator" suggest "making" laws or enacting positive laws, I have reserved these words for
the context of "public right," which is distinguished from "private right" by the existence of
legislative, executive, and judicial authorities.
p
abzwingt. In The Metaphysics of Morals, where the concept of Zrvang comes to the foreground
in the context of moral constraint, Kant sometimes gives Notigung as a parenthetical equivalent of Zwang. There Notigung is translated as "necessitation," Zwang as "constraint," and
(dufiere) Zwang as "external constraint" or "coercion." In more general contexts, however,
notigen and zwingen are sometimes translated as "forced" or "constrained" or "compelled."
q
Or "have insight into," einsehe. On the whole Kant seems to use einsehen informally. But see
below, 4:446, note q.
r
so in einer allgemeinen Form abgesondert. Absondern is sometimes translated as "to separate" or
"to set aside."

16

FROM COMMON RATIONAL COGNITION TO PHILOSOPHY
Yet we cannot consider without admiration how great an advantage the
practical faculty of appraising5 has over the theoretical in common human
understanding. In the latter, if common reason ventures to depart from
laws of experience and perceptions of the senses it falls into sheer
incomprehensibilities' and self-contradictions, at least into a chaos of
uncertainty, obscurity, and instability. But in practical matters, it is just
when common understanding excludes all sensible incentives from practical laws that its faculty of appraising first begins to show itself to advantage. It then becomes even subtle, whether in quibbling tricks with its own
conscience or with other claims regarding what is to be called right, or in
sincerely wanting to determine the worth of actions for its own instruction; and, what is most admirable, in the latter case it can even have as
good a hope of hitting the mark as any philosopher can promise himself;
indeed, it is almost more sure in this matter, because a philosopher,
though he cannot have any other principle than that of common understanding, can easily confuse his judgment by a mass of considerations
foreign and irrelevant to the matter and deflect it from the straight course.
Would it not therefore be more advisable in moral matters to leave the
judgment of common reason as it is and, at most, call in philosophy only to
present the system of morals all the more completely and apprehensibly"
and to present its rules in a form more convenient for use (still more for
disputation), but not to lead common human understanding, even in
practical matters,1 away from its fortunate simplicity and to put it, by
means of philosophy, on a new path of investigation and instruction?
There is something splendid about innocence; but what is bad about it,
in turn, is that it cannot protect itself very well and is easily seduced. 4-'4O5
Because of this, even wisdom - which otherwise consists more in conduct
than in knowledge - still needs science, not in order to learn from it but in
order to provide access and durability for its precepts. The human being
feels within himself a powerful counterweight to all the commands of
duty, which reason represents to him as so deserving of the highest
respect - the counterweight of his needs and inclinations, the entire satisfaction of which he sums up under the name happiness. Now reason
issues its precepts unremittingly,"' without thereby promising anything to
the inclinations, and so, as it were, with disregard and contempt for those
claims, which are so impetuous and besides so apparently equitable (and
refuse to be neutralized by any command). But from this there arises a
natural dialectic, that is, a propensity to rationalize against those strict laws
s

Beurteilungsvermogen
' Unbegreiflichkeiten
"fafilicher
v
in praktischer Absicht
m
gebietet die Vernunft. . . unnachlafilich . . . ihre Vorschriften

17

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
of duty and to cast doubt upon their validity, or at least upon their purity
and strictness, and, where possible, to make them better suited to our
wishes and inclinations, that is, to corrupt them at their basis and to
destroy all their dignity - something that even common practical reason
cannot, in the end, call good.
In this way common human reason is impelled, not by some need of
speculation (which never touches it as long as it is content to be mere
sound reason), but on practical grounds themselves, to go out of its sphere
and to take a step into the field of practical philosophy, in order to obtain
there information and distinct instruction regarding the source of its
principle and the correct determination of this principle in comparison
with maxims based on need and inclination, so that it may escape from its
predicament about claims from both sides and not run the risk of being
deprived of all genuine moral principles through the ambiguity* into
which it easily falls. So there develops unnoticed in common practical
reason as well, when it cultivates itself, a dialectic that constrains it to seek
help in philosophy, just as happens in its theoretical use; and the first will,
accordingly, find no more rest than the other except in a complete critique
of our reason.
* Zweideutigkeit

18

4:406

Section II
Transition from popular moral philosophy to
metaphysics of morals

If we have so far drawn our concept of duty^ from the common use of our
practical reason, it is by no means to be inferred from this that we have
treated it as a concept of experience. On the contrary, if we attend to
experience of people's conduct we meet frequent and, as we ourselves
admit, just complaints that no certain example can be cited of the disposition to act from pure duty; that, though much may be done in conformity
with what duty commands, still it is always doubtful whether it is really
done from duty and therefore has moral worth. Hence there have at all
times been philosophers who have absolutely denied the reality2 of this
disposition in human actions and ascribed everything to more or less
refined self-love. They did not, on account of this, call into doubt the
correctness of the concept of morality but rather spoke with deep regret of
the frailty and impurity of human nature, which is indeed noble enough to
take as its precept an idea so worthy of respect but at the same time is too
weak to follow it, and uses reason, which should serve it for giving law,
only to look after the interests of the inclinations, whether singly or, at
most, in their greatest compatibility with one another.
In fact, it is absolutely impossible by means of experience to make out 4:407
with complete certainty a single case in which the maxim of an action
otherwise in conformity with duty rested simply on moral grounds and on
the representation of one's duty. It is indeed sometimes the case that with
the keenest self-examination we find nothing besides the moral ground of
duty that could have been powerful enough to move us to this or that good
action and to so great a sacrifice; but from this it cannot be inferred with
certainty that no covert impulse of self-love, under the mere pretense of
that idea, was not actually the real determining cause of the will; for we like
to flatter ourselves by falsely attributing to ourselves a nobler motive,
whereas in fact we can never, even by the most strenuous self-examination,
get entirely behind our covert incentives, since, when moral worth is at
y

unsern bisherigen Begriffder Pflicht

z

Wirklichkeit and its cognates are translated indifferently in terms of "reality" or "actuality."

19

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:408

issue, what counts is not actions/ which one sees, but those inner principles
of actions that one does not see.
Moreover, one cannot better serve the wishes of those who ridicule all
morality as the mere phantom of a human imagination overstepping itself*
through self-conceit than by granting them that concepts of duty must be
drawn solely from experience (as, from indolence, people like to persuade
themselves is the case with all other concepts as well); for then one
prepares a sure triumph for them. From love of humankind I am willing to
admit that even most of our actions are in conformity with duty; but if we
look more closely at the intentions and aspirations in them we everywhere
come upon the dear self, which is always turning up; and it is on this that
their purpose is based, not on the strict command of duty, which would
often require self-denial. One need not be an enemy of virtue but only a
cool observer, who does not take the liveliest wish for the good straightaway as its reality, to become doubtful at certain moments (especially with
increasing years, when experience has made one's judgment partly more
shrewd and partly more acute in observation) whether any true virtue is to
be found in the world. And then nothing can protect' us against falling
away completely from our ideas of duty and can preserve in our soul a
well-grounded respect for its law other than the clear conviction that, even
if there never have been actions arising from such pure sources, what is at
issue here is not whether this or that happened; that, instead, reason by
itself and independently of all appearances commands what ought to
happen; that, accordingly, actions of which the world has perhaps so far
given no example, and whose very practicability^ might be very much
doubted by one who bases everything on experience, are still inflexibly
commanded by reason; and that, for example, pure sincerity in friendship
can be no less required of everyone even if up to now there may never
have been a sincere friend, because this duty - as duty in general - lies,
prior to all experience, in the idea of a reason determining the will by
means of a priori grounds.
If we add further that, unless we want to deny to the concept of
morality any truth and any relation to some possible object, we cannot
dispute that its law is so extensive in its import that it must hold not only
for human beings but for all rational beings as such, not merely under
contingent conditions and with exceptions but with absolute necessity, then
it is clear that no experience could give occasion to infer even the possibility of such apodictic laws. For, by what right could we bring into unlimited
respect, as a universal precept for every rational nature, what is perhaps
a
b
c
d

es nicht aufdie Handlungen
sich selbst iibersteigenden
bewahren
Tunlichkeit

ankommt

20

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
valid only under the contingent conditions of humanity? And how should
laws of the determination of our will be taken as laws of the determination
of the will of rational beings as such, and for ours only as rational beings,
if they were merely empirical and did not have their origin completely a
priori in pure but practical reason?
Nor could one give worse advice to morality than by wanting to derive
it from examples. For, every example of it represented to me must itself
first be appraised in accordance with principles of morality, as to whether
it is also worthy to serve as an original example, that is, as a model; it can
by no means authoritatively provide the concept of morality. Even the
Holy One of the Gospel must first be compared with our ideal of moral
perfection before he is cognized as such; even he says of himself: why do
you call me (whom you see) good? none is good (the archetype of the
good) but God only (whom you do not see)/ But whence have we the
concept of God as the highest good? Solely from the idea of moral perfec- 4-'4Oo,
tion that reason frames a priori and connects inseparably with the concept
of a free will. Imitation has no place at all in matters of morality, and
examples serve only for encouragement, that is, they put beyond doubt the
practicability of what the law commands and make intuitive-'" what the
practical rule expresses more generally, but they can never justify setting
aside their true original, which lies in reason, and guiding oneself by
examples.
If there is, then, no genuine supreme basic principle of morality that
does not have to rest only on pure reason independently of all experience,
I believe it unnecessary even to ask whether it is a good thing to set forth
in their generality^ (in abstracto) these concepts as they, along with the
principles belonging to them, are fixed a priori, if this cognition is to be
distinguished from the common and called philosophic. But in our day it
may well be necessary to ask this. For if votes were collected as to which is
to be preferred - pure rational cognition separated from anything empirical, hence metaphysics of morals, or popular practical philosophy - one
can guess at once on which side the preponderance would fall.
This descending to popular concepts is certainly very commendable,
provided the ascent to the principles of pure reason has first taken place and
has been carried through to complete satisfaction. That would mean that
the doctrine of morals isfirstgroundedon metaphysics and afterwards, when
it has been firmly established, is provided with access by means ofpopularity.
But it is quite absurd to want to comply with popularity in the first investigation, on which all correctness of basic principles depends. Not only can this
procedure never lay claim to the very rare merit of a true philosophicpopulare
Matthew 19:17
^ machen . . . anschaulich
g
im Allgemeinen

21

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:410

4:411

ityy since there is no art in being commonly understandable if one thereby
renounces any well-grounded insight; it also produces a disgusting hodgepodge of patchwork observations and half-rationalized principles, in which
shallow pates revel because it is something useful for everyday chitchat, but
the insightful, feeling confused and dissatisfied without being able to help
themselves, avert their eyes - although philosophers, who see quite well
through the deception, get little hearing when they call [moralists] away for
a time from this alleged popularity, so that they may be rightly popular only
after having acquired determinate insight.
One need only look at attempts at morality in that popular taste. One
will find now the special determinationh of human nature (but occasionally
the idea of a rational nature as such along with it), now perfection, now
happiness, here moral feeling, there fear of God, a bit of this and also a bit
of that in a marvellous mixture, without its occurring to them to ask
whether the principles of morality are to be sought at all in acquaintance
with human nature (which we can get only from experience) and, if this is
not the case - if these principles are to be found altogether a priori, free
from anything empirical, solely in pure rational concepts and nowhere
else even to the slightest extent - instead to adopt the plan1 of quite
separating this investigation as pure practical philosophy or (if one may
use a name so decried) as metaphysics of morals,* of bringing it all by
itself to its full completeness, and of putting off the public, which demands popularity, pending the outcome of this undertaking.
But such a completely isolated metaphysics of morals, mixed with no
anthropology, theology, physics, or hyperphysics and still less with occult
qualities (which could be called hypophysical), is not only an indispensable substratum of all theoretical and surely determined cognition of
duties; it is also a desideratum of utmost importance to the actual fulfillment of their precepts. For, the pure thought of duty and in general of the
moral law, mixed with no foreign addition of empirical inducements, has
by way of reason alone (which with this first becomes aware that it can of
itself also be practical) an influence on the human heart so much more
powerful than all other incentives,* which may be summoned from the
*One can, if one wants to, distinguish pure philosophy of morals (metaphysics) from applied
(namely to human nature) (just as pure mathematics is distinguished from applied, and pure
logic from applied). By using this name one is also reminded at once that moral principles
are not based on what is peculiar to human nature but must be fixed7 a priori by themselves,
while from such principles it must be possible to derive practical rules for every rational
nature, and accordingly for human nature as well.
tl have a letter from the late excellent Sulzer* in which he asks me what the cause might be
that the teachings of virtue, however much they contain that is convincing to reason, accomh

Bestimmung
* den Anschlag zu fassen
1
bestehend sein miissen

22

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
empirical field, that reason, in the consciousness of its dignity, despises
the latter and can gradually become their master; on the other hand a
mixed doctrine of morals, put together from incentives of feeling and
inclination and also of rational concepts, must make the mind waver
between motives that cannot be brought under any principle, that can lead
only contingently to what is good and can very often also lead to what is
evil.
From what has been said it is clear that all moral concepts have their
seat and origin completely a priori in reason, and indeed in the most
common reason just as in reason that is speculative in the highest degree;
that they cannot be abstracted from any empirical and therefore merely
contingent cognitions; that just in this purity of their origin lies their
dignity, so that they can serve us as supreme practical principles; that in
adding anything empirical to them one subtracts just that much from their
genuine influence and from the unlimited worth of actions; that it is not
only a requirement of the greatest necessity for theoretical purposes,
when it is a matter merely of speculation, but also of the greatest practical
importance to draw its concepts and laws from pure reason, to set them
forth pure and unmixed, and indeed to determine the extent of this entire
practical or pure rational cognition, that is, to determine the entire faculty
of pure practical reason; and in so doing, it is of the greatest practical
importance not to make its principles dependent upon the special nature 4:412
of human reason - as speculative philosophy permits and even at times
finds necessary - but instead, just because moral laws are to hold for
every rational being as such, to derive them from the universal concept of
a rational being as such, and in this way to set forth completely the whole
of morals, which needs anthropology for its application to human beings, at
first independently of this as pure philosophy, that is, as metaphysics (as
can well be done in this kind of quite separated cognitions);' [for we are]
well aware that, unless we are in possession of this, it would be - I will not
say futile to determine precisely for speculative appraisal the moral element of duty in all that conforms with duty, but - impossible to base
plish so little. By trying to prepare a complete answer I delayed too long. However, my
answer is simply that the teachers themselves have not brought their concepts to purity, but,
since they want to do too well by hunting everywhere for motives to moral goodness, in trying
to make their medicine really strong they spoil it. For the most ordinary observation shows
that if we represent, on the one hand, an action of integrity* done with steadfast soul, apart
from every view to advantage of any kind in this world or another and even under the greatest
temptations of need or allurement, it leaves far behind and eclipses any similar act that was
affected in the least by an extraneous incentive; it elevates the soul and awakens a wish to be
able to act in like manner oneself. Even children of moderate age feel this impression, and
one should never represent duties to them in any other way.
* Rechtschaffenheit

'The structure of this sentence, from the semicolon to "impossible to base morals," has been
slightly modified.

23

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
morals on their genuine principles even for common and practical use,
especially that of moral instruction, and thereby to bring about pure moral
dispositions and engraft them onto people's minds for the highest good in
the world.m
However, in order to advance by natural steps in this study - not
merely from common moral appraisal (which is here very worthy of respect) to philosophic, as has already been done, but - from a popular
philosophy, which goes no further than it can by groping with the help of
examples, to metaphysics (which no longer lets itself be held back by
anything empirical and, since it must measure out the whole sum of
rational cognition of this kind, goes if need be all the way to ideas, where
examples themselves fail us), we must follow and present distinctly the
practical faculty of reason, from its general rules of determination to the
point where the concept of duty arises from it.
Everything in nature works in accordance with laws. Only a rational
being has the capacity to act in accordance with the representation of laws,

4:413

that is, in accordance with principles, or has a will. Since reason is required for the derivation of actions from laws, the will is nothing other
than practical reason. If reason infallibly determines the will, the actions
of such a being that are cognized as objectively necessary are also subjectively necessary, that is, the will is a capacity to choose only that which
reason independently of inclination cognizes as practically necessary, that
is, as good. However, if reason solely by itself does not adequately determine the will; if the will is exposed" also to subjective conditions (certain
incentives) that are not always in accord with the objective ones; in a word,
if the will is not in /ft^f completely in conformity with reason (as is actually
the case with human beings), then actions that are cognized as objectively
necessary are subjectively contingent, and the determination of such a will
in conformity with objective laws is necessitation: that is to say, the relation
of objective laws to a will that is not thoroughly good is represented as the
determination of the will of a rational being through grounds of reason,
indeed, but grounds to which this will is not by its nature necessarily
obedient.
The representation of an objective principle, insofar as it is necessitating for a will, is called a command (of reason), and the formula of the
command is called an imperative.
All imperatives are expressed by an ought and indicate by this the
relation of an objective law of reason to a will that by its subjective
constitution is not necessarily determined by it (a necessitation). They say
that to do or to omit something would be good, but they say it to a will that
does not always do something just because it is represented to it that it
m
n

zutn hochsten Weltbesten
unterworfen

24

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
would be good to do that thing. Practical good, however, is that which
determines the will by means of representations of reason, hence not by
subjective causes but objectively, that is, from grounds that are valid for
every rational being as such. It is distinguished from the agreeable, as that
which influences the will only by means of feeling0 from merely subjective
causes, which hold only for the senses of this or that one, and not as a
principle of reason, which holds for everyone.#
A perfectly good will would, therefore, equally stand under objective 4:414
laws (of the good), but it could not on this account be represented as
necessitated to actions in conformity with law since of itself, by its subjective
constitution, it can be determined only through the representation of the
good. Hence no imperatives hold for the divine will and in general for a
holy will: the "ought" is out of place here, because volition^ is of itself
necessarily in accord with the law. Therefore imperatives are only formulae expressing the relation of objective laws of volition in general to the
subjective imperfection of the will of this or that rational being, for example, of the human will.
Now, all imperatives command either hypothetically or categorically. The
former represent the practical necessity of a possible action as a means to
achieving something else that one wills (or that it is at least possible for one
to will). The categorical imperative would be that which represented an
action as objectively necessary of itself, without reference to another end.
Since every practical law represents a possible action as good and thus
as necessary for a subject practically determinable by reason, all imperatives are formulae for the determination of action that is necessary in
accordance with the principle of a will which is good in some way. Now, if
the action would be good merely as a means to something else the imperative is hypothetical; if the action is represented as in itself good, hence as
necessary in a will in itself conforming to reason, as its principle, then it is
categorical
T h e dependence of the faculty of desire upon feelings is called inclination, and this
accordingly always indicates a need. The dependence of a contingendy determinable will on
principles of reason, however, is called an interest. This, accordingly, is present only in the
case of a dependent will, which is not of itself always in conformity with reason; in the case of
the divine will we cannot think of any interest. But even the human will can take an interest in
something without therefore acting from interest. The first signifies practical interest in the
action, the second, pathological interest in the object of the action. The former indicates only
dependence of the will upon principles of reason in themselves; the second, dependence upon
principles of reason for the sake of inclination, namely where reason supplies only the
practical rule as to how to remedy the need of inclination. In the first case the action interests
me; in the second, the object of the action (insofar as it is agreeable to me). We have seen in
the first section that in the case of an action from duty we must look not to interest in the
object but merely to that in the action itself and its principle in reason (the law).
0
p

Empfindung
das Sollen . . . das Wollen

25

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:415

4:416

The imperative thus says which action possible by me would be good,
and represents a practical rule in relation to a will that does not straightaway do an action just because it is good, partly because the subject does
not always know that it is good, partly because, even if he knows this, his
maxims could still be opposed to the objective principles of a practical
reason.
Hence the hypothetical imperative says only that the action is good for
some possible or actual purpose. In the first case it is a problematically
practical principle, in the second an assertorically practical principle.
The categorical imperative, which declares the action to be of itself objectively necessary without reference to some purpose, that is, even apart
from any other end, holds as an apodictically practical principle.
One can think of what is possible only through the powers of some
rational being as also a possible purpose of some will; accordingly, principles of action, insofar as this is represented as necessary for attaining
some possible purpose to be brought about by it, are in fact innumerable.
All sciences have some practical part, consisting of problems [which suppose] that some end is possible for us and of imperatives as to how it can
be attained. These can therefore be called, in general, imperatives of
skill. Whether the end is rational and good is not at all the question here,
but only what one must do in order to attain it. The precepts for a
physician to make his man healthy in a well-grounded way, and for a
poisoner to be sure of killing his, are of equal worth insofar as each serves
perfectly to bring about his purpose. Since in early youth it is not known
what ends might occur to us in the course of life, parents seek above all to
have their children learn a great many things and to provide for skill in the
use of means to all sorts of discretionary ends/ about none of which can
they determine whether it might in the future actually become their pupil's purpose, though it is always possible that he might at some time have
it; and this concern is so great that they commonly neglect to form and
correct their children's judgment about the worth of the things that they
might make their ends.
There is, however, one end that can be presupposed as actual in the
case of all rational beings (insofar as imperatives apply to them, namely as
dependent beings), and therefore one purpose that they not merely could
have but that we can safely presuppose they all actually do have by a
natural necessity, and that purpose is happiness. The hypothetical imperative that represents the practical necessity of an action as a means to the
promotion of happiness is assertoric. It may be set forth not merely as
necessary to some uncertain, merely possible purpose but to a purpose
that can be presupposed surely and a priori in the case of every human
being, because it belongs to his essence. Now, skill in the choice of means
q

beliebigen Zwecken

26

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
to one's own greatest well-being can be called prudence* in the narrowest
sense. Hence the imperative that refers to the choice of means to one's
own happiness, that is, the precept of prudence, is still always hypothetical;
the action is not commanded absolutely but only as a means to another
purpose.
Finally there is one imperative that, without being based upon and
having as its conditionr any other purpose to be attained by certain conduct, commands this conduct immediately. This imperative is categorical. It has to do not with the matter of the action and what is to result from
it, but with the form and the principle from which the action itself follows;
and the essentially good in the action' consists in the disposition, let the
result be what it may. This imperative may be called the imperative of
morality.
Volition in accordance with these three kinds of principles is also
clearly distinguished by dissimilarity1 in the necessitation of the will. In
order to make this dissimilarity evident, I think they would be most suitably named in their order by being said to be either rules of skill, or counsels
of prudence, or commands (lams) of morality. For, only law brings with it
the concept of an unconditional and objective and hence universally valid
necessity, and commands are laws that must be obeyed, that is, must be
followed even against inclination. Giving counsel does involve necessity,
which, however, can hold only under a subjective and contingent condition, whether this or that man counts this or that in his happiness; the
categorical imperative, on the contrary, is limited by no condition and, as
absolutely although practically necessary, can be called quite strictly a
command. The first imperative could also be called technical (belonging to
art), the second pragmatic* (belonging to welfare), the third moral (belong- 4:417
ing to free conduct as such, that is, to morals).
Now the question arises: how are all these imperatives possible? This
question does not inquire how the performance of the action that the
*The word "prudence" is taken in two senses: in the one it may bear the name of "knowledge of the world, "s in the other that of "private prudence." The first is a human being's skill
in influencing others so as to use them for his own purposes. The second is the insight to
unite all these purposes to his own enduring advantage. The latter is properly that to which
the worth even of the former is reduced, and if someone is prudent in the first sense but not
in the second, we might better say of him that he is clever and cunning but, on the whole,
nevertheless imprudent.
tit seems to me that the proper meaning of the word pragmatic can be most accurately
determined in this way. For sanctions are called "pragmatic" that do not flow strictly from the
right of states as necessary laws but from provision for the general welfare. A history is
composed pragmatically when it makes us prudent, that is, instructs the world how it can look
after its advantage better than, or at least as well as, the world of earlier times.
r

als Bedingung zum Grunde zu legen
das Wesentlich-Gute derselben
' Ungleichheit

s

27

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:418

imperative commands can be thought, but only how the necessitation of
the will, which the imperative expresses in the problem, can be thought.
How an imperative of skill is possible requires no special discussion.
Whoever wills the end also wills (insofar as reason has decisive influence
on his actions) the indispensably necessary means to it that are within his
power. This proposition is, as regards the volition, analytic; for in the
volition of an object as my effect, my causality as acting cause, that is, the
use of means, is already thought, and the imperative extracts the concept
of actions necessary to this end merely from the concept of a volition of
this end (synthetic propositions no doubt belong to determining the
means themselves to a purpose intended, but they do not have to do with
the ground for actualizing" the act of will but for actualizing the object).
That in order to divide a line into two equal parts on a sure principle I
must make two intersecting arcs from its ends, mathematics admittedly
teaches only by synthetic propositions; but when I know that only by such
an action can the proposed effect take place, then it is an analytic proposition that if I fully1" will the effect I also will the action requisite to it; for, it
is one and the same thing to represent something as an effect possible by
me in a certain way and to represent myself as acting in this way with
respect to it.
If only it were as easy to give a determinate concept of happiness,
imperatives of prudence would agree entirely with those of skill and would
be just as87 analytic. For it could be said, here just as there: who wills the
end also wills (necessarily in conformity with reason) the sole means to it
that are within his control. But it is a misfortune that the concept of
happiness is such an indeterminate concept that, although every human
being wishes to attain this, he can still never say determinately and consistently with himself what he really wishes and wills. The cause of this is
that all the elements that belong to the concept of happiness are without
exception empirical, that is, they must be borrowed from experience, and
that nevertheless for the idea of happiness there is required an absolute
whole, a maximum of well-being in my present condition and in every
future condition. Now, it is impossible for the most insightful and at the
same time most powerful but still finite being to frame for himself a
determinate concept of what he really wills here. If he wills riches, how
much anxiety, envy and intrigue might he not bring upon himself in this
way! If he wills a great deal of cognition and insight, that might become
only an eye all the more acute to show him, as all the more dreadful, ills
that are now concealed from him and that cannot be avoided, or to burden
" wirklich zu machen
0
vollstdndig
w
eben sorvohl

28

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
his desires/ which already give him enough to do, with still more needs. If
he wills a long life, who will guarantee him that it would not be a long
misery? If he at least wills health, how often has not bodily discomfort kept
someone from excesses into which unlimited health would have let him
fall, and so forth. In short, he is not capable of any principle by which to
determine with complete certainty what would make him truly happy,
because for this omniscience would be required. One cannot therefore act
on determinate principles for the sake of being happy, but only on empirical counsels, for example, of a regimen/ frugality, courtesy, reserve and so
forth, which experience teaches are most conducive to well-being on the
average. From this it follows that imperatives of prudence cannot, to speak
precisely, command at all, that is, present actions objectively as practically
necessary; that they are to be taken as counsels (consilia) rather than as
commands (praecepta) of reason; that the problem of determining surely
and universally which action would promote the happiness of a rational
being is completely insoluble, so that there can be no imperative with
respect to it that would, in the strict sense, command him to do what
would make him happy; for happiness is not an ideal of reason but of
imagination, resting merely upon empirical grounds, which it is futile to
expect should determine an action by which the totality of a series of 4:419
results in fact infinite would be attained. This imperative of prudence
would, nevertheless, be an analytic practical proposition if it is supposed
that the means to happiness can be assigned with certainty; for it is
distinguished from the imperative of skill only in this: that in the case of
the latter the end is merely possible, whereas in the former it is given; but
since both merely command the means to what it is presupposed one wills
as an end, the imperative that commands volition of the means for him
who wills the end is in both cases analytic. Hence there is also no difficulty
with respect to the possibility of such an imperative.
On the other hand, the question of how the imperative of morality is
possible is undoubtedly the only one needing a solution, since it is in no
way hypothetical and the objectively represented necessity can therefore
not be based on any presupposition, as in the case of hypothetical imperatives. Only we must never leave out of account, here, that it cannot be
made out by means ofany example, and so empirically, whether there is any
such imperative at all, but it is rather to be feared that all imperatives
which seem to be categorical may yet in some hidden way be hypothetical.
For example, when it is said "you ought not to promise anything deceitfully," and one assumes that the necessity of this omission is not giving
x

Begierden. According to The Metaphysics of Morals (6:212), Begierde must always be preceded
by a feeling of pleasure.
y
Didt

29

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:420

counsel for avoiding some other ill - in which case what is said would be
"you ought not to make a lying promise lest if it comes to light you destroy
your credit" — but that an action of this kind must be regarded as in itself
evil and that the imperative of prohibition is therefore categorical: one still
cannot show with certainty in any example that the will is here determined
merely through the law, without another incentive, although it seems to be
so; for it is always possible that covert fear of disgrace, perhaps also
obscure apprehension of other dangers, may have had an influence on the
will. Who can prove by experience the nonexistence of a cause when all
that experience teaches is that we do not perceive it? In such a case,
however, the so-called moral imperative, which as such appears to be
categorical and unconditional, would in fact be only a pragmatic precept
that makes us attentive to our advantage and merely teaches us to take this
into consideration.
We shall thus have to investigate entirely a priori the possibility of a
categorical imperative, since we do not here have the advantage of its
reality being given in experience, so that the possibility would be necessary not to establish it but merely to explain it.2 In the meantime, however, we can see this much: that the categorical imperative alone has the
tenor oP a practical law; all the others can indeed be called principles of
the will but not laws, since what it is necessary to do merely for achieving a discretionary purpose can be regarded as in itself contingent and
we can always be released from the precept if we give up the purpose;
on the contrary, the unconditional command leaves the will no discretion* with respect to the opposite, so that it alone brings with it that
necessity which we require of a law.
Second, in the case of this categorical imperative or law of morality the
ground of the difficulty (of insight into its possibility) is also very great. It
is an a priori synthetic practical proposition;* and since it is so difficult to
see the possibility of this kind of proposition in theoretical cognition, it
can be readily gathered that the difficulty will be no less in practical
cognition.
In this task we want first to inquire whether the mere concept of a
categorical imperative may not also provide its formula containing the
*I connect the deed with the will, without a presupposed condition from any inclination, a
priori and hence necessarily (though only objectively, i.e., under the idea of a reason having
complete control over all subjective motives)/ This is, therefore, a practical proposition that
does not derive the volition of an action analytically from another volition already presupposed (for we have no such perfect will), but connects it immediately with the concept of the
will of a rational being as something that is not contained in it.
z
a
b
c

und also die Moglichkeit nicht zur Festsetzung, sondern bloss zur Erkldrung notig ware
als . . . laute
dem Willen kein Belieben . . . frei Idfit
Bewegursachen

30

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
proposition which alone can be a categorical imperative. For, how such an
absolute command is possible, even if we know its tenor, will still require
special and difficult toil, which, however, we postpone to the last section.
When I think of a hypothetical imperative in general I do not know
beforehand what it will contain; I do not know this until I am given the
condition. But when I think of a categorical imperative I know at once what
it contains. For, since the imperative contains, beyond the law, only the
necessity that the maxim* be in conformity with this law, while the law 4:421
contains no condition to which it would be limited, nothing is left with
which the maxim of action is to conform but the universality of a law as
such; and this conformity alone is what the imperative properly represents
as necessary.
There is, therefore, only a single categorical imperative and it is this:
act only in accordance with that maxim through which you can at the same time
will that it become a universal law.

Now, if all imperatives of duty can be derived from this single imperative as from their principle, then, even though we leave it undecided
whether what is called duty is not as such an empty concept, we shall at
least be able to show what we think by it and what the concept wants to
say.
Since the universality of law in accordance with which effects take
place constitutes what is properly called nature in the most general sense
(as regards its form) - that is, the existence of things insofar as it is
determined in accordance with universal laws - the universal imperative
of duty can also go as follows: act as if the maxim of your action were to become

by your will a universal law of nature.
We shall now enumerate a few duties in accordance with the usual
division of them into duties to ourselves and to other human beings and
into perfect and imperfect duties.*
1) Someone feels sick of life because of a series of troubles that has
grown to the point of despair, but is still so far in possession of his reason
that he can ask himself whether it would not be contrary to his duty to

*A maxim is the subjective principle of acting, and must be distinguished from the objective
principle, namely the practical law. The former contains the practical rule determined by
reason conformably with the conditions of the subject (often his ignorance or also his
inclinations), and is therefore the principle in accordance with which the subject acts; but the
law is the objective principle valid for every rational being, and the principle in accordance
with which he ought to act, i.e., an imperative.
+It must be noted here that I reserve the division of duties entirely for a future Metaphysics of
Morals, so that the division here stands only as one adopted at my discretion (for the sake of
arranging my examples). For the rest, I understand here by a perfect duty one that admits no
exception in favor of inclination, and then I have not merely external but also internal perfect
duties; although this is contrary to the use of the word adopted in the schools, I do not intend
to justify it here, since for my purpose it makes no difference whether or not it is granted me.

31

4:422

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:423

himself to take his own life. Now he inquires whether the maxim of his
action could indeed become a universal law of nature. His maxim, however, is: from self-love I make it my principle to shorten my life when its
longer duration threatens more troubles than it promises agreeableness.
The only further question is whether this principle of self-love could
become a universal law of nature. It is then seen at once that a nature
whose law it would be to destroy life itself by means of the same feeling
whose destination^ is to impel toward the furtherance of life would contradict itself and would therefore not subsist* as nature; thus that maxim
could not possibly be a law of nature and, accordingly, altogether opposes
the supreme principle of all duty.
2) Another finds himself urged by need to borrow money. He well
knows that he will not be able to repay it but sees also that nothing will be
lent him unless he promises firmly to repay it within a determinate time.
He would like to make such a promise, but he still has enough conscience
to ask himself: is it not forbidden and contrary to duty to help oneself out
of need in such a way? Supposing that he still decided to do so, his maxim
of action would go as follows: when I believe myself to be in need of
money I shall borrow money and promise to repay it, even though I know
that this will never happen. Now this principle of self-love or personal
advantage is perhaps quite consistent with my whole future welfare, but
the question now is whether it is right. I therefore turn the demand of
self-love into a universal law and put the question as follows: how would it
be if my maxim became a universal law? I then see at once that it could
never hold as a universal law of nature and be consistent with itself, but
must necessarily contradict itself. For, the universality of a law that everyone, when he believes himself to be in need, could promise whatever he
pleases with the intention of not keeping it would make the promise and
the end one might have in it itself impossible, since no one would believe
what was promised him but would laugh at all such expressions as vain
pretenses.
3) A third finds in himself a talent that by means of some cultivation
could make him a human being useful for all sorts of purposes. However,
he finds himself in comfortable circumstances and prefers to give himself
up to pleasure than to trouble himself with enlarging and improving his
fortunate natural predispositions/ But he still asks himself whether his
maxim of neglecting his natural gifts, besides being consistent with his
propensity to amusement, is also consistent with what one calls duty. He
now sees that a nature could indeed always subsist with such a universal
law, although (as with the South Sea Islanders) the human being should
d

Bestimmung
bestehen
f Naturanlagen
e

32

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
let his talents rust and be concerned with devoting his life merely to
idleness, amusement, procreation - in a word, to enjoyment; only he cannot possibly will that this become a universal law or be put in us as such
by means of natural instinct. For, as a rational being he necessarily wills
that all the capacities in him be developed, since they serve him and are
given to him for all sorts of possible purposes.
Yet a fourth, for whom things are going well while he sees that others
(whom he could very well help) have to contend with great hardships,
thinks: what is it to me? let each be as happy as heaven wills or as he can
make himself; I shall take nothing from him nor even envy him; only I do
not care to contribute anything to his welfare or to his assistance in need!
Now, if such a way of thinking were to become a universal law the human
race could admittedly very well subsist, no doubt even better than when
everyone prates about sympathy and benevolence and even exerts himself
to practice them occasionally, but on the other hand also cheats where he
can, sells the right of human beings or otherwise infringes upon it. But
although it is possible that a universal law of nature could very well subsist
in accordance with such a maxim, it is still impossible to will that such a
principle hold everywhere as a law of nature. For, a will that decided this
would conflict with itself, since many cases could occur in which one
would need the love and sympathy^ of others and in which, by such a law
of nature arisen from his own will, he would rob himself of all hope of the
assistance he wishes for himself.
These are a few of the many actual duties, or at least of what we take to
be such, whose derivation^ from the one principle cited above is clear. We 4:424
must be able to will that a maxim of our action become a universal law: this
is the canon of moral appraisal of action in general. Some actions are so
constituted that their maxim cannot even be thought without contradiction
as a universal law of nature, far less could one will that it should become
such. In the case of others that inner impossibility is indeed not to be
found, but it is still impossible to will that their maxim be raised to the
universality of a law of nature because such a will would contradict itself.
It is easy to see that the first is opposed to strict or narrower (unremitting)1
duty, the second only to wide (meritorious) duty; and so all duties, as far as
the kind of obligation (not the object of their action) is concerned, have by
these examples been set out completely in their dependence upon the one
principle.
If we now attend to ourselves in any transgression of a duty, we find
that we do not really will that our maxim should become a universal law,
since that is impossible for us, but that the opposite of our maxim should
g

h

Teilnehmung

readingAbleitung instead ofAbteilung, "classification"

' unnachlafilich

33

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
instead remain a universal law, only we take the liberty of making an
exception to it for ourselves (or just for this once) to the advantage of our
inclination. Consequently, if we weighed all cases from one and the same
point of view, namely that of reason, we would find a contradiction in our
own will, namely that a certain principle be objectively necessary as a
universal law and yet subjectively not hold universally but allow exceptions. Since, however, we at one time regard our action from the point of
view of a will wholly conformed with reason but then regard the very same
action from the point of view of a will affected by inclination, there is
really no contradiction here but instead a resistance^ of inclination to the
precept of reason (antagonismus), through which the universality of the
principle (universalitas) is changed into mere generality (generalitas) and
the practical rational principle is to meet the maxim halfway. Now, even
though this cannot be justified in our own impartially rendered judgment,
it still shows that we really acknowledge the validity of the categorical
imperative and permit ourselves (with all respect for it) only a few exceptions that, as it seems to us, are inconsiderable and wrung from us.
We have therefore shown at least this much: that if duty is a concept
that is to contain significance and real lawgiving for our actions it can be
expressed only in categorical imperatives and by no means in hypothetical
ones; we have also - and this is already a great deal - set forth distinctly
and as determined for every use the content of the categorical imperative,
which must contain the principle of all duty (if there is such a thing at all).
But we have not yet advanced so far as to prove a priori that there really is
such an imperative, that there is a practical law, which commands absolutely of itself and without any incentives, and that the observance of this
law is duty.

4:425

For the purpose of achieving this it is of the utmost importance to take
warning that we must not let ourselves think of wanting to derive the
reality of this principle from the special property of human nature. For, duty
is to be practical unconditional necessity of action and it must therefore
hold for all rational beings (to which alone an imperative can apply at all)
and only because ofthis be also a law for all human wills. On the other hand,
what is derived from the special natural constitution of humanity - what is
derived from certain feelings and propensities and even, if possible, from
a special tendency that would be peculiar to human reason and would not
have to hold necessarily for the will of every rational being - that can
indeed yield a maxim for us but not a law; it can yield a subjective
principle on which we might act if we have the propensity and inclination/
but not an objective principle on which we would be directed to act even
though every propensity, inclination, and natural tendency of ours were
j
k

Widerstand
nach welchem wir handeln zu diirfen Hang und Neigung haben

34

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
against it - so much so that the sublimity and inner dignity of the command in a duty is all the more manifest the fewer are the subjective causes
in favor of it and the more there are against it, without thereby weakening
in the least the necessitation by the law or taking anything away from its
validity.
Here, then, we see philosophy put in fact in a precarious position,
which is to be firm even though there is nothing in heaven or on earth
from which it depends or on which it is based. Here philosophy is to
manifest its purity as sustainer of its own laws, not as herald of laws that an
implanted sense or who knows what tutelary nature whispers to it, all of
which - though they may always be better than nothing at all - can still
never yield basic principles that reason dictates and that must have their 4:426
source entirely and completely a priori and, at the same time, must have
their commanding authority from this: that they expect nothing from the
inclination of human beings but everything from the supremacy of the law
and the respect owed it or, failing this, condemn the human being to
contempt for himself and inner abhorrence.
Hence everything empirical, as an addition/ to the principle of morality,
is not only quite inept for this; it is also highly prejudicial to the purity of
morals, where the proper worth of an absolutely good will - a worth raised
above all price - consists just in the principle of action being free from all
influences of contingent grounds, which only experience can furnish. One
cannot give too many or too frequent warnings against this laxity, or even
mean cast of mind, which seeks its principle among empirical motives and
laws; for, human reason in its weariness gladly rests on this pillow and in a
dream of sweet illusions (which allow it to embrace a cloud instead of
Juno) it substitutes for morality a bastard patched up from limbs of quite
diverse ancestry, which looks like whatever one wants to see in it but not
like virtue for him who has once seen virtue in her true form.#
The question is therefore this: is it a necessary law^r all rational beings
always to appraise their actions in accordance with such maxims as they
themselves could will to serve as universal laws? If there is such a law, then
it must already be connected (completely a priori) with the concept of the
will of a rational being as such. But in order to discover this connection we
must, however reluctantly, step forth, namely into metaphysics, although
into a domain"2 of it that is distinct from speculative philosophy, namely 4:427

*To behold virtue in her proper form is nothing other than to present morality stripped of
any admixture of the sensible and of any spurious adornments of reward or self-love. By
means of the least effort of his reason everyone can easily become aware of how much virtue
then eclipses everything else that appears charming to the inclinations, provided his reason is
not altogether spoiled for abstraction.
1
Zutat, literally "an ornament"
m

Gebiet

35

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:428

into metaphysics of morals. In a practical philosophy, where we have to do
not with assuming" grounds for what happens but rather laws for what
ought to happen even if it never does, that is, objective practical laws, we do
not need to undertake an investigation into the grounds on account of
which something pleases or displeases; how the satisfaction of mere sensation differs from taste, and whether the latter differs from a general
satisfaction of reason; upon what the feeling of pleasure or displeasure
rests, and how from it desires and inclinations arise, and from them, with
the cooperation of reason, maxims; for all that belongs to an empirical
doctrine of the soul,0 which would constitute the second part of the doctrine of nature when this is regarded as philosophy of nature insofar as it is
based on empirical laws. Here, however, it is a question of objective practical laws and hence of the relation of a will to itself insofar as it determines
itself only by reason; for then everything that has reference to the empirical falls away of itself, since if reason entirely by itself determines conduct
(and the possibility of this is just what we want now to investigate), it must
necessarily do so a priori.
The will is thought as a capacity to determine itself to acting in conformity with the representation of certain laws. And such a capacity can be
found only in rational beings. Now, what serves the will as the objective
ground of its self-determination is an end, and this, if it is given by reason
alone, must hold equally for all rational beings. What, on the other hand,
contains merely the ground of the possibility of an action the effect of
which is an end is called a means. The subjective ground of desire is an
incentive', the objective ground of volition is a motive; hence the distinction
between subjective ends, which rest on incentives, and objective ends,
which depend on motives, which hold for every rational being. Practical
principles are formal if they abstract from all subjective ends, whereas they
are material if they have put these, and consequently certain incentives, at
their basis. The ends that a rational being proposes at his discretion as
effects of his actions (material ends) are all only relative; for only their mere
relation to a specially constituted^ faculty of desire on the part of the
subject gives them their worth, which can therefore furnish no universal
principles, no principles valid and necessary for all rational beings and
also for every volition, that is, no practical laws. Hence all these relative
ends are only the ground of hypothetical imperatives.
But suppose there were something the existence of which in itself'has an
absolute worth, something which as an end in itself could be a ground of
determinate laws; then in it, and in it alone, would lie the ground of a
possible categorical imperative, that is, of a practical law.
" anzunehmen
Seelenlehre
p
geartetes
0

36

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
Now I say that the human being and in general every rational being
exists as an end in itself, not merely as a means to be used by this or that will
at its discretion; instead he must in all his actions, whether directed to
himself or also to other rational beings, always be regarded at the same time
as an end. All objects of the inclinations have only a conditional worth; for,
if there were not inclinations and the needs based on them, their object
would be without worth. But the inclinations themselves, as sources of
needs, are so far from having an absolute worth, so as to make one wish to
have them/ that it must instead be the universal wish of every rational
being to be altogether free from them. Thus the worth of any object to be
acquired by our action is always conditional. Beings the existence of which
rests not on our will but on nature, if they are beings without reason, still
have only a relative worth, as means, and are therefore called things/
whereas rational beings are called persons because their nature already
marks them out as an end in itself, that is, as something that may not be
used merely as a means, and hence so far limits all choice (and is an object
of respect). These, therefore, are not merely subjective ends, the existence of which as an effect of our action has a worth for us, but rather
objective ends, that is, beings* the existence of which is in itself an end, and
indeed one such that no other end, to which they would serve merely as
means, can be put in its place, since without it nothing of absolute worth
would be found anywhere; but if all worth were conditional and therefore
contingent, then no supreme practical principle for reason could be found
anywhere.
If, then, there is to be a supreme practical principle and, with respect to
the human will, a categorical imperative, it must be one such that, from
the representation of what is necessarily an end for everyone because it is
an end in itself, it constitutes an objective principle of the will and thus can
serve as a universal practical law/ The ground of this principle is: rational
nature exists as an end in itself The human being necessarily represents his 4.429
own existence in this way; so far it is thus a subjective principle of human
actions. But every other rational being also represents his existence in this
way consequent on" just the same rational ground that also holds for me;*
thus it is at the same time an objective principle from which, as a supreme
*Here I put forward this proposition as a postulate. The grounds for it will be found in the
last Section.
q
r

um sie selbst zu wiinschen
Sachen

s

Dinge. Although both Sache and Ding would usually be translated as "thing," Sache has the
technical sense of something usable that does not have free choice, i.e., "Sache ist ein Din^
to which nothing can be imputed (The Metaphysics of Morals 6:223).
' ausmacht, mithin zum allgemeinen praktischen Gesetz dienen kann. It is not clear, grammatically,
whether the subject of "can serve" is "end in itself" or "objective principle."
" zufolge

37

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
practical ground, it must be possible to derive all laws of the will. The
practical imperative will therefore be the following: So act that you use
humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, always at
the same time as an end, never merely as a means. We shall see whether this

4:430

can be carried out.
To keep to the preceding examples:
First, as regards the concept of necessary duty to oneself, someone who
has suicide* in mind will ask himself whether his action can be consistent
with the idea of humanity as an end in itself. If he destroys himself in order to
escape from a trying condition he makes use of a person merely as a means to
maintain a tolerable condition up to the end of life. A human being, however, is not a thing and hence not something that can be used merely as a
means, but must in all his actions always be regarded as an end in itself. I
cannot, therefore, dispose of a human being in my own person by maiming,
damaging or killing him. (I must here pass over a closer determination of
this principle that would prevent any misinterpretation, e.g., as to having
limbs amputated in order to preserve myself, or putting my life in danger in
order to preserve my life, and so forth; that belongs to morals proper.)
Second, as regards necessary duty to others or duty owed* them, he who
has it in mind to make a false promise to others sees at once that he wants to
make use of another human being merely as a means, without the other at the
same time containing in himself the end. For, he whom I want to use for my
purposes by such a promise cannot possibly agree to my way of behaving
toward him, and so himself contain the end of this action. This conflict with
the principle of other human beings is seen more distinctly if examples of
assaults on the freedom and property of others are brought forward. For
then it is obvious that he who transgresses the rights of human beings
intends to make use of the person of others merely as means, without taking
into consideration that, as rational beings, they are always to be valued at the
same time as ends, that is, only as beings who must also be able to contain in
themselves the end of the very same action.*
Third, with respect to contingent (meritorious) duty to oneself, it is not
enough that the action does not conflict with humanity in our person as an
*Let it not be thought that the trite quod tibi non vis fieri etc/ can serve as norm or principle
here. For it is, though with various limitations, only derived from the latter. It can be no
universal law because it contains the ground neither of duties to oneself nor of duties of love
to others (for many a man would gladly agree that others should not benefit him if only he
might be excused from showing them beneficence), and finally it does not contain the
ground of duties owed to others; for a criminal would argue on this ground against the judge
punishing him, and so forth.
v
Selbstmorde, perhaps "murdering himself." In The Metaphysics of Morals, Selbstmord
(homicidium dolosum) is carefully distinguished from Selbstentleibung (suicidium) (6:421-4).
" schuldige
x
what you do not want others to do to you, etc. [i.e., don't do the same to them]

38

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
end in itself; it must also harmonize with it. Now there are in humanity
predispositionsJ to greater perfection, which belong to the end of nature
with respect to humanity in our subject; to neglect these might admittedly
be consistent with the preservation of humanity as an end in itself but not
with the furtherance of this end.
Fourth, concerning meritorious duty to others, the natural end that all
human beings have is their own happiness. Now, humanity might indeed
subsist if no one contributed to the happiness of others but yet did not
intentionally withdraw anything from it; but there is still only a negative
and not a positive agreement with humanity as an end in itself unless
everyone also tries, as far as he can, to further the ends of others. For, the
ends of a subject who is an end in itself must as far as possible be also my
ends, if that representation is to have its full effect in me.
This principle of humanity, and in general of every rational nature, as an
end in itself (which is the supreme limiting condition of the freedom of action 4:431
of every human being) is not borrowed from experience; first because of its
universality, since it applies to all rational beings as such and no experience
is sufficient to determine anything about them; second because in it humanity is represented not as an end of human beings (subjectively), that is, not
as an object that we of ourselves actually make our end, but as an objective
end that, whatever ends we may have, ought as law to constitute the
supreme limiting condition of all subjective ends, so that the principle must
arise from pure reason. That is to say, the ground of all practical lawgiving
lies (in accordance with the first principle) objectively in the rule and the form
of universality which makes it fit to be a law (possibly2 a law of nature);
subjectively, however, it lies in the end; but the subject of all ends is every
rational being as an end in itself (in accordance with the second principle);
from this there follows now the third practical principle of the will, as
supreme condition of its harmony with universal practical reason, the idea
of the mill of every rational being as a mill giving universal lam.

In accordance with this principle all maxims are repudiated that are
inconsistent with the will's own giving of universal law. Hence the will is
not merely subject to the law but subject to it in such a way that it must be
viewed as also giving the law to itselP and just because of this as first
subject to the law (of which it can regard itself as the author)/
Imperatives as they were represented above - namely in terms of the
conformity of actions with universal law similar to a natural order or of the
universal supremacy as ends0 of rational beings in themselves - did exclude
y
z
a
b
c

Anlagen
alien/alls
O r "as itself lawgiving," ah selbstgesetzgebend
Urheber
Zweckvorzuges

39

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:432

4:433

from their commanding authority any admixture of interest as incentive,
just by their having been represented as categorical; but they were only
assumed*1 to be categorical because we had to make such an assumption if
we wanted to explain the concept of duty. But that there are practical
propositions which command categorically could not itself be proved/ any
more than it could be proved either here or anywhere else in this section;
one thing, however, could still have been done: namely, to indicate in the
imperative itself the renunciation of all interest, in volition from duty, by
means of some determination the imperative contains, as the specific
mark distinguishing^^categorical from hypothetical imperatives; and this is
done in the present third formula of the principle, namely the idea of the
will of every rational being as a will giving universal law.
For when we think of a will of this kind, then although a will that stands
under law may be bound to this law by means of some interest, a will that is
itself the supreme lawgiver cannot possibly, as such, depend upon some
interest; for, a will that is dependent in this way would itself need yet
another law that would limit the interest of its self-love to the condition of
a validity for universal law.
Thus the principle of every human will as a will giving universal law
through all its maxims* provided it is otherwise correct, would be very well
suited to be the categorical imperative by this: that just because of the idea
of giving universal law it is based on no interest and therefore, among all
possible imperatives, can alone be unconditional; or still better, by converting the proposition, if there is a categorical imperative (i.e., a law for every
will of a rational being) it can only command that everything be done from
the maxim of one's will as a will that could at the same time have as its
object itself as giving universal law; for only then is the practical principle,
and the imperative that the will obeys, unconditional, since it can have no
interest as its basis.
If we look back upon all previous efforts that have ever been made to
discover the principle of morality, we need not wonder now why all of
them had to fail. It was seen that the human being is bound to laws by his
duty, but it never occurred to them that he is subject only to laws given by
himselfbut still universal and that he is bound only to act in conformity with
his own will, which, however, in accordance with nature's end^ is a will
giving universal law. For, if one thought of him only as subject to a law
(whatever it may be), this law had to carry with it some interest by way of
*I may be excused from citing examples to illustrate this principle, since those that have
already illustrated the categorical imperative and its formula can all serve for the same end
here.
d

angenommen
bewiesen merden
f Unterscheidungszeichen
g
dem Naturzwecke nach
e

40

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
attraction or constraint, since it did not as a law arise from his will; in
order to conform with the law, his will had instead to be constrained by
something else to act in a certain way/ By this quite necessary consequence,
however, all the labor to find a supreme ground of duty was irretrievably
lost. For, one never arrived at duty but instead at the necessity of an action
from a certain interest. This might be one's own or another's interest. But
then the imperative had to turn out always conditional and could not be fit
for a moral command. I will therefore call this basic principle the principle
of the autonomy of the will in contrast with every other, which I accordingly count as heteronomy.
The concept of every rational being as one who must regard himself as
giving universal law through all the maxims of his will, so as to appraise
himself and his actions from this point of view, leads to a very fruitful
concept dependent upon it,' namely that of a kingdom* of ends.
By a kingdom I understand a systematic union of various rational beings
through common laws. Now since laws determine ends in terms of their
universal validity, if we abstract from the personal differences of rational
beings as well as from all the content of their private ends we shall be able
to think of a whole of all ends in systematic connection (a whole both of
rational beings as ends in themselves and of the ends of his own that each
may set himself), that is, a kingdom of ends, which is possible in accordance with the above principles.
For, all rational beings stand under the law that each of them is to treat
himself and all others never merely as means but always at the same time as
ends in themselves. But from this there arises a systematic union of rational
beings through common objective laws, that is, a kingdom, which can be
called a kingdom of ends (admittedly only an ideal) because what these
laws have as their purpose is just the relation of these beings to one
another as ends and means.
A rational being belongs as a member to the kingdom of ends when he
gives universal laws in it but is also himself subject to these laws. He
belongs to it as sovereign11 when, as lawgiving, he is not subject to the will of
any other.
A rational being must always regard himself as lawgiving in a kingdom 4:434
of ends possible through freedom of the will, whether as a member or as
sovereign. He cannot, however, hold the position of sovereign merely by
the maxims of his will but only in case he is a completely independent
being, without needs and with unlimited resources7 adequate to his will.
h

sondern dieser gesetzmdssig von etrvas anderm genotigt tvurde, aufgewisse Weise zu handeln
Or "attached to it," ihm anhangenden
7
Reich, which could also be translated "commonwealth"
* ah Oberhaupt
1
Vermogen
1

41

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
Morality consists, then, in the reference of all action to the lawgiving by
which alone a kingdom of ends is possible. This lawgiving must, however,
be found in every rational being himself and be able to arise from his will,
the principle of which is, accordingly: to do no action on any other maxim
than one such that it would be consistent with it to be a universal law, and
hence to act only so that the will could regard itself as at the same time giving

4:435

universal law through its maxim. Now, if maxims are not already of their
nature in agreement with this objective principle of rational beings as
givers of universal law, the necessity of an action in accordance with this
principle is called practical necessitation, that is, duty. Duty does not apply
to the sovereign in the kingdom of ends, but it does apply to every member
of it and indeed to all in equal measure.
The practical necessity of acting in accordance with this principle, that
is, duty, does not rest at all on feelings, impulses, and inclinations but
merely on the relation of rational beings to one another, in which the will
of a rational being must always be regarded as at the same time lawgiving,
since otherwise it could not be thought as an end in itself Reason accordingly refers every maxim of the will as giving universal law to every other
will and also to every action toward oneself, and does so not for the sake of
any other practical motive or any future advantage but from the idea of the
dignity of a rational being, who obeys no law other than that which he
himself at the same time gives.
In the kingdom of ends everything has either a price or a dignity.m What
has a price can be replaced by something else as its equivalent, what on the
other hand is raised above all price and therefore admits of no equivalent
has a dignity.
What is related to general human inclinations and needs has a market
price, that which, even without presupposing a need, conforms with a
certain taste, that is, with a delight" in the mere purposeless0 play of our
mental powers, has a fancy price f but that which constitutes the condition
under which alone something can be an end in itself has not merely a
relative worth, that is, a price, but an inner worth, that is, dignity.
Now, morality is the condition under which alone a rational being can
be an end in itself, since only through this is it possible to be a lawgiving
member in the kingdom of ends. Hence morality, and humanity insofar as
it is capable of morality, is that which alone has dignity. Skill and diligence
in work have a market price; wit, lively imagination and humor have a
fancy price; on the other hand, fidelity in promises and benevolence from
basic principles (not from instinct) have an inner worth. Nature, as well as
m
n
0
p

Wiirde
Wohlgefallen
zwecklosen
Affectionspreis

42

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
art, contains nothing that, lacking these, it could put in their place; for
their worth does not consist in the effects arising from them, in the
advantage and use they provide, but in dispositions/ that is, in maxims of
the will that in this way are ready to manifest themselves through actions,
even if success does not favor them. Such actions also need no recommendation from any subjective disposition or taste, so as to be looked upon
with immediate favor and delight, nor do they need any immediate propensity or feeling for them; they present the will that practices them as the
object of an immediate respect, and nothing but reason is required to
impose them upon the will, not to coax them from it, which latter would in
any case be a contradiction in the case of duties. This estimation therefore
lets the worth of such a cast of mind be cognized as dignity and puts it
infinitely above all price, with which it cannot be brought into comparison
or competition at all without, as it were, assaulting its holiness.5
And what is it, then, that justifies a morally good disposition, or virtue,
in making such high claims? It is nothing less than the share it affords a
rational being in the giving ofuniversal laws, by which it makes him fit to be
a member of a possible kingdom of ends, which he was already destined to
be by his own nature as an end in itself and, for that very reason, as
lawgiving in the kingdom of ends - as free with respect to all laws of
nature, obeying only those which he himself gives and in accordance with
which his maxims can belong to a giving of universal law (to which at the
same time he subjects himself). For, nothing can have a worth other than 4:436
that which the law determines for it. But the lawgiving itself, which determines all worth, must for that very reason have a dignity, that is, an
unconditional, incomparable worth; and the word respect alone provides a
becoming expression for the estimate of it that a rational being must give.
Autonomy is therefore the ground of the dignity of human nature and of
every rational nature.
The above three ways of representing the principle of morality are at
bottom only so many formulae of the very same law, and any one of them
of itself unites the other two in it. There is nevertheless a difference
among them, which is indeed subjectively rather than objectively practical,
intended namely to bring an idea of reason closer to intuition (by a certain
analogy) and thereby to feeling. All maxims have, namely,
1) a form, which consists in universality; and in this respect the formula of
the moral imperative is expressed thus: that maxims must be chosen' as
if they were to hold as universal laws of nature;
2) a matter, namely an end, and in this respect the formula says that a
q

Gesinnungen
Disposition
s
Heiligkeit
' so miissen gewdhlt werden
r

43

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:437

rational being, as an end by its nature and hence as an end in itself,
must in every maxim serve as the limiting condition of all merely
relative and arbitrary" ends;
3) a complete determination of all maxims by means of that formula, namely
that all maxims from one's own lawgiving are to harmonize with a possible kingdom of ends as with a kingdom of nature.* A progression takes
place here, as through the categories of the unity of the form of the will
(its universality), the plurality of the matter (of objects, i.e., of ends),
and the allness1 or totality of the system of these. But one does better
always to proceed in moral appraisal by the strict method and put at its
basis the universal formula of the categorical imperative: act in accordance with a maxim that can at the same time make itself a universal law. If,

however, one wants also to provide access for the moral law, it is very useful to bring one and the same action under the three concepts mentioned above and thereby, as far as possible, bring it closer to intuition.
We can now end where we set out from at the beginning, namely with
the concept of a will unconditionally good. That will is absolutely good
which cannot be evil, hence whose maxim, if made a universal law, can
never conflict with itself. This principle is, accordingly, also its supreme
law: act always on that maxim whose universality as a law you can at the
same time will; this is the sole condition under which a will can never be
in conflict with itself, and such an imperative is categorical. Since the
validity of the will as a universal law for possible actions has an analogy
with the universal connection of the existence of things in accordance with
universal laws, which is the formal aspect of nature in general, the categorical imperative can also be expressed thus: act in accordance with maxims that
can at the same time have as their object themselves as universal laws of nature.

In this way, then, the formula of an absolutely good will is provided.
Rational nature is distinguished from the rest of nature by this, that it
sets itself an end. This end would be the matter of every good will. But
since, in the idea of a will absolutely good without any limiting condition
(attainment of this or that end) abstraction must be made altogether from
every end to be effected (this would make every will only relatively good),
the end must here be thought not as an end to be effected but as an
independently existing* end, and hence thought only negatively, that is, as
*Teleology considers nature as a kingdom of ends, morals considers a possible kingdom of
ends as a kingdom of nature. In the former the kingdom of ends is a theoretical idea for
explaining what exists. In the latter, it is a practical idea for the sake of bringing about, in
conformity with this very idea, that which does not exist but which can become real by means
of our conduct.
" rvillkurlichen
Allheit
w
selbststdndiger

v

44

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
that which must never be acted against and which must therefore in
every volition be estimated never merely as a means but always at the
same time as an end. Now, this end can be nothing other than the
subject of all possible ends itself, because this subject is also the subject
of a possible absolutely good will; for, such a will cannot without contradiction be subordinated to any other object. The principle, so act with
reference to every rational being (yourself and others) that in your
maxim it holds at the same time as an end in itself, is thus at bottom the
same as the basic principle, act on a maxim that at the same time 4:438
contains in itself its own universal validity for every rational being. For,
to say that in the use of means to any end I am to limit my maxim to the
condition of its universal validity as a law for every subject is tantamount
to saying that the subject of ends, that is, the rational being itself, must
be made the basis of all maxims of actions, never merely as a means but
as the supreme limiting condition in the use of all means, that is, always
at the same time as an end.
Now, from this it follows incontestably that every rational being, as an
end in itself, must be able to regard himself as also giving universal laws
with respect to any law whatsoever to which he may be subject; for, it is
just this fitness of his maxims for giving universal law that marks him out
as an end in itself; it also follows that this dignity (prerogative) he has over
all merely natural beings brings with it that he must always take his
maxims from the point of view of himself, and likewise every other rational
being, as lawgiving beings (who for this reason are also called persons).
Now in this way a world of rational beings (mundus intelligibilis)x as a
kingdom of ends is possible, through the giving of their own laws^ by all
persons as members. Consequently, every rational being must act as if he
were by his maxims at all times a lawgiving member of the universal
kingdom of ends. The formal principle of these maxims is, act as if your
maxims were to serve at the same time as a universal law (for all rational
beings). A kingdom of ends is thus possible only by analogy with a kingdom of nature; the former, however, is possible only through maxims, that
is, rules imposed upon oneself, the latter only through laws of externally
necessitated efficient causes. Despite this, nature as a whole, even though
it is regarded as a machine, is still given the name "a kingdom of nature"
insofar as and because it has reference to rational beings as its ends. Now,
such a kingdom of ends would actually come into existence through
maxims whose rule the categorical imperative prescribes to all rational
beings if they were universally followed. It is true that, even though a rational
being scrupulously follows this maxim himself, he cannot for that reason
x
y

intelligible world
durch die eigene Gesetzgebung

45

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:439

4:440

count upon every other to be faithful to the same maxim nor can he count
upon the kingdom of nature and its purposive order to harmonize with
him, as a fitting member, toward a kingdom of ends possible through
himself, that is, upon its favoring his expectation of happiness; nevertheless that law, act in accordance with the maxims of a member giving
universal laws for a merely possible kingdom of ends, remains in its full
force because it commands categorically. And just in this lies the paradox
that the mere dignity of humanity as rational nature, without any other
end or advantage to be attained by it - hence respect for a mere idea - is
yet to serve as an inflexible precept of the will, and that it is just in this
independence of maxims from all such incentives that their sublimity
consists, and the worthiness of every rational subject to be a lawgiving
member in the kingdom of ends; for otherwise he would have to be
represented only as subject to the natural law of his needs. Even if the
kingdom of nature as well as the kingdom of ends were thought as united
under one sovereign, so that the latter would no longer remain a mere
idea but would obtain true reality, it would no doubt gain the increment of
a strong incentive but never any increase of its inner worth; for, even this
sole absolute lawgiver would, despite this, still have to be represented as
appraising the worth of rational beings only by their disinterested conduct,
prescribed to themselves merely from that idea. The essence of things is
not changed by their external relations; and that which, without taking
account of such relations, alone constitutes the worth of a human being is
that in terms of which he must also be appraised by whoever does it, even
by the supreme being. Morality is thus the relation of actions to the
autonomy of the will, that is, to a possible giving of universal law through
its maxims. An action that can coexist with the autonomy of the will is
permitted; one that does not accord with it is forbidden. A will whose
maxims necessarily harmonize with the laws of autonomy is a holy, absolutely good will. The dependence upon the principle of autonomy of a will
that is not absolutely good (moral necessitation) is obligation. This, accordingly, cannot be attributed to a holy being. The objective necessity of an
action from obligation is called duty.
From what has just been said it is now easy to explain how it happens
that, although in thinking the concept of duty we think of subjection to the
law, yet at the same time we thereby represent a certain sublimity and
dignity in the person who fulfills all his duties. For there is indeed no
sublimity in him insofar as he is subject to the moral law, but there certainly
is insofar as he is at the same time lawgiving with respect to it and only for
that reason subordinated to it. We have also shown above how neither fear
nor inclination but simply respect for the law is that incentive which can
give actions a moral worth. Our own will insofar as it would act only under
the condition of a possible giving of universal law through its maxims this will possible for us in idea - is the proper object of respect; and the
46

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
dignity of humanity consists just in this capacity to give universal law,
though with the condition of also being itself subject to this very lawgiving.
AUTONOMY OF THE WILL

AS THE SUPREME PRINCIPLE OF MORALITY
Autonomy of the will is the property* of the will by which it is a law to itself
(independently of any property of the objects of volition). The principle of
autonomy is, therefore: to choose only in such a way that the maxims of
your choice* are also included' as universal law in the same volition. That
this practical rule is an imperative, that is, that the will of every rational
being is necessarily bound to it as a condition, cannot be proved by mere
analysis^ of the concepts to be found in it, because it is a synthetic proposition; one would have to go beyond cognition of objects to a critique of the
subject, that is, of pure practical reason, since this synthetic proposition,
which commands apodictically, must be capable of being cognized completely a priori. This business, however, does not belong in the present
section. But that the above principle of autonomy is the sole principle of
morals can well be shown by mere analysis of the concepts of morality.
For, by this analysis we find that its principle must be a categorical imperative, while this commands neither more nor less than just this autonomy.

HETERONOMY OF THE WILL

AS THE SOURCE OF ALL SPURIOUS PRINCIPLES
OF MORALITY
If the will seeks the law that is to determine it anywhere else than in the
fitness of its maxims for its own giving of universal law - consequently if,
in going beyond itself, it seeks this law in a property of any of its objects heteronomy always results. The will in that case does not give itself the law;
instead the object, by means of its relation to the will, gives the law to it.
This relation, whether it rests upon inclination or upon representations of
reason, lets only hypothetical imperatives become possible: I ought to do
something because I will something else. On the contrary, the moral and
therefore categorical imperative says: I ought to act in such or such a way
even though I have not willed anything else. For example, the former says:
I ought not to lie if I will to keep my reputation; but the latter says: I ought
a

Beschaffenheit
zu wdhlen also so, dass die Maximen seiner Wahl. Kant has apparently not yet drawn the
distinction between Wille ("the will") and Willkiir ("choice" or "the power of choice") so
prominent in The Metaphysics of Morals.
c
mit begrijfen seien
d
Zergliederung
b

47

4:441

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
not to lie even though it would not bring me the least discredit. The latter
must therefore abstract from all objects to this extent: that they have no
influence at all on the will, so that practical reason (the will) may not merely
administer an interest not belonging to it/ but may simply show its own
commanding authority as supreme lawgiving. Thus, for example, I ought
to try to further the happiness of others, not as if its existence were of any
consequence to me (whether because of immediate inclination or because
of some indirect agreeableness through reason), but simply because a
maxim that excludes this cannot be included as a universal law in one and
the same volition.
DIVISION

OF ALL POSSIBLE PRINCIPLES OF MORALITY
TAKEN FROM
HETERONOMY ASSUMED AS THE
BASIC CONCEPT

4:442

Here, as everywhere else, human reason in its pure use, as long as it lacks
a critique, first tries all possible wrong ways before it succeeds in finding
the only true way.
All principles that can be taken from this point of view are either
empirical or rational. The first, taken from the principle of happiness, are
built upon physical or moral feeling; the second, taken from the principle
of perfection, are built either upon the rational concept of perfection as a
possible effect of our will or upon the concept of an independently existing perfection (the will of God) as the determining cause of our will.
Empirical principles are not at all fit to be the ground of moral laws. For,
the universality with which these are to hold for all rational beings without
distinction - the unconditional practical necessity which is thereby imposed upon them - comes to nothing if their ground is taken from the
special constitution of human nature or the contingent circumstances in
which it is placed. The principle of one's own happiness, however, is the
most objectionable, not merely because it is false and experience contradicts the pretense that well-being always proportions itself to good conduct, nor yet merely because it contributes nothing at all to the establishment of morality, since making someone happy is quite different from
making him good, or making him prudent and sharp-sighted for his own
advantage is quite different from making him virtuous; it is the most
objectionable because it bases morality on incentives that undermine it
and destroy all its sublimity, since they put motives to virtue and those to
vice in one class and only teach us to calculate better, but quite obliterate
e

fremdes Interesse. Fremd is also translated as "alien," "foreign," or "another's."

48

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
the specific difference between virtue and vice. On the other hand, moral
feeling — this supposed special sense* (however superficial the appeal to
it is, inasmuch as those who cannot think believe they can help themselves
out by feeling in what has to do merely with universal law/ and however
little feelings, which by nature differ infinitely from one another in degree,
can furnish a uniform standard of good and evil, and one cannot judge
validly for others by means of one's feeling) — nevertheless remains closer
to morality and its dignity inasmuch as it shows virtue the honor of
ascribing to her immediately the delight^ and esteem we have for her and
does not, as it were, tell her to her face that it is not her beauty but only
our advantage that attaches us to her.
Among the rational grounds of morality or those based on reason/ the
ontological concept of perfection (however empty, however indeterminate
and hence useless it is for finding, in the immeasurable field of possible
reality, the greatest sum appropriate to us; and however much, in trying to
distinguish specifically the reality here in question from every other, it has
an unavoidable propensity to get involved in a circle and cannot avoid
covertly presupposing the morality which it is supposed to explain) k
nevertheless better than the theological concept, which derives morality
from a divine, all-perfect will; it is better not merely because we cannot
intuit the perfection of this will but can only derive it from our concepts,
among which that of morality is foremost, but because if we do not do this
(and to do it would be a grossly circular explanation), the concept of his
will still left to us, made up of the attributes' of desire for glory and
dominion combined with dreadful representations of power and vengefulness, would have to be the foundation for a system of morals that would be
directly opposed to morality.
But if I had to choose between the concept of the moral sense and that
of perfection generally (both of which at least do not infringe upon morality, even though they are not at all fit to support it as its foundation), then I
should decide7 for the latter; for, since it at least withdraws the decision of
the question from sensibility and brings it to the court of pure reason,
#
I count the principle of moral feeling under that of happiness because every empirical
interest promises to contribute to our well-being by the agreeableness that something affords, whether this happens immediately and without a view to advantage or with regard for
it. One must likewise, with Hutcheson,6 count the principle of sympathy with the happiness
of others under the moral sense assumed by him.
^ It is not altogether clear whether the clause "in what has to do merely with universal law"
modifies "think" or "feeling."

' Wohlgefallen
h
Unter den rationalen oder Vernunftgriinden
1
Eigenschafien
i bestimmen

49

4:443

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:444

even though it decides nothing there it still preserves the indeterminate
idea (of a will good in itself) unfalsified, for closer determination.
For the rest, I believe I may be excused from a lengthy refutation of all
these doctrines/ That is so easy, and is presumably so well seen even by
those whose office requires them to declare themselves for one of these
theories (because their hearers would not tolerate suspension of judgment), that it would be merely superfluous labor. But what interests us
more here is to know that all these principles set up nothing other than
heteronomy of the will as the first ground of morality, and just because of
this they must necessarily fail in their end.
Wherever an object of the will has to be laid down as the basis for
prescribing the rule that determines the will, there the rule is none other
than heteronomy; the imperative is conditional, namely: if or because one
wills this object, one ought to act in such or such a way; hence it can never
command morally, that is, categorically. Whether the object determines
the will by means of inclination, as in the principle of one's own happiness, or by means of reason directed to objects of our possible volition in
general, as in the principle of perfection, the will never determines itself
immediately, just by the representation of an action, but only by means of
an incentive that the anticipated effect of the action has upon the will: /
ought to do something on this account, that I will something else, and here yet

another law must be put as a basis in me, the subject, in accordance with
which I necessarily will this something else, which law in turn needs an
imperative that would limit this maxim. FOIY because the impulse that the
representation of an object possible through our powers is to exert on the
will of the subject in accordance with his natural constitution belongs to
the nature of the subject - whether to his sensibility (inclination and taste)
or to his understanding and reason, which by the special constitution of
their nature employ themselves with delight upon an object - it would,
strictly speaking, be nature that gives the law; and this, as a law of nature,
must not only be cognized and proved by experience - and is therefore in
itself contingent and hence unfit for an apodictic practical rule, such as
moral rules must be - but it is always only heteronomy of the will; the will
would not give itself the law but a foreign impulse would give the law to it
by means of the subject's nature, which is attuned to be receptive to it.
An absolutely good will, whose principle must be a categorical imperative, will therefore, indeterminate with respect to all objects, contain
merely the form of volition as such and indeed as autonomy; that is, the
fitness of the maxims of every good will to make themselves into universal
law is itself the sole law that the will of every rational being imposes upon
k
1

Lehrbegriffe
Wohlgefallen

50

FROM POPULAR PHILOSOPHY TO METAPHYSICS
itself, without having to put underneath it some incentive or interest as a
basis.
How such a synthetic practical proposition is possible a priori and why it is

necessary is a problem whose solution does not lie within the bounds of
metaphysics of morals, and we have not here affirmed its truth, much less
pretended to have a proof of it in our power. By explicating the generally
received concept of morality we showed only that an autonomy of the will
unavoidably depends upon it,w or much rather lies at its basis. Thus
whoever holds morality to be something and not a chimerical idea without
any truth must also admit the principle of morality brought forward. This
section then, like the first, was merely analytic. That morality is no
phantom - and this follows if the categorical imperative, and with it the
autonomy of the will, is true and absolutely necessary as an a priori
principle - requires a possible synthetic use of pure practical reason, which

use, however, we cannot venture upon without prefacing it by a critique of
this rational faculty itself, the main features of which we have to present,
sufficiently for our purpose, in the last section.
m

anhdnge, perhaps "is attached to it"

51

4:445

4:446

Section III
Transition from metaphysics of morals to the
critique of pure practical reason

THE CONCEPT OF FREEDOM IS THE KEY
TO THE EXPLANATION" OF THE AUTONOMY OF
THE WILL

4:447

Will is a kind of causality of living beings insofar as they are rational, and
freedom would be that property0 of such causality that it can be efficient
independently of alien causes determining it, just as natural necessity is the
property of the causality of all nonrational beings to be determined to
activity by the influence of alien causes.
The preceding definition^ of freedom is negative and therefore unfruitful for insight into* its essence; but there flows from it a positive concept of
freedom, which is so much the richer and more fruitful. Since the concept
of causality brings with it that of laws in accordance with which, by
something that we call a cause, something else, namely an effect, must be
posited, so freedom, although it is not a property of the will in accordance
with natural laws, is not for that reason lawless but must instead be a
causality in accordance with immutable laws but of a special kind; for
otherwise a free will would be an absurdity/ Natural necessity was a
heteronomy of efficient causes, since every effect was possible only in
accordance with the law that something else determines the efficient
cause to causality; what, then, can freedom of the will be other than
autonomy, that is, the will's property of being a law to itself? But the
proposition, the will is in all its actions a law to itself, indicates only the
principle, to act on no other maxim than that which can also have as object
itself as a universal law. This, however, is precisely the formula of the
n

Erkldrung
Eigenschaft
p
Erkldrung. On the translation ofErkldrung see The Metaphysics ofMorals (6:226).
q
einzusehen. As was noted above, Kant seems on the whole to use einsehen informally. In the
Jasche Logik (9: 64-5), however, he distinguishes seven levels of Erkenntnis in the general
sense, the sixth of which is einsehen (perspicere), i.e., to cognize through reason or a priori, and
the seventh begreifen (comprehendere), which adds to einsehen "sufficiently for our purpose."
Some passages in Section III, notably 4:459 and 460, suggest that he has this distinction in
mind.
r
Unding
0

52

FROM METAPHYSICS TO CRITIQUE
categorical imperative and is the principle of morality; hence a free will
and a will under moral laws are one and the same.
If, therefore, freedom of the will is presupposed, morality together with
its principle follows from it by mere analysis of its concept. But the
principle of morality - that an absolutely good will is that whose maxim
can always contain itself regarded as a universal law - is nevertheless
always a synthetic proposition; for, by analysis of the concept of an absolutely good will that property of its maxim cannot be discovered. Such
synthetic propositions are possible only in this way: that the two cognitions
are bound together' by their connection with a third in which they are both
to be found. The positive concept of freedom provides this third cognition,
which cannot be, as in the case of physical causes, the nature of the
sensible world (in the concept of which the concepts of something as
cause in relation to something else as effect come together). What this third
cognition is, to which freedom points us and of which we have an idea a
priori, cannot yet be shown here and now; nor can the deduction of the
concept of freedom from pure practical reason, and with it the possibility
of a categorical imperative as well, as yet be made comprehensible; instead, some further preparation is required.
FREEDOM MUST BE PRESUPPOSED
AS A PROPERTY OF THE WILL OF ALL
RATIONAL BEINGS
It is not enough that we ascribe freedom to our will on whatever ground, if
we do not have sufficient ground for attributing it also to all rational
beings. For, since morality serves as a law for us only as rational beings, it
must also hold for all rational beings; and since it must be derived solely
from the property of freedom, freedom must also be proved' as a property
of all rational beings; and it is not enough to demonstrate" it from certain
supposed experiences of human nature (though this is also absolutely
impossible and it can be demonstrated only a priori), but it must be proved
as belonging to the activity of all beings whatever that are rational and
endowed with a will. I say now: every being that cannot act otherwise than
under the idea of freedom is just because of that really free in a practical
respect, that is, all laws that are inseparably bound up with freedom hold
for him just as if his will had been validly pronounced1" free also in itself
and in theoretical philosophy. * Now I assert that to every rational being
s

untereinander verbunden werden
bewiesen
u
darzutun
v
gultigfiirfrei erkldrt wiirde
t

#

I follow this route - that of assuming freedom, sufficiently for our purpose, only as laid
down by rational beings merely in idea as a ground for their actions - so that I need not be

53

4.448

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
having a will we must necessarily lend the idea of freedom also, under
which alone he acts. For in such a being we think of a reason that is
practical, that is, has causality with respect to its objects. Now, one cannot
possibly think of a reason that would consciously receive direction from
any other quarter with respect to its judgments, since the subject would
then attribute the determination of his judgment not to his reason but to
an impulse. Reason must regard itself as the author of its principles
independently of alien influences; consequently, as practical reason or as
the will of a rational being it must be regarded of itself as free, that is, the
will of such a being cannot be a will of his own except under the idea of
freedom, and such a will must in a practical respect* thus be attributed to
every rational being.
OF THE INTEREST ATTACHING y TO THE IDEAS
OF MORALITY

4:449

We have finally traced the determinate concept of morality back to the
idea of freedom; but we could not even prove the latter as something real
in ourselves and in human nature; we saw only that we must presuppose it
if we want to think of a being as rational and endowed with consciousness
of his causality with respect to actions, that is, with a will, and so we find
that on just the same grounds we must assign to every being endowed with
reason and will this property of determining himself to action under the
idea of his freedom.
But there alsoflowedfrom the presupposition of this idea consciousness
of a law for acting: that subjective principles of actions, that is, maxims,
must always be so adopted that they can also hold as objective, that is, hold
universally as principles, and so serve for our own giving of universal laws.
But why, then, ought I to subject myself to this principle and do so simply as
a rational being, thus also subjecting to it all other beings endowed with
reason? I am willing to admit that no interest impels me to do so, for that
would not give a categorical imperative; but I must still necessarily take an
interest in it and have insight into how this comes about; for this "ought" is
strictly speaking a "will"2 that holds for every rational being under the
condition that reason in him is practical without hindrance; but for beings
bound to prove freedom in its theoretical respect"1 as well. For even if the latter is left
unsettled, still the same laws hold for a being that cannot act otherwise than under the idea
of its own freedom as would bind a being that was actually free. Thus we can escape here
from the burden that weighs upon theory.
w

Absicht

x

in praktischer Absicht. The subject of "must be attributed" could be either "this idea" or
"such a will."

y
z

welches den Ideen . . . anhdngt
dieses Sollen ist eigentlich ein Wollen

54

FROM METAPHYSICS TO CRITIQUE
like us - w h o are also affected by sensibility, by incentives of a different
kind, and in whose case that which reason by itself would do is not always
done - that necessity of action is called only an "ought," and the subjective
necessity is distinguished from the objective.
It seems, then, that in the idea of freedom we have actually only
presupposed the moral law, namely the principle of the autonomy of the
will itself, and could not prove by itself its reality and objective necessity;
and in that case we should still have gained something considerable by at
least determining the genuine principle more accurately than had previously been done, but we should have got no further with respect to its
validity and the practical necessity of subjecting oneself to it; for, if someone asked us why the universal validity of our maxim as a law must be the
limiting condition of our actions, and on what we base the worth we assign
to this way of acting - a worth so great that there can be no higher interest
anywhere - and asked us how it happens that a human being believes that
only through this does he feel his personal worth, in comparison with
which that of an agreeable or disagreeable condition* is to be held as
nothing, we could give him no satisfactory answer.
We do indeed find that we can take an interest in a personal characteristic* that brings with it no interest at all in a condition, if only the former
makes us fit to participate in the latter in case reason were to effect the
distribution, that is, that mere worthiness to be happy, even without the
motive of participating in this happiness, can interest us of itself; but this
judgment is in fact only the result of the importance we have already
supposed belongs to the moral law (when by the idea of freedom we
detach ourselves from all empirical interest); but we cannot yet see, in this
way, that we ought to detach ourselves from such interest, that is, to
regard ourselves as free in acting and so to hold ourselves yet subject to
certain laws in order to find merely in our own person a worth that can
compensate us for the loss of everything that provides a worth to our
condition; and we cannot yet see how this is possible, and hence on what
grounds' the moral lam is binding.

It must be freely admitted that a kind of circle comes to light here from
which, as it seems, there is no way to escape. We take ourselves as free in
the order of efficient causes nV order to think ourselves under moral laws
in the order of ends; and we afterwards think ourselves as subject to these
laws because we have ascribed to ourselves freedom of will: for, freedom
and the will's own lawgiving are both autonomy and hence reciprocal
concepts, and for this very reason one cannot be used to explain the other
or to furnish a ground for it but can at most be used only for the logical
a
h
c

Zustand
Beschaffenheit
woher

55

4:450

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:451

purpose of reducing apparently different representations of the same object to one single concept (as different fractions of equal value are reduced
to their lowest expression).
One resource, however, still remains to us, namely to inquire whether
we do not take a different standpoint when by means of freedom we think
of ourselves as causes efficient a priori than when we represent ourselves
in terms of our actions as effects that we see before our eyes.
No subtle reflection is required to make the following remark, and one
may assume that the commonest understanding can make it, though in its
own way, by an obscure discrimination of judgment which it calls feeling:
that all representations which come to us involuntarily^ (as do those of the
senses) enable us to cognize objects only as they affect us and we remain
ignorant of what they may be in themselves so that, as regards representations of this kind, even with the most strenuous attentiveness and distinctness that the understanding can ever bring to them we can achieve only
cognition of appearances, never ofthings in themselves. As soon as this distinction has once been made (perhaps merely by means of the difference
noticed between representations given us from somewhere else and in
which we are passive, and those that we produce simply from ourselves and
in which we show our activity), then it follows of itself that we must admit
and assume behind appearances something else that is not appearance,
namely things in themselves, although, since we can never become acquainted with them but only with how they affect us, we resign ourselves to
being unable to come any closer to them or ever to know what they are in
themselves. This must yield a distinction, although a crude one, between a
world of sense and the world of understanding, the first of which can be very
different according to the difference of sensibility in various observers of
the world while the second, which is its basis, always remains the same.
Even as to himself, the human being cannot claim to cognize what he is in
himself through the cognizance he has by inner sensation. For, since he
does not as it were create himself and does not get his concept a priori but
empirically, it is natural that he can obtain information even about himself
only through inner sense and so only through the appearance of his nature
and the way in which his consciousness is affected - although beyond this
constitution of his own subject, made up of nothing but appearances, he
must necessarily assume something else lying at their basis, namely his ego
as it may be constituted in itself; and thus as regards mere perception and
receptivity to sensations he must count himself as belonging to the world of
sense, but with regard to what there may be of pure activity in him (what
reaches consciousness immediately and not through affection of the
senses) he must count himself as belonging to the intellectual world, of which
however he has no further cognizance.
d

ohne unsere Willkiir

56

FROM METAPHYSICS TO CRITIQUE
A reflective human being must come to a conclusion of this kind about
all the things that present themselves to him; presumably it is also to be 4:452
found even in the most common understanding, which, as is well known,
is very much inclined to expect behind the objects of the senses something
else invisible and active of itself - but it spoils this again by quickly making
this invisible something sensible in turn, that is, wanting to make it an
object of intuition, so that it does not thereby become any the wiser.
Now, a human being really finds in himself a capacity by which he
distinguishes himself from all other things, even from himself insofar as
he is affected by objects, and that is reason. This, as pure self-activity, is
raised even above the understanding by this: that though the latter is also
self-activity and does not, like sense, contain merely representations that
arise when we are affected by things (and are thus passive), yet it can
produce from its activity no other concepts than those which serve merely
to bring sensible representations under rules and thereby to unite them in one
consciousness, without which use of sensibility it would think nothing at
all; but reason, on the contrary, shows in what we call "ideas" a spontaneity so pure that it thereby goes far beyond anything that sensibility can ever
afford it, and proves its highest occupation in distinguishing the world of
sense and the world of understanding from each other and thereby marking out limits for the understanding itself.
Because of this a rational being must regard himself as intelligence
(hence not from the side of his lower powers) as belonging not to the
world of sense but to the world of understanding; hence he has two
standpoints from which he can regard himself and cognize laws for the
use of his powers and consequendy for all his actions; y?m, insofar as he
belongs to the world of sense, under laws of nature (heteronomy); second,
as belonging to the intelligible world, under laws which, being independent of nature, are not empirical but grounded merely in reason.
As a rational being, and thus as a being belonging to the intelligible
world, the human being can never think of the causality of his own will
otherwise than under the idea of freedom; for, independence from the
determining causes of the world of sense (which reason must always
ascribe to itself) is freedom. With the idea of freedom the concept of
autonomy is now inseparably combined, and with the concept of autonomy
the universal principle of morality, which in idea is the ground of all
actions of rational beings, just as the law of nature is the ground of all 4:453
appearances.
The suspicion that we raised above is now removed, the suspicion that
a hidden circle was contained in our inference from freedom to autonomy
and from the latter to the moral law — namely that we perhaps took as a
ground the idea of freedom only for the sake of the moral law, so that we
could afterwards infer the latter in turn from freedom, and that we were
thus unable to furnish any ground at all for the moral law but could put it
57

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS
forward only as a petitio principiie disposed souls would gladly grant us, but
never as a demonstrable^ proposition. For we now see that when we think
of ourselves as free we transfer ourselves into the world of understanding
as members of it and cognize autonomy of the will along with its consequence, morality; but if we think of ourselves as put under obligation^ we
regard ourselves as belonging to the world of sense and yet at the same
time to the world of understanding.
HOW IS A CATEGORICAL IMPERATIVE POSSIBLE?

4:454

A rational being counts himself, as intelligence, as belonging to the world
of understanding, and only as an efficient cause belonging to this does he
call his causality a will. On the other side he is also conscious of himself as
a part of the world of sense, in which his actions are found as mere
appearances of that causality; but their possibility from that causality of
which we are not cognizant cannot be seen; instead, those actions as
belonging to the world of sense must be regarded as determined by other
appearances, namely desires and inclinations. All my actions as only a
member of the world of understanding would therefore conform perfectly
with the principle of autonomy of the pure will; as only a part of the world
of sense they would have to be taken to conform wholly to the natural law
of desires and inclinations, hence to the heteronomy of nature. (The
former would rest on the supreme principle of morality, the latter on that
of happiness.) But because the world of understanding contains the ground of
the world ofsense and so too of its laws, and is therefore immediately lawgiving with respect to my will (which belongs wholly to the world of understanding) and must accordingly also be thought as such, it follows that I
shall cognize myself as intelligence, though on the other side as a being
belonging to the world of sense, as nevertheless subject to the law of the
world of understanding, that is, of reason, which contains in the idea of
freedom the law of the world of understanding, and thus cognize myself as
subject to the autonomy of the will; consequently the laws of the world of
understanding must be regarded as imperatives for me, and actions in
conformity with these as duties.
And so categorical imperatives are possible by this: that the idea of
freedom makes me a member of an intelligible world and consequently, if I
were only this, all my actions would always be in conformity with the autonomy of the will; but since at the same time I intuit myself as a member of the
world of sense, they ought to be in conformity with it; and this categorical
ought represents a synthetic proposition a priori, since to my will affected
e
Erbittung des Prinzips
f erweislichen
g
ah verpflichtet

58

FROM METAPHYSICS TO CRITIQUE
by sensible desires there is added the idea of the same will but belonging to
the world of the understanding - a will pure and practical of itself, which
contains the supreme condition, in accordance with reason, of the former
will; this is roughly like the way in which concepts of the understanding,
which by themselves signify nothing but lawful form in general, are added
to intuitions of the world of sense and thereby make possible synthetic
propositions a priori on which all cognition of a nature rests.
The practical use of common human reason confirms the correctness of
this deduction. There is no one - not even the most hardened scoundrel, if
only he is otherwise accustomed to use reason — who, when one sets before
him examples of honesty of purpose, of steadfastness in following good
maxims, of sympathy and general benevolence (even combined with great
sacrifices of advantage and comfort), does not wish that he might also be so
disposed. He cannot indeed bring this about in himself, though only because of his inclinations and impulses; yet at the same time he wishes to be
free from such inclinations, which are burdensome to himself. Hence he
proves, by this, that with a will free from impulses of sensibility he transfers
himself in thought into an order of things altogether different from that of
his desires in the field of sensibility, since from that wish he can expect no
satisfaction of his desires and hence no condition^ that would satisfy any of
his actual or otherwise imaginable inclinations (for if he expected this, the
very idea which elicits that wish from him would lose its preeminence); he
can expect only a greater inner worth of his person. This better person,
however, he believes himself to be when he transfers himself to the stand- 4:455
point of a member of the world of understanding, as the idea of freedom,
that is, of independence from determining causes of the world of sense,
constrains him involuntarily' to do; and from this standpoint he is conscious
of a good will that, by his own acknowledgments, constitutes the law for his
evil will as a member of the world of sense - a law of whose authority he is
cognizant even while he transgresses it. The moral "ought" is then his own
necessary "will" as a member of an intelligible world, and is thought by him
as "ought" only insofar as he regards himself at the same time as a member
of the world of sense.
ON THE EXTREME BOUNDARY OF ALL
PRACTICAL PHILOSOPHY
All human beings think of themselves as having free will.7 From this come
all judgments upon actions as being such that they ought to have been done
even though they were not done. Yet this freedom is no concept of experih

Zustand
' unwillkurlich
}
denken sich dem Willen nach ahfrei

59

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:456

ence, and moreover cannot be one, since it always remains even though
experience shows the opposite of those requirements that are represented
as necessary under the presupposition of freedom. On the other side, it is
equally necessary that everything which takes place should be determined
without exception in accordance with laws of nature; and this natural
necessity is also no concept of experience, just because it brings with it the
concept of necessity and hence of an a priori cognition. But this concept
of a nature is confirmed by experience and must itself unavoidably be
presupposed if experience, that is, coherent cognition of objects of the
senses in accordance with universal laws, is to be possible. Hence freedom is only an idea of reason, the objective reality of which is in itself
doubtful, whereas nature is a concept of the understanding that proves, and
must necessarily prove, its reality in examples from experience.
From this there arises a dialectic of reason since, with respect to the
will, the freedom ascribed to it seems to be in contradiction with natural
necessity; and at this parting of the ways reason for speculative purposes
finds the road of natural necessity much more traveled and more usable
than that of freedom; yet for practical purposes the footpath of freedom is
the only one on which it is possible to make use of our reason in our
conduct; hence it is just as impossible for the most subtle philosophy as
for the most common human reason to argue freedom away. Philosophy
must therefore assume that no true contradiction will be found between
freedom and natural necessity in the very same human actions, for it
cannot give up the concept of nature any more than that of freedom.
Nevertheless, this seeming contradiction must be removed in a convincing way, even though we shall never be able to comprehend how freedom
is possible. For if even the thought of freedom contradicts itself or contradicts nature, which is equally necessary, it would have to be given up
altogether in favor of natural necessity.
It would, however, be impossible to escape this contradiction if the
subject who seems to himself free thought of himself in the same sense or in
the very same relation when he calls himself free as when he takes himself to
be subject to the law of nature with regard to the same action. Hence it is
an indispensable task of speculative philosophy at least to show that its
illusion* about the contradiction rests on our thinking of the human being
in a different sense and relation when we call him free and when we hold
him, as a part of nature, to be subject to its laws, and to show that both not
only can very well coexist but also must be thought as necessarily united in
the same subject; for otherwise no ground could be given why we should
burden reason with an idea which, though it may without contradiction be
united with another that is sufficiently established, yet entangles us in a
business that brings reason into difficult straits in its theoretical use. This
* Tduschung

60

FROM METAPHYSICS TO CRITIQUE
duty, however, is incumbent upon speculative philosophy only so that it
may clear the way for practical philosophy. Hence it is not left to the
philosopher's discretion whether he wants to remove the seeming conflict
or leave it untouched; for, in the latter case the theory about this would be
bonum vacans,1 into possession of which the fatalist could justifiably enter
and chase all morals from its supposed property, as occupying it without
title.
Nevertheless it cannot yet be said here that the boundary of practical
philosophy begins. For, the settlement of that controversy does not belong
to it; instead it only requires of speculative reason that it put an end to the
discord in which it entangles itself in theoretical questions, so that practi- 4:457
cal reason may have tranquillity and security from the external attacks that
could make the land on which it wants to build a matter of dispute.
But the rightful claimw to freedom of will made even by common human
reason is based on the consciousness and the granted presupposition of the
independence of reason from merely subjectively determining causes, all of
which together constitute what belongs only to feeling" and hence come
under the general name of sensibility. The human being, who this way
regards himself as an intelligence, thereby puts himself in a different order
of things and in a relation to determining grounds of an altogether different
kind when he thinks of himself as an intelligence endowed with a will, and
consequently with causality, than when he perceives himself as a phenomenon in the world of sense (as he also really is) and subjects his causality to
external determination in accordance with laws of nature. Now he soon
becomes aware that both can take place at the same time, and indeed must
do so. For, that a thing in appearance (belonging to the world of sense) is
subject to certain laws from which as a thing or a being in itself it is independent contains not the least contradiction; that he must represent and think
of himself in this twofold way, however, rests as regards the first on consciousness of himself as an object affected through the senses and as
regards the second on consciousness of himself as an intelligence, that is, as
independent of sensible impressions in the use of reason (hence as belonging to the world of understanding).
So it is that the human being claims for himself a will which lets
nothing be put to his account that belongs merely to his desires and
inclinations, and on the contrary thinks as possible by means of it indeed as necessary - actions that can be done only by disregarding all
desires and sensible incitements. The causality of such actions lies in him
as intelligence and in the laws of effects and actions in accordance with
principles of an intelligible world, of which he knows nothing more than
1
m
n

i.e., something that belongs to no one
Rechtsanspruch
Empfindung

61

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:458

4:459

that in it reason alone, and indeed pure reason independent of sensibility,
gives the law, and, in addition, that since it is there, as intelligence only,
that he is his proper self (as a human being he is only the appearance of
himself), those laws apply to him immediately and categorically, so that
what inclinations and impulses (hence the whole nature of the world of
sense) incite him to cannot infringe upon the laws of his volition as
intelligence; indeed, he does not hold himself accountable for the former
or ascribe them to his proper self, that is, to his will, though he does
ascribe to it the indulgence he would show them if he allowed them to
influence his maxims to the detriment of the rational laws of his will.
By thinking itself into a world of understanding practical reason does
not at all overstep its boundaries, but it would certainly do so if it wanted
to intuit or feel itselfinto it.0 That is only a negative thought with respect to
the world of sense: it gives reason no laws for determining the will and is
positive only in this single point: that freedom as a negative determination
is combined with a (positive) capacity as well, and indeed with a causality
of reason that we call a will, a capacity so to act that the principle of
actions conforms with the essential constitution of a rational cause, that is,
with the condition of universal validity of a maxim as a law. But if practical
reason were to fetch in addition an object of the will, that is, a motive, from
the world of understanding, then it would overstep its bounds and pretend
to be cognizant of something of which it knows nothing. The concept of a
world of understanding is thus only a standpoint that reason sees itself
constrained to take outside appearances in order to think of itselfas practical,
as would not be possible if the influences of sensibility were determining
for the human being but is nevertheless necessary insofar as he is not to be
denied consciousness of himself as an intelligence and consequently as a
rational cause active by means of reason, that is, operating freely/ This
thought admittedly brings with it the idea of another order and another
lawgiving than that of the mechanism of nature, which has to do with the
sensible world; and it makes necessary the concept of an intelligible world
(i.e., the whole of rational beings as things in themselves), but without the
least pretense to think of it further than in terms merely of its formal
condition, that is, of the universality of maxims of the will as law and so of
the autonomy of the will, which alone is compatible with its freedom; on
the contrary, all laws that are determined with reference to an object give
heteronomy, which can be found only in laws of nature and also can have
to do only with the world of sense.
But reason would overstep all its bounds if it took it upon itself to
explain horn pure reason can be practical, which would be exactly the same
task as to explain horn freedom is possible.
0
p

hineinschauen, hineinempfinden
ah vernunftige und durch Vernunft tdtige, d.i. frei wirkende

62

FROM METAPHYSICS TO CRITIQUE
For we can explain nothing but what we can reduce to laws the object of
which can be given in some possible experience. Freedom, however, is a
mere idea, the objective reality of which can in no way be presented in
accordance with laws of nature and so too cannot be presented in any
possible experience; and because no example of anything analogous* can
ever be put under it, it can never be comprehended or even only seen/ It
holds only as a necessary presupposition of reason in a being that believes
itself to be conscious of a will, that is, of a faculty distinct from a mere faculty
of desire (namely, a faculty of determining itself to action as an intelligence
and hence in accordance with laws of reason independently of natural
instincts). Now, where determination by laws of nature ceases, there all
explanation ceases as well, and nothing is left but defense, that is, to repel the
objections of those who pretend to have seen deeper into the essence of
things and therefore boldly declare that freedom is impossible. We can only
point out to them that the supposed contradiction they have discovered in it
lies nowhere else than in this: in order to make the law of nature hold with
respect to human actions they must necessarily regard the human being as
an appearance; and now when they are required to think of him, as an
intelligence, as also a thing in itself they nevertheless continue to regard
him as appearance here too; in that case the separation' of his causality (i.e.,
of his will) from all the natural laws of the world of sense in one and the
same subject would be a contradiction; but this would come to nothing if
they were willing to reflect and to acknowledge, as is equitable, that things
in themselves (though hidden) must lie behind appearances as their ground
and that one cannot insist that the laws of their operation' should be the
same as those under which their appearances stand.
The subjective impossibility of explaining the freedom of the will is the
same as the impossibility of discovering and making comprehensible" an 4:460
interest which the human being can take in moral laws;* and yet he does
*An interest is that by which reason becomes practical, i.e., becomes a cause determining the
will. Hence only of a rational being does one say that he takes an interest in something;
nonrational creatures feel only sensible impulses. Reason takes an immediate interest in an
action only when the universal validity of the maxim of the action is a sufficient determining
ground of the will. Only such an interest is pure. But if it can determine the will only by
means of another object of desirer or on the presupposition of a special feeling of the subject,
then reason takes only a mediate interest in the action, and since reason all by itself, without
experience, can discover neither objects of the will nor a special feeling lying at its basis, this
latter interest would be only empirical and not a pure rational interest. The logical interest of
reason (to further its insights) is never immediate but presupposes purposes for its use.
q

niemals nach irgend einer Analogic
niemals begriffen, oder auch nur eingesehen werden kann
s
Absonderung
1
Wirkungsgesetzen
u
ausfindig und begreiflich zu machen
v
des Begehrens
r

63

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:461

really take an interest in them, the foundation of which in us we call moral
feeling, which some have falsely given out as the standard for our moral
appraisal whereas it must rather be regarded as the subjective effect that
the law exercises on the will, to which reason alone delivers the objective
grounds.
In order for a sensibly affected rational being to will that for which
reason alone prescribes the "ought," it is admittedly required that his
reason have the capacity to induce a feeling ofpleasure or of delight in the
fulfillment of duty, and thus there is required a causality of reason to
determine sensibility in conformity with its principles. But it is quite
impossible to see, that is, to make comprehensible a priori,"' how a mere
thought which itself contains nothing sensible produces a feeling* of pleasure or displeasure; for that is a special kind of causality about which, as
about any causality, we can determine nothing whatever a priori but must
for this consult experience alone. But since this cannot provide us with
any relation of cause to effect except between two objects of experience whereas here pure reason, by means of mere ideas (which yield no object
at all for experience), is to be the cause of an effect that admittedly lies in
experience - it follows that for us human beings it is quite impossible to
explain how and why the universality ofa maxim as law and hence morality
interests us. This much only is certain: it is not because the lam interests us
that it has validity for us (for that is heteronomy and dependence of
practical reason upon sensibility, namely upon a feeling lying at its basis,
in which case it could never be morally lawgiving); instead, the law interests because it is valid for us as human beings, since it arose from our will
as intelligence and s6 from our proper self; but what belongs to mere appearance is necessarily subordinated by reason to the constitution of the thing in itself

Thus the question, how a categorical imperative is possible, can indeed
be answered to the extent that one can furnish the sole presupposition on
which alone it is possible, namely the idea of freedom, and that one can
also see the necessity of this presupposition, which is sufficient for the
practical use of reason, that is, for the conviction of the validity of this
imperative and so also of the moral law; but how this presupposition itself
is possible can never be seen by any human reason. On the presupposition
of the freedom of the will of an intelligence, however, its autonomy, as the
formal condition under which alone it can be determined, is a necessary
consequence. Moreover, to presuppose this freedom of the will is (as
speculative philosophy can show) not only quite possible (without falling
into contradiction with the principle of natural necessity in the connection
of appearances in the world of sense); it is also practically necessary - that
is, necessary in idea, without any further condition - for a rational being
w
x

einzusehen, d.i. a priori begreiflich zu machen
Empfindung

64

FROM METAPHYSICS TO CRITIQUE
who is conscious of his causality through reason and so of a will (which is
distinct from desires) to put it under all his voluntary^ actions as their
condition. But it is quite beyond the capacity of any human reason to
explain how pure reason, without other incentives that might be taken
from elsewhere, can be of itself practical, that is, how the mere principle of
the universal validity ofall its maxims as laws (which would admittedly be the
form of a pure practical reason), without any matter (object) of the will in
which one could take some interest in advance, can of itself furnish an
incentive and produce an interest that would be called purely moral; it is
impossible for us to explain, in other words, how pure reason can be practical,
and all the pains and labor of seeking an explanation of it are lost.
It is just the same as if I tried to fathom how freedom itself as the
causality of a will is possible. For then I leave the philosophic ground of 4:462
explanation behind and I have no other. I might indeed revel* in the
intelligible world, the world of intelligences, which is still left to me; but
even though I have an idea of it, which has its good grounds, yet I have not
the least cognizance of it nor can I ever attain this by all the efforts of my
natural faculty of reason. It signifies only a "something" that is left over
when I have excluded from the determining grounds of my will everything
belonging to the world of sense, merely in order to limit the principle of
motives from the field of sensibility by circumscribing this field and showing that it does not include everything within itselP but that there is still
more beyond it; but of this something more I have no further cognizance.
As for pure reason, which thinks this ideal: after its isolation from all
matter, that is, cognition of objects, nothing is left for me but the form of
it - namely the practical law of the universal validity of maxims — and to
think of reason, conformably with this, with reference to a pure world of
understanding as a possible efficient cause, that is, a cause determining
the will. Here an incentive must be quite lacking; for this idea of an
intelligible world would itself have to be the incentive or that in which
reason originally takes an interest; but to make this comprehensible is
precisely the problem that we cannot solve.
Here, then, is the highest* limit of all moral inquiry; and it is already of
great importance to determine it just so that reason may not, on the one
hand, to the detriment of morals search about in the world of sense for the
supreme motive and a comprehensible but empirical interest, and that it
may not, on the other hand, impotently flap its wings without moving from
the spot in the space, which is empty for it, of transcendent concepts
y

willkurlichen
herumschtvarmen
a
A lies inAllem in sichfasse

z

b
oberste. Given the heading of the division beginning on 455, one would have expected
dufierste, " extreme."

65

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSICS OF MORALS

4:463

called the intelligible world, and so lose itself among phantoms. Moreover, the idea of a pure world of understanding as a whole of all intelligences, to which we ourselves belong as rational beings (though on the
other side we are also members of the world of sense), remains always a
useful and permitted idea for the sake of a rational belief, even if all
knowledge stops at its boundary - useful and permitted for producing in
us a lively interest in the moral law by means of the noble ideal of a
universal kingdom of ends in themselves (rational beings) to which we can
belong as members only when we carefully conduct ourselves in accordance with maxims of freedom as if they were laws of nature.
CONCLUDING REMARK
The speculative use of reason with respect to nature leads to the absolute
necessity of some supreme cause of the world: the practical use of reason
with regard to freedom leads also to an absolute necessity, but only of laws of
actions of a rational being as such. Now, it is an essential principle of every
use of our reason to push its cognition to consciousness of its necessity (for
without this it would not be cognition on the part of reason). It is, however, an equally essential limitation of this same reason that it can see
neither the necessity of what is and what happens nor the necessity of what
ought to happen unless a condition under which it is and happens or ought
to happen is put at the basis of this. In this way, however, by constant
inquiry after the condition, the satisfaction of reason is only further and
further postponed. Hence it restlessly seeks the unconditionally necessary
and sees itself constrained to assume it without any means of making it
comprehensible to itself, fortunate enough if it can discover only the
concept that is compatible with this presupposition. It is therefore no
censure of our deduction of the supreme principle of morality, but a
reproach that must be brought against human reason in general, that it
cannot make comprehensible as regards its absolute necessity an unconditional practical law (such as the categorical imperative must be); for, that it
is unwilling to do this through a condition - namely by means of some
interest laid down as a basis - cannot be held against it, since then it
would not be the moral law, that is, the supreme law of freedom. And thus
we do not indeed comprehend the practical unconditional necessity of the
moral imperative, but we nevertheless comprehend its incomprehensibility;
and this is all that can fairly be required of a philosophy that strives in its
principles to the very boundary of human reason.

66

Notes

Christian Wolff's Philosophia Practica Universalis was published in two volumes in 1738-9. Kant himself uses "Philosophia practica universalis" as the
subtitle of Section III of his Introduction to The Metaphysics of Morals
(6:221-8), the title of which is "Concepts Preliminary to the Metaphysics of
Morals" and in which he discusses concepts common to both The Doctrine of
Right and The Doctrine of Virtue.
Kant did plan to publish a work having this title; he apparently did not, however, intend to write a work entitled Critique of Practical Reason. I take it that
he is here referring to subject matter rather than titles, and I have therefore
capitalized neither. However, since a sharp distinction should be drawn
between the proposed book that he calls "a metaphysics of morals" and the
"metaphysics of morals" to which Section II of the Groundwork makes the
"transition," I have marked the distinction by retaining his definite or indefinite article in the case of the former while omitting it in the case of the latter.
On the sense of Verstand, Witz, and Urteilskraft that is relevant in this
context, see Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View (7:196-201). On
"character" in the general sense in which the word is used in this sentence,
see ibid., 7:249, 291-6.
Johann Georg Sulzer (1720-79), who in 1775 became director of the philosophic division of the Berlin Academy. He was best known for his writings in
aesthetics, especially his Allgemeine Theorie der Schonen Ku'nste.
Weltklugheit, or prudence regarding the world. Compare pragmatic
Weltkenntniss in 7:120; also 271 ff.
In his Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue (1725) and
Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the Passions and Affections and Illustrations
upon the Moral Sense (1728), Francis Hutcheson maintained that we make
moral distinctions and are motivated to virtuous actions not through reason
but through a moral sense, by means of which benevolence pleases us.

67

Selected glossary

act
action
activity
agreeable
appearance
approve

Akt
Handlung
Tatigkeit
angenehm
Erscheinung
billigen

bind
bound (ary)

Wohltatigkeit, Wohltun
Wohlwollen
verbinden
Grenze

capacity
cause
choice (power of)
choose
coercion
cognition
cognize
concept
condition
consent
consequence
constraint
contempt

Vermogen
Ursache
Willkur
wahlen
Zwang
Erkenntnis
erkennen
Begriff
Bedingung, Zustand
Einwilligung
Folgerung
Notigung, Zwang
Verachtung

desire
determination
determine
dignity
disapprove
displeasure
disposition
duty

Begierde
Bestimmung
bestimmen
Wiirde
miBbilligen
Unlust
Gesinnung
Pflicht

effect
employment

Wirkung
Gebrauch
Zweck

beneficence
benevolence

end

68

Selected glossary
enjoyment
evil
example
experience
explanation
explicate

GenuB
Bose
Beispiel
Erahrung
Erklarung
entwickeln

faith
feeling
final end
final purpose

Glaube
Gefiihl, Empfindung
Endzweck
Endabsicht

general

allgemein

happiness
holiness
honest
honor
human
human being
humanity

Gliickseligkeit
Heiligkeit
ehrlich
Ehre
menschlich
Mensch
Menschheit, Menschlichkeit, Humanitat

impulse
impurity
incentive
inclination
innocence
insight
intention
intuition

Trieb, Antrieb
Unlauterkeit
Triebfeder
Neigung
Unschuld
Einsicht
Absicht, Vorsatz
Anschauung (intuitus)

judgment

Urteil, Urteilskraft

kingdom
know
knowledge

Reich
wissen, kennen
Wissen, Kenntnis

lawfulness
lawgiver
legislation
legislator

Gesetzmafiigkeit
Gesetzgeber
Gesetzgebung
Gesetzgeber

morality, morals
motive

Sitten, Sittlichkeit, Moral, Moralitat
Bewegungsgrund, Bestimmungsgrund

necessitate
necessity
need

notigen
Notwendigkeit
Bedurfhis

69

Selected glossary
obligation
omission

Verpflichtung, Verbindung
Unterlassung

perfect
perfection
permission
philanthropy
please
pleasure
principle
propensity
prudence
purpose
purposiveness

vollkommen
Vollkommenheit
Erlaubnis
Menschenliebe
gefalien (v.r.)
Lust
Grundsatz, Prinzip
Hang
Klugheit
Absicht
ZweckmaBigkeit

reason
receptivity
representation
resistance
respect
right (n.)
rightful

Vernunft
Empfanglichkeit
Vorstellung
Widerstand
Achtung
Recht
rechtlich

self-conceit
self-love
sensation
sense (s)
sensibility
spontaneity
sublime
supreme
sympathy

Eigendiinkel
Eigenliebe, Selbstliebe
Empfindung
Sinn(e)
Sinnlichkeit
Selbsttatigkeit
erhaben
oberst
Teilnehmung

understanding
universal
universal validity

use

Verstand
allgemein
Allgemeingultigkeit
Gebrauch

validity
vice
virtue
volition
voluntary

Giiltigkeit
Laster
Tugend
Wollen
willkiirlich, freiwillig

will
worth
worthiness
wrong

Wille
Wert
Wiirdigkeit
unrecht (tun)

70

Index

categorical imperative: its content or
principle may be derived from its
concept, xvi-xvii, 30-1; as a synthetic
principle, xvi, 47, 58-9; duty must be
expressed in categorical imperatives, 34;
categorical imperatives and autonomous
motivation, xxii-xxiii, 40-1, 47-50;
relation between the three formulas of,
43-4; as the law of the free will, 52-3;
see also autonomy, formula of; humanity,
formula of; kingdom of ends; moral law;
morality, imperatives of; universal law,
formula of
causality, of the will, 52; and the two
standpoints, 56, 58; see also autonomy
cause, principle that every event has a cause,
ix-x, ix n.3, xxvi
character, 7, 12
circle, appears in the argument for the moral
law, xxvi, 55-6; argument not circular
after all, 57-8
coercion, xxi
contradictions, interpretations of,
xviii-xix
contradictions in conception vs.
contradictions in the will, xix
Copernican Revolution, in Kant's philosophy
in general, vii; in ethics, xxiii
critique of pure practical reason, 5

a priori vs. a posteriori, vin—IX, 5
analytic vs. synthetic judgments, viii-ix, xxiv;
imperatives of skill are analytic, 28;
imperatives of prudence would be
analytic if happiness were a determinate
concept, 28-9; but imperatives of
morality are synthetic, 30, 47, 51, 53;
difficulties of establishing synthetic
principles, 29-30, 51; how to establish
synthetic propositions, 53
analytic vs. synthetic methods of
presentation, xi, xvi, xxiv, 5-6
anthropology, practical, 2, 3, 22, 23
appearance and reality, xxvi-xxvii, 56; we
cannot cognize what we are in ourselves
through inner sensation, 56; insofar as
we are receptive we belong to the world
of sense, but insofar as we are active we
belong to the intellectual world, 56, 61;
common understanding wants to make
reality or things in themselves objects of
intuition, 57; things in themselves must
lie behind appearances, 63; see also
intelligible world; two standpoints
autonomy, 41; appropriate motivation for a
categorical imperative, xxii-xxiii, 40-1;
failure to grasp this is the reason why all
previous moral philosophy has failed,
40-1; and free will, xxiv-xxv, 52, 55,
57-8, 64; if we belonged wholly to the
world of understanding, actions would
conform perfectly to the law of
autonomy, 58, d2'rsee also autonomy,
formula of; heteronomy
autonomy, formula of: argument for, 39-41;
stated, 47; formula of autonomy in the
kingdom of ends corresponds to the
complete determination of all maxims,
44; can be arrived at by analyzing the
concept of morality, 47; but is a
synthetic principle, 47

deception, xxi
determinism, xxvi-xxvii; apparent conflict
between freedom and determinism gives
rise to a dialectic of reason, 60; this
resolved by appeal to the two
standpoints, 60-2; only what falls
under natural determinism can be
explained, 63
dignity, 42-3; morality as the ground of
dignity, 42; autonomy as the ground of
dignity, 43, 45, 46
divine will, not the basis of morality, xvi-xvii,
49; see also God

beneficence, duty of, as derived from the
Formula of Universal Law, 33; as
derived from the Formula of the
Humanity, 39
beneficence, good-willed vs. naturally
sympathetic, xii-xiv, 11-12

duties, categories or divisions of, 3in, 33;
see also duties to oneself and duties to
others; perfect and imperfect duties;
strict and wide duties
duties to oneself and duties to others, 31

71

Index
of the intelligible world, 53, 62; must be
presupposed as a property of rational
wills, 53-4; rational beings must act
under the idea of freedom, xxv, 53-4;
presupposition of freedom leads to
consciousness of moral law, 54; idea of
freedom seems to presuppose autonomy
and morality, 55; connection between
freedom and morality seems to make the
argument for morality circular, 55-8;
since freedom and autonomy are
reciprocal concepts, 55; but argument is
not circular, 57-8; when we think of
ourselves as free we think of ourselves as
members of the world of understanding,
58, 59, 62; all human beings think of
themselves as having free will and so as
being obligated, 59; freedom not a
concept of experience, 59-60; dialectic
of reason arising from the apparent
conflict of freedom and determinism
resolved by appeal to the two
standpoints, xxvi-xxvii, 60-2; objective
reality of, cannot be proved, 60, 63; we
cannot explain how it is possible, 62-5;
see also autonomy
friendship, 20

duty, 2, 4; defined, 10, 46; action from, xii;
distinguished from actions done from
self-interest, 10-11; distinguished from
actions done from immediate
inclination, 11-13; moral worth of
actions from duty depends on the
agent's principle of volition rather than
his purpose, 13,14; defined as the
necessity of an action from respect for
law, 13, 14, 16; formula of universal law
as the principle of, 15-16
empiricism, viii
ends, role in volition, xx, 36; objective vs.
subjective, 36, 37; relative ends vs. ends
in themselves, 36, 37; rational nature is
an end-in-itself, 37; rational nature sets
ends, 44; see also ends in itself
ends in itself, viii, xxi, 368".; we are ends in
ourselves in virtue of lawgiving, 42;
morality makes us ends in ourselves, 42;
autonomy makes us ends in ourselves,
43; ends in themselves are conceived as
existing things not to act against rather
than ends to be effected, 44—5; end in
itself must be the subject of all ends, 45;
see also ends, role in volition
ethics, philosophical treatment of, 1-5; need
for an a priori part, 2-4
examples, relevance to moral philosophy, xv,

God, as morally perfect, 21; as the sovereign
of the kingdom of ends, 41; as a
sovereign under whom the kingdom of
ends and the kingdom of nature may be
united, 46; good will, 7-10; as a
condition of the value of happiness, 7,
10; as a condition of the value of talents
and personal qualities, 7-8, 42; as a
condition of value in general, xi, 10;
value rests in the nature of its volition
itself, xii, 8; is good in itself, 8, 10; value
is independent of usefulness or
fruitfulness, 8; value is independent of
its purposes, 13, 14; is the natural
purpose of the rational will, 8-10;
explication of the good will to find its
principle, 10-16; is motivated by the
representation of law itself, 14-15; must
be autonomous, 50; why the good will's
principle must be that of acting on
maxims which can be universal law,
14-16; its formula is the categorical
imperative, 44, 53; even the most
hardened scoundrel is conscious of a
good will that constitutes a law for him,
59

19-20

exceptions, we make exceptions of ourselves
when we violate duties, 33—4
false promise, example of, 15; under the
formula of universal law, xvii-xviii, 32;
under the formula of humanity,
xxi-xxii, 38
forbidden, xix; means the action does not
accord with autonomy, 46
formal vs. material, x, xiv n.7, 1; the will
must be determined by the formal
principle of volition, 13; defined, 36
formula of autonomy, see autonomy, formula
of
formula of humanity, see humanity, formula
of
formula of universal law, see universal law,
formula of
formula of universal law of nature, see
universal law, formula of
freedom: as independence of determination
by alien causes, xxiv, 52; positive and
negative, xxiv, 52-3, 62; why the will's
freedom must be autonomy, 52-3; a free
will is a will under moral laws, 53;
morality follows analytically from
freedom, 53; points us to the conception

happiness, value conditioned by the good
will, xi, 7, 10; not the natural purpose of
the rational will, 8-10, 14; not the basis

72

Index
of morality, 22, 48; problems about
seeking happiness through reason, 9-10;
those problems arise because it is an
indeterminate concept, 12; an end for all
rational beings by a natural necessity,
26; and so can be presupposed a priori of
human beings, 26; prudence defined as
skill in the choice of means to happiness,
26-7; an indeterminate concept, 28; an
ideal of the imagination, 29; this
renders imperatives of prudence mere
counsels, 29; as an indirect duty, 12;
happiness pursued from inclination
contrasted with happiness pursued from
duty, 12
heteronomy, xxii-xxiii, 41, 52, 57, 58, 64; as
the basis of all spurious moral
principles, 47-50; why acting on the
principle of perfection is heteronomous,
50; insofar as we are members of the
world of sense, our actions conform to
the heteronomy of nature, 58, 62; see
also autonomy
holy will, defined, 46
honor, 11
human nature, not the ground of morality,
22,34
humanity, as an end-in-itself, xxi, 37-9; as a
limiting condition of all value, xxii, 39;
we are ends in ourselves in virtue of
lawgiving, 42; morality makes us ends in
ourselves, 42; autonomy makes us ends
in ourselves, 43
humanity, formula of, xx-xxii; argument for,
37-8; statement of, 38; duties derived
from, 38-9; corresponds to the matter
of maxims, 43-4
Hutcheson, Francis, 49n
hypothetical imperatives, defined, xv, 25;
either problematic or assertoric, 26—7;
imperatives of skill, 26; imperatives of
prudence, 26-7; technical vs. pragmatic,
27; possibility of, xvi, 27-9; duty cannot
be expressed in, 34; see also imperatives
imperatives, defined, 24; expressed by an
ought, 24; say that actions would be
good to do, 24-5; do not hold for divine
will, 25; express the relation of objective
laws of volition to subjectively imperfect
wills, 25; are either hypothetical or
categorical, xv, 25-7; possibility of, xvi,
27-30; and the two standpoints, 58-9
incentives, xiii; defined, 36
inclinations, 3; defined, 25n; actions done
from immediate inclination
distinguished from actions done from
duty, 11-13; inclinations and their

objects not objects of respect, 13; their
objects have only conditional worth, 37;
relation to needs 25n; we wish to be free
of them, 59; not regarded as part of our
proper self, 61-2
instinct, 9, 10
intellectual world, see intelligible world; two
standpoints
intelligible world (or intellectual world or
world of understanding): a third
cognition needed for deduction to
which positive freedom points us, 53;
conception of comes from the
distinction between appearance and
reality, 56; insofar as we are receptive we
belong to the world of sense, but insofar
as we are active we belong to the
intellectual world, 56; our activity
shown by the spontaneity of reason in
the production of ideas places us among
the intelligences, 57; freedom transfers
us to world of understanding, 58, 59, 62;
we have a will only insofar as we belong
to the world of understanding, 58, 61-2;
world of understanding contains the
ground of the world of sense and its
laws, 58; world of understanding is
therefore legislative for the will, 58-9;
we identify our proper selves as
intelligences, 62, 64; world of
understanding an object of thought, not
intuition or feeling, 62, 65; world of
understanding is only a standpoint, 62;
the idea of the intelligible world as an
incentive or object of moral interest, 65;
intelligible world as the kingdom of ends
is the object of moral interest, 66; see
also appearance and reality; two
standpoints
interest: defined, 25n; acting from interest vs.
taking an interest, 25n; our interest in
the ideas of morality, 54-8; taking an
interest, 54; and the need to explain the
worth we assign to moral action, 55; this
interest itself cannot be explained, 63-4;
idea of the intelligible world as itself the
object of moral interest, 65; intelligible
world considered as the kingdom of
ends is the object of moral interest, 66
Jesus, as ideal of moral perfection, 21
judgments, typology of, viii-ix
Kant, Immanuel, life and philosophical
project, vii-ix
kingdom of ends, xxii-xxiv, 41-2; defined,
xxiii, 41; rational beings as members
and sovereigns of, 41; moral laws make a

73

Index
kingdom of ends - continued
kingdom of ends possible, 42; compared
and related to the kingdom of nature,
45-6; formula of, 45; as the object of
moral faith, xxviii, 66
law of nature, formula of, 31
laws, ix, x, 1; of freedom, xxiii; idea of law as
the object of respect, 13-15; of what
happens vs. of what ought to happen,
36; rational laws for the use of our
powers distinguished from natural laws,
57; world of understanding contains the
ground of the world of sense and its
laws, 58; see also determinism; moral law
lies, 15; see also deception; false promise,
example of
logic, ix, 1
love, practical but not pathological can be
commanded, 13; see also beneficence,
duty of; beneficence, good-willed
maxims, xiii, 14; defined, i4n, 3m
metaphysics, x, 1-2; of morals, 2—5;
distinguished from groundwork and
critique, 5; morality is grounded on
metaphysics, 21; but it must be
metaphysics of morals, not speculative
metaphysics, 35
moral feeling, not the basis of morality, 49
moral law, 2—3, 4; as a motive, 3-4; must hold
for rational beings as such, 20-1; must
hold with absolute necessity, 20; cannot
be derived from examples, 21, 29; must
be entirely a priori, 35; follows
analytically if freedom is presupposed,
52-3, 54; moral principle is synthetic,
53; cannot be arrived at by analyzing
concept of the good will, 53; how
synthetic principles are established, 53;
presupposition of freedom leads to
consciousness of the moral law, but does
not explain the worth we assign to that
way of acting and so the interest
attached to the ideas of morality, 54-5;
the argument from the presupposition
of freedom therefore seems circular, 55;
but it is not, 57-8; we are autonomous
in the world of understanding, obligated
insofar as we also belong to the world of
sense, 58; moral law is the law of the
world of understanding, and the world
of understanding contains the grounds
of the laws of the world of sense, 58;
world of understanding is therefore
lawgiving for the will, 58; laws of
autonomy are therefore imperatives for
the will, 58; this deduction confirmed

by the practical use of common human
reason, 59; limitations of the argument,
64-6; see also categorical imperative
moral worth, xi-xiv, moral worth, of actions
done from duty, 12; depends on the
agent's principle of volition rather than
his purpose, 13, 14; a matter of inner
principle, 19-20
morality, imperatives of, 27; are apodictic, 26;
how they are possible, 29-30; must be
investigated purely a priori, 30, 34—5;
are the only imperatives which are laws,
30; are synthetic a priori, 30; see also
categorical imperative; moral law
motives, 3-4; pure vs. empirical, 4; defined,
36
natural purposes, 8-10; see also teleology
necessitation, as the determination of a will
not necessarily obedient to the laws of
reason, 24, 25; is different for the three
kinds of imperatives (skill, prudence,
and morality), 27-9; takes the form of
rule, counsel, or command, 27; duty is
practical necessitation, 42; obligation is
moral necessitation, 46
noumenal vs. phenomenal, xxvi-xxvii; see
appearance and reality; intelligible
world; two standpoints
obligation: defined, 46; and necessity, 2-3;
must hold for all rational beings, 2—3;
concept of, 4-5
ought, as the expression of imperatives, xv,
24-5; does not hold for divine will, 25; is
a "will" for perfectly rational beings,
54-5, 58
perfect and imperfect duties, 31,3 m;
examples of perfect duties, 31-2, 38;
examples of imperfect duties, 32-3,
38-9; see also strict and wide duties
perfection, not the basis of morality, 22, 49;
but principle of perfection nearer to the
truth than moral sense theory, 49—50;
why the principle of perfect action is
heteronomous even though its motive is
not the pursuit of happiness, 50
permissible, xix, 46
philosophy: divisions of, 1, 36; investigates
basis of respect for law, 16; not needed
to know what accords with duty, 16;
whether practical philosophy is better
avoided, 17; necessity of doing philosophy,
17-18, 22-4; need for a priori or pure
philosophy, 1-5, 21-4, 34-5; practical vs.
theoretical philosophy, 35-6; limits of
practical philosophy, xxvii-xxviii, 62-4

74

Index
physics (natural philosophy), ix, i, 22, 36;
rational vs. empirical parts of, 1
pleasure, in following the moral law,
produced by reason, 64
practical and theoretical reason, 5, 17-18;
resolution of the apparent conflict
between free will and determinism,
59—66; lead in different ways to the
idea of a supreme cause of the world, 66;

standpoints, see two standpoints
strict and wide duties, xix, xix n.9, 33
suicide, avoidance motivated by immediate
inclination contrasted with avoidance
motivated by duty, 11; duty not to
commit, as derived from the Formula of
Universal Law, 31-2; as derived from
the Formula of Humanity, 38
sympathy, xiii, 11-12, 13, 59
synthetic, see analytic vs. synthetic methods
of presentation; analytic vs. synthetic
judgments

see also reason

promise, see false promise, example of
prudence, contrasted with morality, 15;
defined, 27n; see also prudence,
imperatives of
prudence, imperatives of, 26-7; are
assertoric, 26; how they are possible,
28-9; would be analytic if happiness
were a determinate concept, 28-9; are
not laws, 30

teleology, xi-xii n.5, xviii
theology, 22
two standpoints, xxvii, 56—9; we view
ourselves from a different standpoint as
efficient causes of our actions than when
we view our actions as effects, 56; we
distinguish appearances from things in
themselves, 56; this leads us to
distinguish world of sense from world of
understanding or intellectual world, 56;
insofar as we are receptive we belong to
the world of sense, but insofar as we are
active we belong to the intellectual
world, 56; our activity shown by the
spontaneity of reason in the production
of ideas places us among the
intelligences, 57; freedom transfers us to
world of understanding, 58; we are
autonomous in the world of
understanding, obligated insofar as we
also belong to the world of sense, 58; we
have a will insofar as we belong to the
world of understanding, and regard our
actions in the world of sense as
appearances of that will, 58; we regard
our actions as appearances of intelligible
causality insofar as we are members of
the world of understanding and as
determined by desires and inclinations
insofar as we are members of the world
of sense, 58; world of understanding
contains the ground of the world of
sense and its laws, 58; laws of the world
of understanding are imperatives for the
will in the world of sense, 58; appeal to
the two standpoints resolves the
apparent contradiction between
freedom and determinism, 60-2; both
standpoints necessary to our selfconception, 61, 64

Quine, W. V., ix n.2
rational being, xv, xx; acts on representation
of laws, 24; distinguished by the fact
that it sets itself an end, 44
rationalism, viii
Rawls, John, xviii n.8; influence of, xxxiii
reason: unity of, 5; as lawgiver, 19; commands
what ought to happen, 20; must regard
itself as the author of its principles, 54;
contrasted with understanding, 57;
shows its spontaneity in thinking the
ideas, 57; and so as pure activity, places
us among the intelligences, 57, 62;
limitations of, 62-6; seeks the
unconditioned, 66; see also will
reciprocity, of freedom and autonomy, 55
relative value, xx, 36
respect, for law, xiv; for persons, xxi; duty is
the necessity of an action from respect
for law, 13; possible objects of, 13; idea
of law itself as the object of respect,
13-15, i4n, 16; explicated as a feeling
generated by reason, i4n; as a response
to autonomy, 43; as the moral incentive,
46
self-conceit, 20
self-cultivation, duty of, as derived from the
Formula of Universal Law, 32-3; as
derived from the Formula of Humanity,
38-9
self-love, as a covert motive for moral action,
19, 29-30
skill, imperatives of, 26; are problematic, 26;
are technical, 27; how they are possible,
27-8; are analytic, 28; are not laws, 30
Socrates, 16

universal law, formula of, xiv, xvi-xx, 15-16,
31-4; is the principle of common human
reason, 15-17; and the formula of the
universal law of nature, 31; examples

75

Index
the world of understanding, but is
obligated because we are also members
of the world of sense, 58-9; all human
beings think of themselves as having
free will and therefore being obligated,
59; we claim for ourselves a will
independent of sensibility, 61; and as
such do not identify inclinations and
impulses as part of our proper self,
62; will as intelligence is our proper self,
64
Wolff, Christian, 4
world of sense vs. world of understanding, see
appearance and reality; intelligible
world; two standpoints
worthiness to be happy, 7, 55

deriving duties from, 15, 31-3;
corresponds to the form of maxims, 43;
is the best formula to use for moral
appraisal, 44
will: pure, 4; denned, 24, 36; wills of rational
beings give universal law, 39; is a
causality of living beings insofar as they
are rational, 52; why the will's freedom
must be autonomy, 52-3; a free will is a
will under moral laws, 53; freedom must
be presupposed as a property of rational
wills, 53-4; we have wills only insofar as
we are efficient causes belonging to the
intelligible world, 58; would be perfectly
autonomous if we were only members of

76

Cambridge texts in the history of philosophy
Titles published in the series thus far
Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole Logic or the Art of Thinking (edited by
Jill Vance Buroker)
Boyle A Free Enquiry into the Vulgarly Received Notion ofNature (edited by
Edward B. Davis and Michael Hunter)
Clarke A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God and Other Writings
(edited by Ezio Vailati)
Con way The Principles ofthe Most Ancient and Modern Philosophy (edited by
Allison P. Coudert and Taylor Corse)
Cudworth A Treatise Concerning Eternal and Immutable Morality with A Treatise
ofFreewill (edited by Sarah Hutton)
Descartes Meditations on First Philosophy, with selections from the Objections and
Replies (edited with an introduction by John Cottingham)
Kant Critique ofPractical Reason (edited by Mary Gregor with an introduction
by Andrews Reath)
Kant Groundwork ofthe Metaphysics of Morals (edited by Mary Gregor with an
introduction by Christine M. Korsgaard)
Kant The Metaphysics of Morals (edited by Mary Gregor with an introduction by
Roger Sullivan)
Kant Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics (edited by Gary Hatfield)
La Mettrie Machine Man and Other Writings (edited by Ann Thomson)
Leibniz New Essays on Human Understanding (edited by Peter Remnant and
Jonathan Bennett)
Malebranche Dialogues on Metaphysics and on Religion (edited by Nicholas Jolley
and David Scott)
Malebranche The Search after Truth (edited by Thomas M. Lennon and
Paul J. Olscamp)
Mendelssohn Philosophical Writings (edited by Daniel 0. Dahlstrom)
Nietzsche Daybreak (edited by Maudemarie Clark and Brian Leiter, translated
by R. J. Hollingdale)
Nietzsche Human, All Too Human (translated by R. J. Hollingdale with an
introduction by Richard Schacht)
Nietzsche Untimely Meditations (edited by Daniel Breazeale, translated by
R J . Hollingdale)
Schleiermacher On Religion: Speeches to its Cultured Despisers (edited by
Richard Crouter)

