Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

1

Albert Camus (1913-1960) gives a quite different account of philosophy and politics of
existentialism from that of Sartre. Perhaps the most striking difference from Sartre is his
conception of the absurd. For Sartre absurdity belongs to the world prior to activity of
consciousness, while Camus’s idea of the absurd is closer to Kierkegaard and Nietzsche—the
absurd is a direct consequence of the absence of God. Without God the discrepancy between
human aspirations and the world is acute. The human condition is characterized by the
probability of suffering and the certainty of death—a fate which human reason cannot accept as
reasonable. In the face of this absurdity, the universal reason of the Enlightenment has nothing to
say. In The Myth of Sisyphus Camus elucidates this concept of the absurd. The absurd comes
with the realization that the world is not rational: “At this point of his effort man stands face to
face with the irrational. He feels within him his longing for happiness and for reason. The absurd
is born of this confrontation between the human need and the unreasonable silence of the world”
(28).
This confrontation is epitomized in The Plague (1947) in the painful death of a child. The
arbitrariness of the plague parallels the absurdity of existence. The absurdity of existence raises
the question of suicide and the meaning of life thus becomes “the only truly serious
philosophical problem.” The myth of Sisyphus is a potent image of futility. Camus’ response is
that only the ‘lucid’ recognition of the absurdity of existence liberates us from belief in another
life and permits us to live for the instant, for the beauty, pleasure and the ‘implacable grandeur’
of existence. Lucidity is the clarity and courage of mind which refuses all comforting illusions
and self-deception. Lucidity is Camus’s notion comparable to Kierkegaard and Sartre’s anguish,
but in the end Camus is more positive than either Kierkegaard and Sartre. Camus concludes that
“One must imagine Sisyphus happy.”
Camus draws the political moral from his confrontation with the absurd in The Rebel
(1951) which is an ethic of uncompromising honesty and lucid revolt against absurdity. Its most
obvious enemies are found in the stifling atmosphere of conventional bourgeois morality, and
more horrifyingly, in totalitarianism, of either fascist or communist varieties. Though a member
of the communist party as a youth, Camus became openly hostile to communism, rejecting the
idea that the ends can justify the means and the arrogance of philosophies of history which claim
to know the end in advance.
The Myth of Sisyphus
[3]
AN ABSURD REASONING
Absurdity and Suicide

T

HERE is but one truly serious philosophical problem, and that is suicide. Judging whether life is or is
not worth living amounts to answering the fundamental question of philosophy. All the rest— whether
or not the world has three dimensions, whether the mind has nine or twelve categories—comes afterwards.
These are games; one must first answer. And if it is true, as Nietzsche claims, that a philosopher, to deserve
our respect, must preach by example, you can appreciate the importance of that reply, for it will precede the
definitive act. These are facts the heart can feel; yet they call for careful study before they become clear to
the intellect.
If I ask myself how to judge that this question is more urgent than that, I reply that one judges by the
actions it entails. I have never seen anyone die for the ontological argument. Galileo, who held a scientific truth
of great importance, abjured it with the greatest ease as soon as it endangered his life. In a certain sense, he did

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

2

right.1 That truth was not worth the stake. Whether the earth or the sun revolves around the other is a matter of
[4] profound indifference. To tell the truth, it is a futile question. On the other hand, I see many people die
because they judge that life is not worth living. I see others paradoxically getting killed for the ideas or
illusions that give them a reason for living (what is called a reason for living is also an excellent reason
for dying). I therefore conclude that the meaning of life is the most urgent of questions. How to answer it?
On all essential problems (I mean thereby those that run the risk of leading to death or those that intensify
the passion of living) there are probably but two methods of thought: the method of La Palisse and the
method of Don Quixote. Solely the balance between evidence and lyricism can allow us to achieve
simultaneously emotion and lucidity. In a subject at once so humble and so heavy with emotion, the
learned and classical dialectic must yield, one can see, to a more modest attitude of mind deriving at one
and the same time from common sense and understanding.
Suicide has never been dealt with except as a social phenomenon. On the contrary, we are
concerned here, at the outset, with the relationship between individual thought and suicide. An act like
this is prepared within the silence of the heart, as is a great work of art. The man himself is ignorant of it.
One evening he pulls the trigger or jumps. Of an apartment-building manager who had killed himself I
was told that he had lost his daughter five years before, that he had changed greatly since, and that that
experience had "undermined" him. A more exact word cannot be imagined. Beginning to think is
beginning to be undermined. Society has but [5] little connection with such beginnings. The worm is in
man's heart. That is where it must be sought. One must follow and understand this fatal game that leads
from lucidity in the face of existence to flight from light.
There are many causes for a suicide, and generally the most obvious ones were not the most
powerful. Rarely is suicide committed (yet the hypothesis is not excluded) through reflection. What sets off
the crisis is almost always unverifiable. Newspapers often speak of "personal sorrows" or of "incurable
illness." These explanations are plausible. But one would have to know whether a friend of the desperate
man had not that very day addressed him indifferently. He is the guilty one. For that is enough to precipitate
all the rancors and all the boredom still in suspension.2
But if it is hard to fix the precise instant, the subtle step when the mind opted for death, it is
easier to deduce from the act itself the consequences it implies. In a sense, and as in melodrama, killing
yourself amounts to confessing. It is confessing that life is too much for you or that you do not
understand it. Let's not go too far in such analogies, however, but rather return to everyday words. It is
merely confessing that that "is not worth the trouble." Living, naturally, is never easy. You continue
making the gestures commanded by existence, for many reasons, the first of which is habit. Dying
voluntarily implies that you have recognized, even instinctively, [6] the ridiculous character of that habit, the
absence of any profound reason for living, the insane character of that daily agitation, and the uselessness of
suffering.
What, then, is that incalculable feeling that deprives the mind of the sleep necessary to life? A world
that can be explained even with bad reasons is a familiar world. But, on the other hand, in a universe suddenly
divested of illusions and lights, man feels an alien, a stranger. His exile is without remedy since he is deprived of
the memory of a lost home or the hope of a promised land. This divorce between man and his life, the actor and
his setting, is properly the feeling of absurdity. All healthy men having thought of their own suicide, it can be
seen, without further explanation, that there is a direct connection between this feeling and the longing for
death.
The subject of this essay is precisely this relationship between the absurd and suicide, the exact degree
to which suicide is a solution to the absurd. The principle can be established that for a man who does not cheat,
what he believes to be true must determine his action. Belief in the absurdity of existence must then dictate his
1 From the point of view of the relative value of truth. On the other hand, from the point of view of virile behavior, this
scholar's fragility may well make us smile.
2 Let us not miss this opportunity to point out the relative character of this essay. Suicide may indeed be related to much more

honorable considerations—for example, the political suicides of protest, as they were called, during the Chinese revolution.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

3

conduct. It is legitimate to wonder, clearly and without false pathos, whether a conclusion of this importance
requires forsaking as rapidly as possible an incomprehensible condition. I am speaking, of course, of men
inclined to be in harmony with themselves.
Stated clearly, this problem may seem both simple and insoluble. But it is wrongly assumed that
simple questions involve answers that are no less simple and that evidence implies evidence. A priori and
reversing [7] the terms of the problem, just as one does or does not kill oneself, it seems that there are but two
philosophical solutions, either yes or no. This would be too easy. But allowance must be made for those who,
without concluding, continue questioning. Here I am only slightly indulging in irony: this is the majority. I
notice also that those who answer "no" act as if they thought "yes." As a matter of fact, if I accept the
Nietzschean criterion, they think "yes" in one way or another. On the other hand, it often happens that those
who commit suicide were assured of the meaning of life. These contradictions are constant. It may even be
said that they have never been so keen as on this point where, on the contrary, logic seems so desirable. It is
a commonplace to compare philosophical theories and the behavior of those who profess them. But it must
be said that of the thinkers who refused a meaning to life none except Kirilov who belongs to literature,
Peregrinos who is torn of legend,3 and Jules Lequier who belongs to hypothesis, admitted his logic to the
point of refusing that life. Schopenhauer is often cited, as a fit subject for laughter, because he praised
suicide while seated at a well-set table. This is no subject for joking. That way of not taking the tragic
seriously is not so grievous, but it helps to judge a man.
In the face of such contradictions and obscurities must we conclude that there is no relationship
between [8] the opinion one has about life and the act one commits to leave it? Let us not exaggerate in
this direction. In a man' s attachment to life there is something stronger than all the ills in the world. The
body' s judgment is as good as the mind's, and the body shrinks from annihilation. We get into the habit of
living before acquiring the habit of thinking. In that race which daily hastens us toward death, the body
maintains its irreparable lead. In short, the essence of that contradiction lies in what I shall call the act of
eluding because it is both less and more than diversion in the Pascalian sense. Eluding is the invariable
game. The typical act of eluding, the fatal evasion that constitutes the third theme of this essay, is hope.
Hope of another life one must "deserve" or trickery of those who live not for life itself but for some great
idea that will transcend it, refine it, give it a meaning, and betray it.
Thus everything contributes to spreading confusion. Hitherto, and it has not been wasted effort,
people have played on words and pretended to believe that refusing to grant a meaning to life necessarily
leads to declaring that it is not worth living. In truth, there is no necessary common measure between these
two judgments. One merely has to refuse to be misled by the confusions, divorces, and inconsistencies
previously pointed out. One must brush everything aside and go straight to the real problem. One kills
oneself because life is not worth living, that is certainly a truth—yet an unfruitful one because it is a truism.
But does that insult to existence, that flat denial in which it is plunged come from the fact that it has no
meaning? Does its absurdity require one to [9] escape it through hope or suicide—this is what must be
clarified, hunted down, and elucidated while brushing aside all the rest. Does the Absurd dictate death?
This problem must be given priority over others, outside all methods of thought and all exercises of the
disinterested mind. Shades of meaning, contradictions, the psychology that an "objective" mind can
always introduce into all problems have no place in this pursuit and this passion. It calls simply for an
unjust—in other words, logical—thought. That is not easy. It is always easy to be logical. It is almost
impossible to be logical to the bitter end. Men who die by their own hand consequently follow to its
conclusion their emotional inclination. Reflection on suicide gives me an opportunity to raise the only
problem to interest me: is there a logic to the point of death? I cannot know unless I pursue, without reckless
passion, in the sole light of evidence, the reasoning of which I am here suggesting the source. This is what I
call an absurd reasoning. Many have begun it. I do not yet know whether or not they kept to it.

3 I have heard of an emulator of Peregrinos, a post-war writer who, after having finished his first book, committed suicide to attract

attention to his work. Attention was in fact attracted, but the book was judged no good.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

4

When Karl Jaspers, revealing the impossibility of constituting the world as a unity, exclaims:
"This limitation leads me to myself, where I can no longer withdraw behind an objective point of view
that I am merely representing, where neither I myself nor the existence of others can any longer become
an object for me," he is evoking after many others those waterless deserts where thought reaches its
confines. After many others, yes indeed, but how eager they were to get out of them! At that last
crossroad where thought hesitates, many men have arrived and even some of the humblest. They then [10]
abdicated what was most precious to them, their life. Others, princes of the mind, abdicated likewise, but they
initiated the suicide of their thought in its purest revolt. The real effort is to stay there, rather, in so far as that is
possible, and to examine closely the odd vegetation of those distant regions. Tenacity and acumen are privileged
spectators of this inhuman show in which absurdity, hope, and death carry on their dialogue. The mind can then
analyze the figures of that elementary yet subtle dance before illustrating them and reliving them itself.
Absurd Walls
Like great works, deep feelings always mean more than they are conscious of saying. The regularity of an
impulse or a repulsion in a soul is encountered again in habits of doing or thinking, is reproduced in
consequences of which the soul itself knows nothing. Great feelings take with them their own universe,
splendid or abject. They light up with their passion an exclusive world in which they recognize their climate.
There is a universe of jealousy, of ambition, of selfishness, or of generosity. A universe—in other words, a
metaphysic and an attitude of mind. What is true of already specialized feelings will be even more so of
emotions basically as indeterminate, simultaneously as vague and as "definite," as remote and as "present"
as those furnished us by beauty or aroused by absurdity.
At any streetcorner the feeling of absurdity can strike [11] any man in the face. As it is, in its distressing
nudity, in its light without effulgence, it is elusive. But that very difficulty deserves reflection. It is probably
true that a man remains forever unknown to us and that there is in him something irreducible that escapes
us. But practically I know men and recognize them by their behavior, by the totality of their deeds, by the
consequences caused in life by their presence. Likewise, all those irrational feelings which offer no purchase to
analysis. I can de-fine them practically, appreciate them practically, by gathering together the sum of their
consequences in the domain of the intelligence, by seizing and noting all their aspects, by outlining their
universe. It is certain that apparently, though I have seen the same actor a hundred times, I shall not for that
reason know him any better personally. Yet if I add up the heroes he has personified and if I say that I know him
a little better at the hundredth character counted off, this will be felt to contain an element of truth. For this
apparent paradox is also an apologue. There is a moral to it. It teaches that a man defines himself by his makebelieve as well as by his sincere impulses. There is thus a lower key of feelings, inaccessible in the heart but
partially disclosed by the acts they imply and the attitudes of mind they assume. It is clear that in this way I am
defining a method. But it is also evident that that method is one of analysis and not of knowledge. For methods
imply metaphysics; unconsciously they disclose conclusions that they often claim not to know yet. Similarly,
the last pages of a book are already contained in the first pages. Such a link is [12] inevitable. The method
defined here acknowledges the feeling that all true knowledge is impossible. Solely appearances can be
enumerated and the climate make itself felt.
Perhaps we shall be able to overtake that elusive feeling of absurdity in the different but closely
related worlds of intelligence, of the art of living, or of art itself. The climate of absurdity is in the
beginning. The end is the absurd universe and that attitude of mind which lights the world with its true
colors to bring out the privileged and implacable visage which that attitude has discerned in it.
*
*
*
All great deeds and all great thoughts have a ridiculous beginning. Great works are often born on a
street-corner or in a restaurant' s revolving door. So it is with absurdity. The absurd world more than
others derives its nobility from that abject birth. In certain situations, replying "nothing" when asked what
one is thinking about may be pretense in a man. Those who are loved are well aware of this. But if that
reply is sincere, if it symbolizes that odd state of soul in which the void becomes eloquent, in which the

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

5

chain of daily gestures is broken, in which the heart vainly seeks the link that will connect it again, then it
is as it were the first sign of absurdity.
It happens that the stage sets collapse. Rising, street-car, four hours in the office or the factory, meal,
street-car, four hours of work, meal, sleep, and Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday and
Saturday according [13] to the same rhythm—this path is easily followed most of the time. But one
day the "why" arises and everything begins in that weariness tinged with amazement. "Begins"—this is
important. Weariness comes at the end of the acts of a mechanical life, but at the same time it inaugurates
the impulse of consciousness. It awakens consciousness and provokes what follows. What follows is the
gradual return into the chain or it is the definitive awakening. At the end of the awakening comes, in
time, the consequence: suicide or recovery. In itself weariness has something sickening about it.
Here, I must conclude that it is good. For everything begins with consciousness and nothing is worth
anything except through it. There is nothing original about these remarks. But they are obvious; that is
enough for a while, during a sketchy reconnaissance in the origins of the absurd. Mere "anxiety," as
Heidegger says, is at the source of everything.
Likewise and during every day of an unillustrious life, time carries us. But a moment always comes
when we have to carry it. We live on the future: "tomorrow," "later on," "when you have made your way,"
"you will understand when you are old enough." Such irrelevancies are wonderful, for, after all, it' s a
matter of dying. Yet a day comes when a man notices or says that he is thirty. Thus he asserts his youth.
But simultaneously he situates himself in relation to time. He takes his place in it. He admits that he
stands at a certain point on a curve that he acknowledges having to travel to its end. He belongs to time,
and by the horror that seizes him, [14] he recognizes his worst enemy. Tomorrow, he was longing for
tomorrow, whereas everything in him ought to reject it. That revolt of the flesh is the absurd.4
A step lower and strangeness creeps in: perceiving that the world is "dense," sensing to what a degree a stone
is foreign and irreducible to us, with what intensity nature or a landscape can negate us. At the heart of all
beauty lies something inhuman, and these hills, the softness of the sky, the outline of these trees at this very
minute lose the illusory meaning with which we had clothed them, henceforth more remote than a lost paradise.
The primitive hostility of the world rises up to face us across millennia. For a second we cease to understand it
because for centuries we have understood in it solely the images and designs that we had attributed to it
beforehand, because henceforth we lack the power to make use of that artifice. The world evades us because it
becomes itself again. That stage scenery masked by habit becomes again what it is. It withdraws at a distance
from us. Just as there are days when under the familiar face of a woman, we see as a stranger her we had loved
months or years ago, perhaps we shall come even to desire what suddenly leaves us so alone. But the time has
not yet come. Just one thing: that denseness and that strangeness of the world is the absurd.
Men, too, secrete the inhuman. At certain moments [15] of lucidity, the mechanical aspect of their
gestures, their meaningless pantomime makes silly everything that surrounds them. A man is talking on the
telephone behind a glass partition; you cannot hear him, but you see his incomprehensible dumb show: you
wonder why he is alive. This discomfort in the face of man' s own inhumanity, this incalculable tumble before
the image of what we are, this "nausea," as a writer of today calls it, is also the absurd. Likewise the stranger
who at certain seconds comes to meet us in a mirror, the familiar and yet alarming brother we encounter in our
own photographs is also the absurd.
I come at last to death and to the attitude we have toward it. On this point everything has been said and it is
only proper to avoid pathos. Yet one will never be sufficiently surprised that everyone lives as if no one "knew."
This is because in reality there is no experience of death. Properly speaking, nothing has been experienced but
what has been lived and made conscious. Here, it is barely possible to speak of the experience of others' deaths.
It is a substitute, an illusion, and it never quite convinces us. That melancholy convention cannot be
persuasive. The horror comes in reality from the mathematical aspect of the event. If time frightens us, this
is because it works out the problem and the solution comes afterward. All the pretty speeches about the soul
4 But not in the proper sense. This is not a definition, but rather an enumeration of the feelings that may admit of the absurd.

Still, the enumeration finished, the absurd has nevertheless not been exhausted.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

6

will have their contrary convincingly proved, at least for a time. From this inert body on which a slap makes
no mark the soul has disappeared. This elementary and definitive aspect of the adventure constitutes the
absurd feeling. Under the fatal lighting of that [16] destiny, its uselessness becomes evident. No code of
ethics and no effort are justifiable a priori in the face of the cruel mathematics that command our
condition.
Let me repeat: all this has been said over and over. I am limiting myself here to making a rapid
classification and to pointing out these obvious themes. They run through all literatures and all philosophies.
Everyday conversation feeds on them. There is no question of reinventing them. But it is essential to be sure
of these facts in order to be able to question oneself subsequently on the primordial question. I am
interested—let me repeat again—not so much in absurd discoveries as in their consequences. If one is
assured of these facts, what is one to conclude, how far is one to go to elude nothing? Is one to die
voluntarily or to hope in spite of everything? Beforehand, it is necessary to take the same rapid inventory
on the plane of the intelligence.
*
*
*
The mind' s first step is to distinguish what is true from what is false. However, as soon as thought
reflects on itself, what it first discovers is a contradiction. Useless to strive to be convincing in this case.
Over the centuries no one has furnished a clearer and more elegant demonstration of the business than
Aristotle: "The often ridiculed consequence of these opinions is that they destroy themselves. For by
asserting that all is true we assert the truth of the contrary assertion and consequently the falsity of our own
thesis (for the contrary assertion does not admit that it can be true). And if one says that all is false, that
assertion is itself false. If we declare that solely the assertion opposed to ours is false or else that [17] solely
ours is not false, we are nevertheless forced to admit an infinite number of true or false judgments. For the
one who expresses a true assertion proclaims simultaneously that it is true, and so on ad infinitum."
This vicious circle is but the first of a series in which the mind that studies itself gets lost in a giddy
whirling. The very simplicity of these paradoxes makes them irreducible. Whatever may be the plays on
words and the acrobatics of logic, to understand is, above all, to unify. The mind' s deepest desire, even in
its most elaborate operations, parallels man's unconscious feeling in the face of his universe: it is an
insistence upon familiarity, an appetite for clarity. Understanding the world for a man is reducing it to the
human, stamping it with his seal. The cat's universe is not the universe of the anthill. The truism "All
thought is anthropomorphic" has no other meaning. Likewise, the mind that aims to understand reality can
consider itself satisfied only by reducing it to terms of thought. If man realized that the universe like him
can love and suffer, he would be reconciled. If thought discovered in the shimmering mirrors of
phenomena eternal relations capable of summing them up and summing themselves up in a single
principle, then would be seen an intellectual joy of which the myth of the blessed would be but a
ridiculous imitation. That nostalgia for unity, that appetite for the absolute illustrates the essential impulse
of the human drama. But the fact of that nostalgia' s existence does not imply that it is to be immediately
satisfied. For if, bridging the gulf that separates desire from conquest, we assert with Parmenides the
reality of the One (whatever it may be), [18] we fall into the ridiculous contradiction of a mind that asserts total
unity and proves by its very assertion its own difference and the diversity it claimed to resolve. This other vicious
circle is enough to stifle our hopes.
These are again truisms. I shall again repeat that they are not interesting in themselves but in the
consequences that can be deduced from them. I know another truism: it tells me that man is mortal. One can
nevertheless count the minds that have deduced the extreme conclusions from it. It is essential to consider as a
constant point of reference in this essay the regular hiatus between what we fancy we know and what we really
know, practical assent and simulated ignorance which allows us to live with ideas which, if we truly put them to
the test, ought to upset our whole life. Faced with this inextricable contradiction of the mind, we shall fully
grasp the divorce separating us from our own creations. So long as the mind keeps silent in the motionless world
of its hopes, everything is reflected and arranged in the unity of its nostalgia. But with its first move this world
cracks and tumbles: an infinite number of shimmering fragments is offered to the understanding. We must
despair of ever reconstructing the familiar, calm surface which would give us peace of heart. After so many

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

7

centuries of inquiries, so many abdications among thinkers, we are well aware that this is true for all our
knowledge. With the exception of professional rationalists, today people despair of true knowledge. If the only
significant history of human thought were to be written, it would have to be the history of its successive regrets
and its impotences.
[19] Of whom and of what indeed can I say: "I know that!" This heart within me I can feel, and I judge that it
exists. This world I can touch, and I likewise judge that it exists. There ends all my knowledge, and the rest is
construction. For if I try to seize this self of which I feel sure, if I try to define and to summarize it, it is nothing
but water slipping through my fingers. I can sketch one by one all the aspects it is able to assume, all those
likewise that have been attributed to it, this up bringing, this origin, this ardor or these silences, this nobility or
this vileness. But aspects cannot be added up. This very heart which is mine will forever remain indefinable to
me. Between the certainty I have of my existence and the content I try to give to that assurance, the gap will
never be filled. Forever I shall be a stranger to myself. In psychology as in logic, there are truths but no truth.
Socrates' "Know thyself" has as much value as the "Be virtuous" of our confessionals. They reveal a nostalgia at
the same time as an ignorance. They are sterile exercises on great subjects. They are legitimate only in precisely
so far as they are approximate.
And here are trees and I know their gnarled surface, water and I feel its taste. These scents of grass and stars
at night, certain evenings when the heart relaxes —how shall I negate this world whose power and strength I
feel? Yet all the knowledge on earth will give me nothing to assure me that this world is mine. You describe it to
me and you teach me to classify it. You enumerate its laws and in my thirst for knowledge I admit that they are
true. You take apart its mechanism and my hope increases. At the final stage you teach me that this wondrous
[20] and multicolored universe can be reduced to the atom and that the atom itself can be reduced to the
electron. All this is good and I wait for you to continue. But you tell me of an invisible planetary system in
which electrons gravitate around a nucleus. You explain this world to me with an image. I realize then that you
have been reduced to poetry: I shall never know. Have I the time to become indignant? You have already
changed theories. So that science that was to teach me everything ends up in a hypothesis, that lucidity founders
in metaphor, that uncertainty is resolved in a work of art. What need had I of so many efforts? The soft lines of
these hills and the hand of evening on this troubled heart teach me much more. I have returned to my
beginning. I realize that if through science I can seize phenomena and enumerate them, I cannot, for all
that, apprehend the world. Were I to trace its entire relief with my finger, I should not know any more. And
you give me the choice between a description that is sure but that teaches me nothing and hypotheses that
claim to teach me but that are not sure. A stranger to myself and to the world, armed solely with a thought
that negates itself as soon as it asserts, what is this condition in which I can have peace only by refusing to
know and to live, in which the appetite for conquest bumps into walls that defy its assaults? To will is to stir
up paradoxes. Everything is ordered in such a way as to bring into being that poisoned peace produced by
thoughtlessness, lack of heart, or fatal renunciations.
Hence the intelligence, too, tells me in its way that this world is absurd. Its contrary, blind reason, may
well [21] claim that all is clear; I was waiting for proof and longing for it to be right. But despite so many
pretentious centuries and over the heads of so many eloquent and persuasive men, I know that is false. On this
plane, at least, there is no happiness if I cannot know. That universal reason, practical or ethical, that
determinism, those categories that explain everything are enough to make a decent man laugh. They have
nothing to do with the mind. They negate its profound truth, which is to be enchained. In this unintelligible and
limited universe, man's fate henceforth assumes its meaning. A horde of irrationals has sprung up and surrounds
him until his ultimate end. In his recovered and now studied lucidity, the feeling of the absurd becomes clear
and definite. I said that the world is absurd, but I was too hasty. This world in itself is not reasonable, that is all
that can be said. But what is absurd is the confrontation of this irrational and the wild longing for clarity whose
call echoes in the human heart. The absurd depends as much on man as on the world. For the moment it is all
that links them together. It binds them one to the other as only hatred can weld two creatures together. This is all
I can discern clearly in this measureless universe where my adventure takes place. Let us pause here. If I hold to
be true that absurdity that determines my relationship with life, if I become thoroughly imbued with that
sentiment that seizes me in face of the world's scenes, with that lucidity imposed on me by the pursuit of a
science, I must sacrifice everything to these certainties and I must see them squarely to be able to maintain them.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

8

Above all, I must adapt my behavior to them [22] and pursue them in all their consequences. I am speaking here
of decency. But I want to know beforehand if thought can live in those deserts.
* * *
I already know that thought has at least entered those deserts. There it found its bread. There it realized that it
had previously been feeding on phantoms. It justified some of the most urgent themes of human reflection.
From the moment absurdity is recognized, it becomes a passion, the most harrowing of all. But whether or
not one can live with one' s passions, whether or not one can accept their law, which is to burn the heart they
simultaneously exalt—that is the whole question. It is not, however, the one we shall ask just yet. It stands at
the center of this experience. There will be time to come back to it. Let us recognize rather those
themes and those impulses born of the desert. It will suffice to enumerate them. They, too, are known to all
today. There have always been men to defend the rights of the irrational. The tradition of what may be
called humiliated thought has never ceased to exist. The criticism of rationalism has been made so often
that it seems unnecessary to begin again. Yet our epoch is marked by the rebirth of those paradoxical
systems that strive to trip up the reason as if truly it had always forged ahead. But that is not so much a proof
of the efficacy of the reason as of the intensity of its hopes. On the plane of history, such a constancy of two
attitudes illustrates the essential passion of man torn between his urge toward unity and the clear vision he
may have of the walls enclosing him. But never perhaps at any time has the attack on reason [23] been more
violent than in ours. Since Zarathustra' s great outburst: "By chance it is the oldest nobility in the world. I
conferred it upon all things when I proclaimed that above them no eternal will was exercised," since
Kierkegaard' s fatal illness, "that malady that leads to death with nothing else following it," the significant and
tormenting themes of absurd thought have followed one another. Or at least, and this proviso is of capital
importance, the themes of irrational and religious thought. From Jaspers to Heidegger, from Kierkegaard to
Chestov, from the phenomenologists to Scheler, on the logical plane and on the moral plane, a whole family
of minds related by their nostalgia but opposed by their methods or their aims, have persisted in blocking the
royal road of reason and in recovering the direct paths of truth. Here I assume these thoughts to be known
and lived. Whatever may be or have been their ambitions, all started out from that indescribable universe where
contradiction, antinomy, anguish, or impotence reigns. And what they have in common is precisely the themes
so far disclosed. For them, too, it must be said that what matters above all is the conclusions they have managed
to draw from those discoveries. That matters so much that they must be examined separately. But for the
moment we are concerned solely with their discoveries and their initial experiments. We are concerned solely
with noting their agreement. If it would be presumptuous to try to deal with their philosophies, it is possible and
sufficient in any case to bring out the climate that is common to them.
Heidegger considers the human condition coldly and [24] announces that that existence is humiliated.
The only reality is "anxiety" in the whole chain of beings. To the man lost in the world and its diversions
this anxiety is a brief, fleeting fear. But if that fear becomes conscious of itself, it becomes anguish, the
perpetual climate of the lucid man "in whom existence is concentrated." This professor of philosophy
writes without trembling and in the most abstract language in the world that "the finite and limited
character of human existence is more primordial than man himself." His interest in Kant extends only to
recognizing the restricted character of his "pure Reason." This is to conclude at the end of his analyses
that "the world can no longer offer anything to the man filled with anguish." This anxiety seems to him so
much more important than all the categories in the world that he thinks and talks only of it. He
enumerates its aspects: boredom when the ordinary man strives to quash it in him and benumb it; terror
when the mind contemplates death. He too does not separate consciousness from the absurd. The
consciousness of death is the call of anxiety and "existence then delivers itself its own summons through
the intermediary of consciousness." It is the very voice of anguish and it adjures existence "to return from
its loss in the anonymous They." For him, too, one must not sleep, but must keep alert until the
consummation. He stands in this absurd world and points out its ephemeral character. He seeks his way
amid these ruins.
Jaspers despairs of any ontology because he claims that we have lost "naïveté." He knows that we
can achieve nothing that will transcend the fatal game of [25] appearances. He knows that the end of the

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

9

mind is failure. He tarries over the spiritual adventures revealed by history and pitilessly discloses the
flaw in each system, the illusion that saved everything, the preaching that hid nothing. In this ravaged
world in which the impossibility of knowledge is established, in which everlasting nothingness seems the
only reality and irremediable despair seems the only attitude, he tries to recover the Ariadne's thread that
leads to divine secrets.
Chestov, for his part, throughout a wonderfully monotonous work, constantly straining toward the same
truths, tirelessly demonstrates that the tightest system, the most universal rationalism always stumbles
eventually on the irrational of human thought. None of the ironic facts or ridiculous contradictions that
depreciate the reason escapes him. One thing only interests him, and that is the exception, whether in the
domain of the heart or of the mind. Through the Dostoevskian experiences of the condemned man, the
exacerbated adventures of the Nietzschean mind, Hamlet' s imprecations, or the bitter aristocracy of an
Ibsen, he tracks down, illuminates, and magnifies the human revolt against the irremediable. He refuses the
reason its reasons and begins to advance with some decision only in the middle of that colorless desert where all
certainties have become stones.
Of all perhaps the most engaging, Kierkegaard, for a part of his existence at least, does more than
discover the absurd, he lives it. The man who writes: "The surest of stubborn silences is not to hold one's
tongue but to talk" makes sure in the beginning that no truth is absolute or [26] can render satisfactory
an existence that is impossible in itself. Don Juan of the understanding, he multiplies pseudonyms and
contradictions, writes his Discourses of Edification at the same time as that manual of cynical spiritualism,
The Diary of the Seducer. He refuses consolations, ethics, reliable principles. As for that thorn he feels in
his heart, he is careful not to quiet its pain. On the contrary, he awakens it and, in the desperate joy of a man
crucified and happy to be so, he builds up piece by piece—lucidity, refusal, make-believe—a category of the
man possessed. That face both tender and sneering, those pirouettes followed by a cry from the heart are the
absurd spirit itself grappling with a reality beyond its comprehension. And the spiritual adventure that leads
Kierkegaard to his beloved scandals begins likewise in the chaos of an experience divested of its setting and
relegated to its original incoherence.
On quite a different plane, that of method, Husserl and the phenomenologists, by their very
extravagances, reinstate the world in its diversity and deny the transcendent power of the reason. The
spiritual universe becomes incalculably enriched through them. The rose petal, the milestone, or the
human hand are as important as love, desire, or the laws of gravity. Thinking ceases to be unifying or
making a semblance familiar in the guise of a major principle. Thinking is learning all over again to see,
to be attentive, to focus consciousness; it is turning every idea and every image, in the manner of Proust,
into a privileged moment. What justifies thought is its extreme consciousness. Though more positive than
Kierkegaard' s or Chestov' s, Husserl' s manner [27] of proceeding, in the beginning, nevertheless negates
the classic method of the reason, disappoints hope, opens to intuition and to the heart a whole
proliferation of phenomena, the wealth of which has about it something inhuman. These paths lead to all
sciences or to none. This amounts to saying that in this case the means are more important than the end.
All that is involved is "an attitude for understanding" and not a consolation. Let me repeat: in the
beginning, at very least.
How can one fail to feel the basic relationship of these minds! How can one fail to see that they take
their stand around a privileged and bitter moment in which hope has no further place? I want everything
to be explained to me or nothing. And the reason is impotent when it hears this cry from the heart. The
mind aroused by this insistence seeks and finds nothing but contradictions and nonsense. What I fail to
understand is nonsense. The world is peopled with such irrationals. The world itself, whose single
meaning I do not understand, is but a vast irrational. If one could only say just once: "This is clear," all
would be saved. But these men vie with one another in proclaiming that nothing is clear, all is chaos, that
all man has is his lucidity and his definite knowledge of the walls surrounding him.
All these experiences agree and confirm one another. The mind, when it reaches its limits, must make a
judgment and choose its conclusions. This is where suicide and the reply stand. But I wish to reverse the
order of the inquiry and start out from the intelligent adventure and come back to daily acts. The experiences
called to mind here were born in the desert that we must not leave [28] behind. At least it is essential to

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

10

know how far they went. At this point of his effort man stands face to face with the irrational. He feels
within him his longing for happiness and for reason. The absurd is born of this confrontation between the
human need and the unreasonable silence of the world. This must not be forgotten. This must be clung to
because the whole consequence of a life can depend on it. The irrational, the human nostalgia, and the
absurd that is born of their encounter—these are the three characters in the drama that must necessarily
end with all the logic of which an existence is capable.

Philosophical Suicide
The feeling of the absurd is not, for all that, the notion of the absurd. It lays the foundations for it, and
that is all. It is not limited to that notion, except in the brief moment when it passes judgment on the
universe. Subsequently it has a chance of going further. It is alive; in other words, it must die or else
reverberate. So it is with the themes we have gathered together. But there again what interests me is not
works or minds, criticism of which would call for another form and another place, but the discovery of
what their conclusions have in common. Never, perhaps, have minds been so different. And yet we
recognize as identical the spiritual landscapes in which they get under way. Likewise, despite such
dissimilar zones of knowledge, the cry that terminates their itinerary rings out in the same way. It is
evident that the thinkers we have just recalled have a common climate. [29]To say that that climate is
deadly scarcely amounts to playing on words. Living under that stifling sky forces one to get away or to
stay. The important thing is to find out how people get away in the first case and why people stay in the
second case. This is how I define the problem of suicide and the possible interest in the conclusions of
existential philosophy.
But first I want to detour from the direct path. Up to now we have managed to circumscribe the absurd
from the outside. One can, however, wonder how much is clear in that notion and by direct analysis try to
discover its meaning on the one hand and, on the other, the consequences it involves.
If I accuse an innocent man of a monstrous crime, if I tell a virtuous man that he has coveted his own
sister, he will reply that this is absurd. His indignation has its comical aspect. But it also has its
fundamental reason. The virtuous man illustrates by that reply the definitive antinomy existing between
the deed I am attributing to him and his lifelong principles. "It's absurd" means "It's impossible" but also
"It's contradictory." If I see a man armed only with a sword attack a group of machine guns, I shall
consider his act to be absurd. But it is so solely by virtue of the disproportion between his intention and
the reality he will encounter, of the contradiction I notice between his true strength and the aim he has in
view. Likewise we shall deem a verdict absurd when we contrast it with the verdict the facts apparently
dictated. And, similarly, a demonstration by the absurd is achieved by comparing the consequences of
such a reasoning with the logical reality one wants to [30] set up. In all these cases, from the simplest to
the most complex, the magnitude of the absurdity will be in direct ratio to the distance between the two
terms of my comparison. There are absurd marriages, challenges, rancors, silences, wars, and even peace
treaties. For each of them the absurdity springs from a comparison. I am thus justified in saying that the
feeling of absurdity does not spring from the mere scrutiny of a fact or an impression, but that it bursts from
the comparison between a bare fact and a certain reality, between an action and the world that transcends it.
The absurd is essentially a divorce. It lies in neither of the elements compared; it is born of their
confrontation.
In this particular case and on the plane of intelligence, I can therefore say that the Absurd is not in man
(if such a metaphor could have a meaning) nor in the world, but in their presence together. For the moment
it is the only bond uniting them. If I wish to limit myself to facts, I know what man wants, I know what the
world offers him, and now I can say that I also know what links them. I have no need to dig deeper. A single
certainty is enough for the seeker. He simply has to derive all the consequences from it.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

11

The immediate consequence is also a rule of method. The odd trinity brought to light in this way is
certainly not a startling discovery. But it resembles the data of experience in that it is both infinitely simple
and infinitely complicated. Its first distinguishing feature in this regard is that it cannot be divided. To
destroy one of its terms is to destroy the whole. There can be no absurd outside the human mind. Thus, like
everything [31] else, the absurd ends with death. But there can be no absurd outside this world either.
And it is by this elementary criterion that I judge the notion of the absurd to be essential and consider that
it can stand as the first of my truths. The rule of method alluded to above appears here. If I judge that a
thing is true, I must preserve it. If I attempt to solve a problem, at least I must not by that very solution
conjure away one of the terms of the problem. For me the sole datum is the absurd. The first and, after all,
the only condition of my inquiry is to preserve the very thing that crushes me, consequently to respect
what I consider essential in it. I have just defined it as a confrontation and an unceasing struggle.
And carrying this absurd logic to its conclusion, I must admit that that struggle implies a total absence
of hope (which has nothing to do with despair), a continual rejection (which must not be confused with
renunciation), and a conscious dissatisfaction (which must not be compared to immature unrest).
Everything that destroys, conjures away, or exorcises these requirements (and, to begin with, consent
which overthrows divorce) ruins the absurd and devaluates the attitude that may then be proposed. The
absurd has meaning only in so far as it is not agreed to.
*

*

*

There exists an obvious fact that seems utterly moral: namely, that a man is always a prey to his truths.
Once he has admitted them, he cannot free himself from them. One has to pay something. A man who has
become conscious of the absurd is forever bound to it. A [32] man devoid of hope and conscious of
being so has ceased to belong to the future. That is natural. But it is just as natural that he should strive
to escape the universe of which he is the creator. All the foregoing has significance only on account of
this paradox. Certain men, starting from a critique of rationalism, have admitted the absurd climate.
Nothing is more instructive in this regard than to scrutinize the way in which they have elaborated their
consequences.
Now, to limit myself to existential philosophies, I see that all of them without exception suggest
escape. Through an odd reasoning, starting out from the absurd over the ruins of reason, in a closed
universe limited to the human, they deify what crushes them and find reason to hope in what
impoverishes them. That forced hope is religious in all of them. It deserves attention.
I shall merely analyze here as examples a few themes dear to Chestov and Kierkegaard. But Jaspers
will provide us, in caricatural form, a typical example of this attitude. As a result the rest will be clearer.
He is left powerless to realize the transcendent, incapable of plumbing the depth of experience, and
conscious of that universe upset by failure. Will he advance or at least draw the conclusions from that
failure? He contributes nothing new. He has found nothing in experience but the confession of his own
impotence and no occasion to infer any satisfactory principle. Yet without justification, as he says to
himself, he suddenly asserts all at once the transcendent, the essence of experience, and the superhuman
significance of life when he writes: "Does not the failure reveal, beyond any possible [33] explanation and
interpretation, not the absence but the existence of transcendence?" That existence which, suddenly and
through a blind act of human confidence, explains everything, he defines as "the unthinkable unity of the
general and the particular." Thus the absurd becomes god (in the broadest meaning of this word) and that
inability to understand becomes the existence that illuminates everything. Nothing logically prepares this
reasoning. I can call it a leap. And paradoxically can be understood Jaspers' s insistence, his infinite
patience devoted to making the experience of the transcendent impossible to realize. For the more fleeting
that approximation is, the more empty that definition proves to be, and the more real that transcendent is to
him; for the passion he devotes to asserting it is in direct proportion to the gap between his powers of
explanation and the irrationality of the world and of experience. It thus appears that the more bitterly Jaspers

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

12

destroys the reason' s preconceptions, the more radically he will explain the world. That apostle of
humiliated thought will find at the very end of humiliation the means of regenerating being to its very
depth.
Mystical thought has familiarized us with such devices. They are just as legitimate as any attitude of
mind. But for the moment I am acting as if I took a certain problem seriously. Without judging
beforehand the general value of this attitude or its educative power, I mean simply to consider whether it
answers the conditions I set myself, whether it is worthy of the conflict that concerns me. Thus I return to
Chestov. A commentator relates a remark of his that deserves interest: [34]"The only true solution," he said,
"is precisely where human judgment sees no solution. Otherwise, what need would we have of God? We turn
toward God only to obtain the impossible. As for the possible, men suffice." If there is a Chestovian philosophy,
I can say that it is altogether summed up in this way. For when, at the conclusion of his passionate analyses,
Chestov discovers the fundamental absurdity of all existence, he does not say: "This is the absurd," but rather:
"This is God: we must rely on him even if he does not correspond to any of our rational categories." So that
confusion may not be possible, the Russian philosopher even hints that this God is perhaps full of hatred and
hateful, incomprehensible and contradictory; but the more hideous is his face, the more he asserts his power. His
greatness is his incoherence. His proof is his inhumanity. One must spring into him and by this leap free oneself
from rational illusions. Thus, for Chestov acceptance of the absurd is contemporaneous with the absurd itself.
Being aware of it amounts to accepting it, and the whole logical effort of his thought is to bring it out so that at
the same time the tremendous hope it involves may burst forth. Let me repeat that this attitude is legitimate. But
I am persisting here in considering a single problem and all its consequences. I do not have to examine the
emotion of a thought or of an act of faith. I have a whole lifetime to do that. I know that the rationalist finds
Chestov's attitude annoying. But I also feel that Chestov is right rather than the rationalist, and I merely
want to know if he remains faithful to the commandments of the absurd.
[35]Now, if it is admitted that the absurd is the contrary of hope, it is seen that existential thought for
Chestov presupposes the absurd but proves it only to dispel it. Such subtlety of thought is a conjuror's
emotional trick. When Chestov elsewhere sets his absurd in opposition to current morality and reason, he
calls it truth and redemption. Hence, there is basically in that definition of the absurd an approbation that
Chestov grants it. If it is admitted that all the power of that notion lies in the way it runs counter to our
elementary hopes, if it is felt that to remain, the absurd requires not to be consented to, then it can be clearly
seen that it has lost its true aspect, its human and relative character in order to enter an eternity that is both
incomprehensible and satisfying. If there is an absurd, it is in man' s universe. The moment the notion
transforms itself into eternity's springboard, it ceases to be linked to human lucidity. The absurd is no longer that
evidence that man ascertains without consenting to it. The struggle is eluded. Man integrates the absurd and in
that communion causes to disappear its essential character, which is opposition, laceration, and divorce. This
leap is an escape. Chestov, who is so fond of quoting Hamlet' s remark: "The time is out of joint," writes it down
with a sort of savage hope that seems to belong to him in particular. For it is not in this sense that Hamlet says it
or Shakespeare writes it. The intoxication of the irrational and the vocation of rapture turn a lucid mind away
from the absurd. To Chestov reason is useless but there is something beyond reason. To an absurd mind reason
is useless and there is nothing beyond reason.
[36]This leap can at least enlighten us a little more as to the true nature of the absurd. We know that it is
worthless except in an equilibrium, that it is, above all, in the comparison and not in the terms of that
comparison. But it so happens that Chestov puts all the emphasis on one of the terms and destroys the
equilibrium. Our appetite for understanding, our nostalgia for the absolute are explicable only in so far,
precisely, as we can understand and explain many things. It is useless to negate the reason absolutely. It has
its order in which it is efficacious. It is properly that of human experience. Whence we wanted to make
everything clear. If we cannot do so, if the absurd is born on that occasion, it is born precisely at the very
meeting-point of that efficacious but limited reason with the ever resurgent irrational. Now, when Chestov
rises up against a Hegelian proposition such as "the motion of the solar system takes place in conformity
with immutable laws and those laws are its reason," when he devotes all his passion to upsetting Spinoza' s
rationalism, he concludes, in effect, in favor of the vanity of all reason. Whence, by a natural and

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

13

illegitimate reversal, to the pre-eminence of the irrational.5 But the transition is not evident. For here may
intervene the notion of limit and the notion of level. The laws of nature may be operative up to a certain
limit, beyond which they turn against themselves to give birth to the absurd. Or else, they may justify
themselves on the level of description without for that reason being true on the level of explanation. [37]
Everything is sacrificed here to the irrational, and, the demand for clarity being conjured away, the absurd
disappears with one of the terms of its comparison. The absurd man, on the other hand, does not
undertake such a leveling process. He recognizes the struggle, does not absolutely scorn reason, and
admits the irrational. Thus he again embraces in a single glance all the data of experience and he is little
inclined to leap before knowing. He knows simply that in that alert awareness there is no further place
for hope.
What is perceptible in Leo Chestov will be perhaps even more so in Kierkegaard. To be sure, it is hard
to outline clear propositions in so elusive a writer. But, despite apparently opposed writings, beyond the
pseudonyms, the tricks, and the smiles, can be felt throughout that work, as it were, the presentiment (at
the same time as the apprehension) of a truth which eventually bursts forth in the last works: Kierkegaard
likewise takes the leap. His childhood having been so frightened by Christianity, he ultimately returns to
its harshest aspect. For him, too, antinomy and paradox become criteria of the religious. Thus, the very
thing that led to despair of the meaning and depth of this life now gives it its truth and its clarity.
Christianity is the scandal, and what Kierkegaard calls for quite plainly is the third sacrifice required by
Ignatius Loyola, the one in which God most rejoices: "The sacrifice of the intellect."6 [38]This effect of
the "leap" is odd, but must not surprise us any longer. He makes of the absurd the criterion of the other
world, whereas it is simply a residue of the experience of this world. "In his failure," says Kierkegaard, "the
believer finds his triumph."
It is not for me to wonder to what stirring preaching this attitude is linked. I merely have to wonder if
the spectacle of the absurd and its own character justifies it. On this point, I know that it is not so. Upon
considering again the content of the absurd, one understands better the method that inspired Kierkegaard.
Between the irrational of the world and the insurgent nostalgia of the absurd, he does not maintain the
equilibrium. He does not respect the relationship that constitutes, properly speaking, the feeling of
absurdity. Sure of being unable to escape the irrational, he wants at least to save himself from that
desperate nostalgia that seems to him sterile and devoid of implication. But if he may be right on this
point in his judgment, he could not be in his negation. If he substitutes for his cry of revolt a frantic
adherence, at once he is led to blind himself to the absurd which hitherto enlightened him and to deify the
only certainty he henceforth possesses, the irrational. The important thing, as Abbe Galiani said to Mme
d' Epinay, is not to be cured, but to live with one's ailments. Kierkegaard wants to be cured. To be cured is
his frenzied wish, and it runs throughout his whole journal. The entire [39]effort of his intelligence is to
escape the antinomy of the human condition. An all the more desperate effort since he intermittently
perceives its vanity when he speaks of himself, as if neither fear of God nor piety were capable of bringing
him to peace. Thus it is that, through a strained subterfuge, he gives the irrational the appearance and God
the attributes of the absurd: unjust, incoherent, and incomprehensible. Intelligence alone in him strives to
stifle the underlying demands of the human heart. Since nothing is proved, everything can be proved.
Indeed, Kierkegaard himself shows us the path taken. I do not want to suggest anything here, but how
can one fail to read in his works the signs of an almost intentional mutilation of the soul to balance the
mutilation accepted in regard to the absurd? It is the leitmotiv of the Journal. "What I lacked was the
animal which also belongs to human destiny. . . But give me a body then." And further on: "Oh!
5 Apropos of the notion of exception particularly and against Aristotle.
6 It may be thought that I am neglecting here the essential problem, that of faith. But I am not examining the philosophy of

Kierkegaard or of Chestov or, later on, of Husserl (this would call for a different place and a different attitude of mind); I am
simply borrowing a theme from them and examining whether its consequences can fit the already established rules. It is
merely a matter of persistence.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

14

especially in my early youth what should I not have given to be a man, even for six months . . . what I
lack, basically, is a body and the physical conditions of existence." Elsewhere, the same man nevertheless
adopts the great cry of hope that has come down through so many centuries and quickened so many
hearts, except that of the absurd man. "But for the Christian death is certainly not the end of everything
and it implies infinitely more hope than life implies for us, even when that life is overflowing with health
and vigor." Reconciliation through scandal is still reconciliation. It allows one perhaps, as [40]can be
seen, to derive hope of its contrary, which is death. But even if fellow-feeling inclines one toward that
attitude, still it must be said that excess justifies nothing. That transcends, as the saying goes, the human
scale; therefore it must be superhuman. But this "therefore" is superfluous. There is no logical certainty
here. There is no experimental probability either. All I can say is that, in fact, that transcends my scale. If
I do not draw a negation from it, at least I do not want to found anything on the incomprehensible. I want
to know whether I can live with what I know and with that alone. I am told again that here the intelligence
must sacrifice its pride and the reason bow down. But if I recognize the limits of the reason, I do not
therefore negate it, recognizing its relative powers. I merely want to remain in this middle path where the
intelligence can remain clear. If that is its pride, I see no sufficient reason for giving it up. Nothing more
profound, for example, than Kierkegaard' s view according to which despair is not a fact but a state: the
very state of sin. For sin is what alienates from God. The absurd, which is the metaphysical state of the
conscious man, does not lead to God.7 Perhaps this notion will become clearer if I risk this shocking
statement: the absurd is sin without God.
It is a matter of living in that state of the absurd. I know on what it is founded, this mind and this
world straining against each other without being able to em- brace each other. I ask for the rule of life
of that state, [41]and what I am offered neglects its basis, negates one of the terms of the painful
opposition, demands of me a resignation. I ask what is involved in the condition I recognize as mine; I
know it implies obscurity and ignorance; and I am assured that this ignorance explains everything and
that this darkness is my light. But there is no reply here to my intent, and this stirring lyricism cannot hide
the paradox from me. One must therefore turn away. Kierkegaard may shout in warning: "If man had no
eternal consciousness, if, at the bottom of everything, there were merely a wild, seething force producing
everything, both large and trifling, in the storm of dark passions, if the bottomless void that nothing can
fill underlay all things, what would life be but despair?" This cry is not likely to stop the absurd man.
Seeking what is true is not seeking what is desirable. If in order to elude the anxious question: "What
would life be?" one must, like the donkey, feed on the roses of illusion, then the absurd mind, rather than
resigning itself to falsehood, prefers to adopt fearlessly Kierkegaard' s reply: "despair." Everything
considered, a determined soul will always manage.
*

*

*

I am taking the liberty at this point of calling the existential attitude philosophical suicide. But this
does not imply a judgment. It is a convenient way of indicating the movement by which a thought negates
itself and tends to transcend itself in its very negation. For the existentials negation is their God. To be
precise, that god is maintained only through the negation of human [42]reason.8 But, like suicides, gods
change with men. There are many ways of leaping, the essential being to leap. Those redeeming
negations, those ultimate contradictions which negate the obstacle that has not yet been leaped over, may
spring just as well (this is the paradox at which this reasoning aims) from a certain religious inspiration as
from the rational order. They always lay claim to the eternal, and it is solely in this that they take the
leap.
7 I did not say "excludes God," which would still amount to asserting.
8 Let me assert again: it is not the affirmation of God that is questioned here, but rather the logic leading to that

affirmation.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

15

It must be repeated that the reasoning developed in this essay leaves out altogether the most
widespread spiritual attitude of our enlightened age: the one, based on the principle that all is reason,
which aims to explain the world. It is natural to give a clear view of the world after accepting the idea that
it must be clear. That is even legitimate, but does not concern the reasoning we are following out here. In
fact, our aim is to shed light upon the step taken by the mind when, starting from a philosophy of the
world' s lack of meaning, it ends up by finding a meaning and depth in it. The most touching of those
steps is religious in essence; it becomes obvious in the theme of the irrational. But the most paradoxical
and most significant is certainly the one that attributes rational reasons to a world it originally imagined as
devoid of any guiding principle. It is impossible in any case to reach the consequences that concern us
without having given an idea of this new attainment of the spirit of nostalgia.
[43]I shall examine merely the theme of "the Intention" made fashionable by Husserl and the
phenomenologists. I have already alluded to it. Originally Husserl' s method negates the classic procedure
of the reason. Let me repeat. Thinking is not unifying or making the appearance familiar under the guise
of a great principle. Thinking is learning all over again how to see, directing one' s consciousness, making
of every image a privileged place. In other words, phenomenology declines to explain the world, it wants
to be merely a description of actual experience. It confirms absurd thought in its initial assertion that there
is no truth, but merely truths. From the evening breeze to this hand on my shoulder, everything has its
truth. Consciousness illuminates it by paying attention to it. Consciousness does not form the object of its
understanding, it merely focuses, it is the act of attention, and, to borrow a Bergsonian image, it resembles
the projector that suddenly focuses on an image. The difference is that there is no scenario, but a
successive and incoherent illustration. In that magic lantern all the pictures are privileged. Consciousness
suspends in experience the objects of its attention. Through its miracle it isolates them. Henceforth they
are beyond all judgments. This is the "intention" that characterizes consciousness. But the word does not
imply any idea of finality; it is taken in its sense of "direction": its only value is topographical.
At first sight, it certainly seems that in this way nothing contradicts the absurd spirit. That apparent
modesty of thought that limits itself to describing what it declines to explain, that intentional discipline
whence [44]result paradoxically a profound enrichment of experience and the rebirth of the world in its
prolixity are absurd procedures. At least at first sight. For methods of thought, in this case as elsewhere,
always assume two aspects, one psychological and the other metaphysical.9 Thereby they harbor two truths.
If the theme of the intentional claims to illustrate merely a psychological attitude, by which reality is drained
instead of being explained, nothing in fact separates it from the absurd spirit. It aims to enumerate what it
cannot transcend. It affirms solely that without any unifying principle thought can still take delight in
describing and understanding every aspect of experience. The truth involved then for each of those aspects
is psychological in nature. It simply testifies to the "interest" that reality can offer. It is a way of awaking a
sleeping world and of making it vivid to the mind. But if one attempts to extend and give a rational basis to
that notion of truth, if one claims to discover in this way the "essence" of each object of knowledge, one
restores its depth to experience. For an absurd mind that is incomprehensible. Now, it is this wavering
between modesty and assurance that is noticeable in the intentional attitude, and this shimmering of
phenomenological thought will illustrate the absurd reasoning better than anything else.
For Husserl speaks likewise of "extra-temporal essences" brought to light by the intention, and he
sounds like Plato. All things are not explained by one thing [45]but by all things. I see no difference. To
be sure, those ideas or those essences that consciousness "effectuates" at the end of every description are
not yet to be considered perfect models. But it is asserted that they are directly present in each datum of
perception. There is no longer a single idea explaining everything, but an infinite number of essences
giving a meaning to an infinite number of objects. The world comes to a stop, but also lights up. Platonic
realism becomes intuitive, but it is still realism. Kierkegaard was swallowed up in his God; Parmenides
plunged thought into the One. But here thought hurls itself into an abstract polytheism. But this is not all:
9 Even the most rigorous epistemologies imply metaphysics. And to such a degree that the metaphysic of many

contemporary thinkers consists in having nothing but an epistemology.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

16

hallucinations and fictions likewise belong to "extra-temporal essences." In the new world of ideas, the
species of centaurs collaborates with the more modest species of metropolitan man.
For the absurd man, there was a truth as well as a bitterness in that purely psychological opinion that
all aspects of the world are privileged. To say that everything is privileged is tantamount to saying that
everything is equivalent. But the metaphysical aspect of that truth is so far-reaching that through an
elementary reaction he feels closer perhaps to Plato. He is taught, in fact, that every image presupposes an
equally privileged essence. In this ideal world without hierarchy, the formal army is composed solely of
generals. To be sure, transcendency had been eliminated. But a sudden shift in thought brings back into
the world a sort of fragmentary immanence which restores to the universe its depth.
Am I to fear having carried too far a theme handled [46]with greater circumspection by its creators? I
read merely these assertions of Husserl, apparently paradoxical yet rigorously logical if what precedes is accepted:
"That which is true is true absolutely, in itself; truth is one, identical with itself, however different the creatures who
perceive it, men, monsters, angels or gods." Reason triumphs and trumpets forth with that voice, I cannot deny.
What can its assertions mean in the absurd world? The perception of an angel or a god has no meaning for me.
That geometrical spot where divine reason ratifies mine will always be incomprehensible to me. There, too, I
discern a leap, and though performed in the abstract, it nonetheless means for me forgetting just what I do not want
to forget. When farther on Husserl exclaims: "If all masses subject to attraction were to disappear, the law of
attraction would not be destroyed but would simply remain without any possible application," I know that I am
faced with a metaphysic of consolation. And if I want to discover the point where thought leaves the path of
evidence, I have only to reread the parallel reasoning that Husserl voices regarding the mind: "If we could
contemplate clearly the exact laws of psychic processes, they would be seen to be likewise eternal and invariable,
like the basic laws of theoretical natural science. Hence they would be valid even if there were no psychic process."
Even if the mind were not, its laws would be! I see then that of a psychological truth Husserl aims to make a
rational rule: after having denied the integrating power of human reason, he leaps by this expedient to eternal
Reason.
Husserl' s theme of the "concrete universe" cannot [47]then surprise me. If I am told that all essences are
not formal but that some are material, that the first are the object of logic and the second of science, this is
merely a question of definition. The abstract, I am told, indicates but a part, without consistency in itself, of a
concrete universal. But the wavering already noted allows me to throw light on the confusion of these terms. For
that may mean that the concrete object of my attention, this sky, the reflection of that water on this coat, alone
preserve the prestige of the real that my interest isolates in the world. And I shall not deny it. But that may mean
also that this coat itself is universal, has its particular and sufficient essence, belongs to the world of forms. I
then realize that merely the order of the procession has been changed. This world has ceased to have its
reflection in a higher universe, but the heaven of forms is figured in the host of images of this earth. This
changes nothing for me. Rather than encountering here a taste for the concrete, the meaning of the human
condition, I find an intellectualism sufficiently unbridled to generalize the concrete itself.
*

*

*

It is futile to be amazed by the apparent paradox that leads thought to its own negation by the opposite paths
of humiliated reason and triumphal reason. From the abstract god of Husserl to the dazzling god of Kierkegaard
the distance is not so great. Reason and the irrational lead to the same preaching. In truth the way matters but
little; the will to arrive suffices. The abstract philosopher and the religious philosopher start out from the same
disorder and support each other in the same [48]anxiety. But the essential is to explain. Nostalgia is stronger
here than knowledge. It is significant that the thought of the epoch is at once one of the most deeply imbued
with a philosophy of the non-significance of the world and one of the most divided in its conclusions. It is
constantly oscillating between extreme rationalization of reality which tends to break up that thought into
standard reasons and its extreme irrationalization which tends to deify it. But this divorce is only apparent. It
is a matter of reconciliation, and, in both cases, the leap suffices. It is always wrongly thought that the notion
of reason is a one-way notion. To tell the truth, however rigorous it may be in its ambition, this concept is
nonetheless just as unstable as others. Reason bears a quite human aspect, but it also is able to turn toward

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

17

the divine. Since Plotinus, who was the first to reconcile it with the eternal climate, it has learned to turn
away from the most cherished of its principles, which is contradiction, in order to integrate into it the
strangest, the quite magic one of participation.10 It is an instrument of thought and not thought itself.
Above all, a man's thought is his nostalgia.
Just as reason was able to soothe the melancholy of Plotinus, it provides modern anguish the
means of [49]calming itself in the familiar setting of the eternal. The absurd mind has less luck. For it
the world is neither so rational nor so irrational. It is unreasonable and only that. With Husserl the reason
eventually has no limits at all. The absurd, on the contrary, establishes its limits since it is powerless to
calm its anguish. Kierkegaard independently asserts that a single limit is enough to negate that anguish.
But the absurd does not go so far. For it that limit is directed solely at the reason's ambitions. The theme
of the irrational, as it is conceived by the existentials, is reason becoming confused and escaping by
negating itself. The absurd is lucid reason noting its limits.
Only at the end of this difficult path does the absurd man recognize his true motives. Upon comparing
his inner exigence and what is then offered him, he suddenly feels he is going to turn away. In the
universe of Husserl the world becomes clear and that longing for familiarity that man's heart harbors
becomes useless. In Kierkegaard's apocalypse that desire for clarity must be given up if it wants to be
satisfied. Sin is not so much knowing (if it were, everybody would be innocent) as wanting to know.
Indeed, it is the only sin of which the absurd man can feel that it constitutes both his guilt and his
innocence. He is offered a solution in which all the past contradictions have become merely polemical
games. But this is not the way he experienced them. Their truth must be preserved, which consists in not
being satisfied. He does not want preaching.
My reasoning wants to be faithful to the evidence [50]that aroused it. That evidence is the absurd. It
is that divorce between the mind that desires and the world that disappoints, my nostalgia for unity, this
fragmented universe and the contradiction that binds them together. Kierkegaard suppresses my nostalgia
and Husserl gathers together that universe. That is not what I was expecting. It was a matter of living and
thinking with those dislocations, of knowing whether one had to accept or refuse. There can be no question
of masking the evidence, of suppressing the absurd by denying one of the terms of its equation. It is
essential to know whether one can live with it or whether, on the other hand, logic commands one to die of
it. I am not interested in philosophical suicide, but rather in plain suicide. I merely wish to purge it of its
emotional content and know its logic and its integrity. Any other position implies for the absurd mind
deceit and the mind's retreat before what the mind itself has brought to light. Husserl claims to obey the
desire to escape "the inveterate habit of living and thinking in certain well-known and convenient
conditions of existence," but the final leap restores in him the eternal and its comfort. The leap does not
represent an extreme danger as Kierkegaard would like it to do. The danger, on the contrary, lies in the
subtle instant that precedes the leap. Being able to remain on that dizzying crest—that is integrity and the
rest is subterfuge. I know also that never has helplessness inspired such striking harmonies as those of
Kierkegaard. But if helplessness has its place in the indifferent landscapes of history, it has none in a
reasoning whose exigence is now known. [51]
Absurd Freedom
Now the main thing is done, I hold certain facts from which I cannot separate. What I know, what is
certain, what I cannot deny, what I cannot reject—this is what counts. I can negate everything of that part
of me that lives on vague nostalgias, except this desire for unity, this longing to solve, this need for clarity
and cohesion. I can refute everything in this world surrounding me that offends or enraptures me, except
this chaos, this sovereign chance and this divine equivalence which springs from anarchy. I don' t know
10 A.—At that time reason had to adapt itself or die. It adapts itself. With Plotinus, after being logical it becomes

aesthetic. Metaphor takes the place of the syllogism.
B.—Moreover, this is not Plotinus' only contribution to phenomenology. This whole attitude is already contained in the
concept so dear to the Alexandrian thinker that there is not only an idea of man but also an idea of Socrates.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

18

whether this world has a meaning that transcends it. But I know that I do not know that meaning and that it
is impossible for me just now to know it. What can a meaning outside my condition mean to me? I can
understand only in human terms. What I touch, what resists me—that is what I understand. And these two
certainties—my appetite for the absolute and for unity and the impossibility of reducing this world to a
rational and reasonable principle —I also know that I cannot reconcile them. What other truth can I admit
without lying, without bringing in a hope I lack and which means nothing within the limits of my condition?
If I were a tree among trees, a cat among animals, this life would have a meaning, or rather this
problem would not arise, for I should belong to this world. I should be this world to which I am now
opposed by my whole consciousness and my whole insistence upon familiarity. This ridiculous reason is
what sets me in opposition to all creation. I cannot cross it out with a [52]stroke of the pen. What I believe
to be true I must therefore preserve. What seems to me so obvious, even against me, I must support. And what
constitutes the basis of that conflict, of that break between the world and my mind, but the awareness of it? If
therefore I want to preserve it, I can through a constant awareness, ever revived, ever alert. This is what, for the
moment, I must remember. At this moment the absurd, so obvious and yet so hard to win, returns to a man's
life and finds its home there. At this moment, too, the mind can leave the arid, dried-up path of lucid effort.
That path now emerges in daily life. It encounters the world of the anonymous impersonal pronoun "one,"
but henceforth man enters in with his revolt and his lucidity. He has forgotten how to hope. This hell of the
present is his Kingdom at last. All problems recover their sharp edge. Abstract evidence retreats before the
poetry of forms and colors. Spiritual conflicts become embodied and return to the abject and magnificent
shelter of man' s heart. None of them is settled. But all are transfigured. Is one going to die, escape by the
leap, rebuild a mansion of ideas and forms to one' s own scale? Is one, on the contrary, going to take up
the heart-rending and marvelous wager of the absurd? Let' s make a final effort in this regard and draw
all our conclusions. The body, affection, creation, action, human nobility will then resume their places in
this mad world. At last man will again find there the wine of the absurd and the bread of indifference on
which he feeds his greatness.
Let us insist again on the method: it is a matter of persisting. At a certain point on his path
the absurd [53]man is tempted. History is not lacking in either religions or prophets, even without
gods. He is asked to leap. All he can reply is that he doesn't fully understand, that it is not obvious. Indeed,
he does not want to do anything but what he fully understands. He is assured that this is the sin of pride, but
he does not understand the notion of sin; that perhaps hell is in store, but he has not enough imagination to
visualize that strange future; that he is losing immortal life, but that seems to him an idle consideration. An
attempt is made to get him to admit his guilt. He feels innocent. To tell the truth, that is all he feels—his
irreparable innocence. This is what allows him everything. Hence, what he demands of himself is to live
solely with what he knows, to accommodate himself to what is, and to bring in nothing that is not certain. He
is told that nothing is. But this at least is a certainty. And it is with this that he is concerned: he wants to find
out if it is possible to live without appeal.
*

*

*

Now I can broach the notion of suicide. It has already been felt what solution might be given. At this
point the problem is reversed. It was previously a question of finding out whether or not life had to have a
meaning to be lived. It now becomes clear, on the contrary, that it will be lived all the better if it has no
meaning. Living an experience, a particular fate, is accepting it fully. Now, no one will live this fate,
knowing it to be absurd, unless he does everything to keep before him that absurd brought to light by
consciousness. Negating one of the terms of the opposition on which he lives amounts to escaping it. To
abolish conscious revolt is to [54]elude the problem. The theme of permanent revolution is thus carried into
individual experience. Living is keeping the absurd alive. Keeping it alive is, above all, contemplating it.
Unlike Eurydice, the absurd dies only when we turn away from it. One of the only coherent philosophical
positions is thus revolt. It is a constant confrontation between man and his own obscurity. It is an insistence
upon an impossible transparency. It challenges the world anew every second. Just as danger provided man
the unique opportunity of seizing awareness, so metaphysical revolt extends awareness to the whole of

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

19

experience. It is that constant presence of man in his own eyes. It is not aspiration, for it is devoid of hope.
That revolt is the certainty of a crushing fate, without the resignation that ought to accompany it.
This is where it is seen to what a degree absurd experience is remote from suicide. It may be thought
that suicide follows revolt—but wrongly. For it does not represent the logical outcome of revolt. It is just
the contrary by the consent it presupposes. Suicide, like the leap, is acceptance at its extreme. Everything
is over and man returns to his essential history. His future, his unique and dreadful future—he sees and
rushes toward it. In its way, suicide settles the absurd. It engulfs the absurd in the same death. But I know
that in order to keep alive, the absurd cannot be settled. It escapes suicide to the extent that it is
simultaneously awareness and rejection of death. It is, at the extreme limit of the condemned man's last
thought, that shoelace that despite everything he sees a few yards away, on the very [55]brink of his
dizzying fall. The contrary of suicide, in fact, is the man condemned to death.
That revolt gives life its value. Spread out over the whole length of a life, it restores its majesty to that
life. To a man devoid of blinders, there is no finer sight than that of the intelligence at grips with a reality
that transcends it. The sight of human pride is unequaled. No disparagement is of any use. That discipline
that the mind imposes on itself, that will conjured up out of nothing, that face-to-face struggle have
something exceptional about them. To impoverish that reality whose inhumanity constitutes man's
majesty is tantamount to impoverishing him himself. I understand then why the doctrines that explain
everything to me also debilitate me at the same time. They relieve me of the weight of my own life, and
yet I must carry it alone. At this juncture, I cannot conceive that a skeptical metaphysics can be joined to
an ethics of renunciation.
Consciousness and revolt, these rejections are the contrary of renunciation. Everything that is
indomitable and passionate in a human heart quickens them, on the contrary, with its own life. It is essential
to die unreconciled and not of one' s own free will. Suicide is a repudiation. The absurd man can only
drain everything to the bitter end, and deplete himself. The absurd is his extreme tension, which he
maintains constantly by solitary effort, for he knows that in that consciousness and in that day-to-day
revolt he gives proof of his only truth, which is defiance. This is a first consequence.
* * *
[56]If I remain in that prearranged position which consists in drawing all the conclusions (and
nothing else) involved in a newly discovered notion, I am faced with a second paradox. In order to
remain faithful to that method, I have nothing to do with the problem of metaphysical liberty. Knowing
whether or not man is free doesn't interest me. I can experience only my own freedom. As to it, I can have
no general notions, but merely a few clear insights. The problem of "freedom as such" has no meaning. For
it is linked in quite a different way with the problem of God. Knowing whether or not man is free involves
knowing whether he can have a master. The absurdity peculiar to this problem comes from the fact that the
very notion that makes the problem of freedom possible also takes away all its meaning. For in the presence
of God there is less a problem of freedom than a problem of evil. You know the alternative: either we are
not free and God the all-powerful is responsible for evil. Or we are free and responsible but God is not allpowerful. All the scholastic subtleties have neither added anything to nor subtracted anything from the
acuteness of this paradox.
This is why I cannot get lost in the glorification or the mere definition of a notion which eludes me
and loses its meaning as soon as it goes beyond the frame of reference of my individual experience. I
cannot understand what kind of freedom would be given me by a higher being. I have lost the sense of
hierarchy. The only conception of freedom I can have is that of the prisoner or the individual in the midst
of the State. The only one I know is freedom of thought and action. Now [57]if the absurd cancels all my
chances of eternal freedom, it restores and magnifies, on the other hand, my freedom of action. That
privation of hope and future means an increase in man's availability.
Before encountering the absurd, the everyday man lives with aims, a concern for the future or for
justification (with regard to whom or what is not the question). He weighs his chances, he counts on
"someday," his retirement or the labor of his sons. He still thinks that something in his life can be directed.
In truth, he acts as if he were free, even if all the facts make a point of contradicting that liberty. But after the

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

20

absurd, everything is upset. That idea that "I am," my way of acting as if everything has a meaning (even if,
on occasion, I said that nothing has)—all that is given the lie in vertiginous fashion by the absurdity of a
possible death. Thinking of the future, establishing aims for oneself, having preferences—all this
presupposes a belief in freedom, even if one occasionally ascertains that one doesn't feel it. But at that
moment I am well aware that that higher liberty, that freedom to be, which alone can serve as basis for a
truth, does not exist. Death is there as the only reality. After death the chips are down. I am not even free,
either, to perpetuate myself, but a slave, and, above all, a slave without hope of an eternal revolution,
without recourse to contempt. And who without revolution and without contempt can remain a slave? What
freedom can exist in the fullest sense without assurance of eternity?
But at the same time the absurd man realizes that hitherto he was bound to that postulate of
freedom on [58]the illusion of which he was living. In a certain sense, that hampered him. To the extent to
which he imagined a purpose to his life, he adapted himself to the demands of a purpose to be achieved and
became the slave of his liberty. Thus I could not act otherwise than as the father (or the engineer or the leader of
a nation, or the post-office sub-clerk) that I am preparing to be. I think I can choose to be that rather than
something else. I think so unconsciously, to be sure. But at the same time I strengthen my postulate with the
beliefs of those around me, with the presumptions of my human environment (others are so sure of being free,
and that cheerful mood is so contagious!). However far one may remain from any presumption, moral or social,
one is partly influenced by them and even, for the best among them (there are good and bad presumptions),
one adapts one' s life to them. Thus the absurd man realizes that he was not really free. To speak clearly, to the
extent to which I hope, to which I worry about a truth that might be individual to me, about a way of being or
creating, to the extent to which I arrange my life and prove thereby that I accept its having a meaning, I create
for myself barriers between which I confine my life. I do like so many bureaucrats of the mind and heart who
only fill me with disgust and whose only vice, I now see clearly, is to take man' s freedom seriously.
The absurd enlightens me on this point: there is no future. Henceforth this is the reason for my inner freedom. I
shall use two comparisons here. Mystics, to begin with, find freedom in giving themselves. By losing themselves
in their god, by accepting his rules, they become [59]secretly free. In spontaneously accepted slavery they recover
a deeper independence. But what does that freedom mean? It may be said, above all, that they feel free with regard
to themselves, and not so much free as liberated. Likewise, completely turned toward death (taken here as the most
obvious absurdity), the absurd man feels released from everything outside that passionate attention crystallizing in
him. He enjoys a freedom with regard to common rules. It can be seen at this point that the initial themes of
existential philosophy keep their entire value. The return to consciousness, the escape from everyday sleep
represent the first steps of absurd freedom. But it is existential preaching that is alluded to, and with it that spiritual
leap which basically escapes consciousness. In the same way (this is my second comparison) the slaves of
antiquity did not belong to themselves. But they knew that freedom which consists in not feeling responsible.11
Death, too, has patrician hands which, while crushing, also liberate.
Losing oneself in that bottomless certainty, feeling henceforth sufficiently remote from one' s own life to
increase it and take a broad view of it—this involves the principle of a liberation. Such new independence has a
definite time limit, like any freedom of action. It does not write a check on eternity. But it takes the place of the
illusions offreedom, which all stopped with death. The divine availability of the condemned man before whom
the prison doors open in a certain early dawn, [60]that unbelievable disinterestedness with regard to everything except for the pure flame of life—it is clear that death and the absurd are here the principles of the
only reasonable freedom: that which a human heart can experience and live. This is a second consequence.
The absurd man thus catches sight of a burning and frigid, transparent and limited universe in which nothing
is possible but everything is given, and beyond which all is collapse and nothingness. He can then decide to
accept such a universe and draw from it his strength, his refusal to hope, and the unyielding evidence of a
life without consolation.

11 I am concerned here with a factual comparison, not with an apology of humility. The absurd man is the contrary of the reconciled

man.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus
*

*

21

*

But what does life mean in such a universe? Nothing else for the moment but indifference to the future and a
desire to use up everything that is given. Belief in the meaning of life always implies a scale of values, a choice,
our preferences. Belief in the absurd, according to our definitions, teaches the contrary. But this is worth examining.
Knowing whether or not one can live without appeal is all that interests me. I do not want to get out of
my depth. This aspect of life being given me, can I adapt myself to it? Now, faced with this particular
concern, belief in the absurd is tantamount to substituting the quantity of experiences for the quality. If I
convince myself that this life has no other aspect than that of the absurd, if I feel that its whole
equilibrium depends on that perpetual opposition between my conscious revolt and the darkness in which
it struggles, if I admit that my freedom has no meaning except in relation to its [61]limited fate, then I
must say that what counts is not the best living but the most living. It is not up to me to wonder if this is
vulgar or revolting, elegant or deplorable. Once and for all, value judgments are discarded here in favor of
factual judgments. I have merely to draw the conclusions from what I can see and to risk nothing that is
hypothetical. Supposing that living in this way were not honorable, then true propriety would command me
to be dishonorable.
The most living; in the broadest sense, that rule means nothing. It calls for definition. It seems to begin
with the fact that the notion of quantity has not been sufficiently explored. For it can account for a large
share of human experience. A man' s rule of conduct and his scale of values have no meaning except
through the quantity and variety of experiences he has been in a position to accumulate. Now, the
conditions of modern life impose on the majority of men the same quantity of experiences and
consequently the same profound experience. To be sure, there must also be taken into consideration the
individual's spontaneous contribution, the "given" element in him. But I cannot judge of that, and let me
repeat that my rule here is to get along with the immediate evidence. I see, then, that the individual character
of a common code of ethics lies not so much in the ideal importance of its basic principles as in the norm of
an experience that it is possible to measure. To stretch a point somewhat, the Greeks had the code of their
leisure just as we have the code of our eight-hour day. But already many men among the most tragic cause
us to foresee that a longer experience changes this table [62]of values. They make us imagine that adventurer
of the everyday who through mere quantity of experiences would break all records (I am purposely using this
sports expression) and would thus win his own code of ethics.12 Yet let' s avoid romanticism and just ask
ourselves what such an attitude may mean to a man with his mind made up to take up his bet and to observe
strictly what he takes to be the rules of the game.
Breaking all the records is first and foremost being faced with the world as often as possible. How can that be
done without contradictions and without playing on words? For on the one hand the absurd teaches that all
experiences are unimportant, and on the other it urges toward the greatest quantity of experiences. How, then, can
one fail to do as so many of those men I was speaking of earlier—choose the form of life that brings us the most
possible of that human matter, thereby introducing a scale of values that on the other hand one claims to reject?
But again it is the absurd and its contradictory life that teaches us. For the mistake is thinking that that quantity
of experiences depends on the circumstances of our life when it depends solely on us. Here we have to be oversimple. To two men living the same number of years, the world always provides the same sum of experiences. It is
up to us to be conscious of them. Being [63]aware of one' s life, one' s revolt, one' s freedom, and to the
maximum, is living, and to the maximum. Where lucidity dominates, the scale of values becomes useless.
Let's be even more simple. Let us say that the sole obstacle, the sole deficiency to be made good, is constituted
by premature death. Thus it is that no depth, no emotion, no passion, and no sacrifice could render equal in the eyes

12 Quantity sometimes constitutes quality. If I can believe the latest restatements of scientific theory, all matter is constituted

by centers of energy. Their greater or lesser quantity makes its specificity more or less remarkable. A billion ions and one ion
differ not only in quantity but also in quality. It is easy to find an analogy in human experience.

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

22

of the absurd man (even if he wished it so) a conscious life of forty years and a lucidity spread over sixty years.13
Madness and death are his irreparables. Man does not choose. The absurd and the extra life it involves therefore do
not depend on man's will, but on its contrary, which is death.14 Weighing words carefully, it is altogether a
question of luck. One just has to be able to consent to this. There will never be any substitute for twenty years of
life and experience.
By what is an odd inconsistency in such an alert race, the Greeks claimed that those who died young were
beloved of the gods. And that is true only if you are willing to believe that entering the ridiculous world of the
gods is forever losing the purest of joys, which is feeling, and feeling on this earth. The present and the
succession of presents before a constantly conscious soul is the ideal [64]of the absurd man. But the word
"ideal" rings false in this connection. It is not even his vocation, but merely the third consequence of his
reasoning. Having started from an anguished awareness of the inhuman, the meditation on the absurd
returns at the end of its itinerary to the very heart of the passionate flames of human revolt.15
* * *
Thus I draw from the absurd three consequences, which are my revolt, my freedom, and my passion.
By the mere activity of consciousness I transform into a rule of life what was an invitation to death—and
I refuse suicide. I know, to be sure, the dull resonance that vibrates throughout these days. Yet I have but
a word to say: that it is necessary. When Nietzsche writes: "It clearly seems that the chief thing in heaven
and on earth is to obey at length and in a single direction: in the long run there results something for which it is worth the
trouble of living on this earth as, for example, virtue, art, music, the dance, reason, the mind—something that transfigures,
something delicate, mad, or divine," he elucidates the rule of a really distinguished code of ethics. But he also points the way
of the absurd man. Obeying the flame is both the easiest and the [65]hardest thing to do. However, it is good for man
to judge himself occasionally. He is alone in being able to do so. "Prayer," says Alain, "is when night
descends over thought." "But the mind must meet the night," reply the mystics and the existentials. Yes,
indeed, but not that night that is born under closed eyelids and through the mere will of man—dark,
impenetrable night that the mind calls up in order to plunge into it. If it must encounter a night, let it be
rather that of despair, which remains lucid—polar night, vigil of the mind, whence will arise perhaps that
white and virginal brightness which outlines every object in the light of the intelligence. At that degree,
equivalence encounters passionate understanding. Then it is no longer even a question of judging the
existential leap. It resumes its place amid the age-old fresco of human attitudes. For the spectator, if he is
conscious, that leap is still absurd. In so far as it thinks it solves the paradox, it reinstates it intact. On this
score, it is stirring. On this score, everything resumes its place and the absurd world is reborn in all its
splendor and diversity.
But it is bad to stop, hard to be satisfied with a single way of seeing, to go without contradiction, perhaps
the most subtle of all spiritual forces. The preceding merely defines a way of thinking. But the point is to
live.

13 Same reflection on a notion as different as the idea of eternal nothingness. It neither adds anything to nor subtracts

anything from reality. In psychological experience of nothingness, it is by the consideration of what will happen in two thousand
years that our own nothingness truly takes on meaning. In one of its aspects, eternal nothingness is made up precisely of the sum
of lives to come which will not be ours.
14 The will is only the agent here: it tends to maintain consciousness. It provides a discipline of life, and that

is appreciable.
15 What matters is coherence. We start out here from acceptance of the world. But Oriental thought teaches that one can indulge in the same effort of
logic by choosing against the world. That is just as legitimate and gives this essay its perspectives and its limits. But when the negation of the world is pursued
just as rigorously, one often achieves (in certain Vedantic schools) similar results regarding, for instance, the indifference of works. In a book of great
importance, Le Choix, Jean Grenier establishes in this way a veritable "philosophy of indifference."

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

23

[119]
The Myth Of Sisyphus
The gods had condemned Sisyphus to ceaselessly rolling a rock to the top of a mountain, whence the
stone would fall back of its own weight. They had thought with some reason that there is no more
dreadful punishment than futile and hopeless labor.
If one believes Homer, Sisyphus was the wisest and most prudent of mortals. According to another
tradition, however, he was disposed to practice the profession of highwayman. I see no contradiction in
this. Opinions differ as to the reasons why he became the futile laborer of the underworld. To begin with,
he is accused of a certain levity in regard to the gods. He stole their secrets. Ægina, the daughter of
Æsopus, was carried off by Jupiter. The father was shocked by that disappearance and complained to
Sisyphus. He, who knew of the abduction, offered to tell about it on condition that Æsopus would give
water to the citadel of Corinth. To the celestial thunderbolts he preferred the benediction of water. He was
punished for this in the underworld. Homer tells us also that Sisyphus had put Death in chains. Pluto
could not endure the sight of his deserted, silent empire. He dispatched the god of war, who liberated
Death from the hands of her conqueror.
It is said that Sisyphus, being near to death, rashly wanted to test his wife's love. He ordered her to
[120]cast his unburied body into the middle of the public square. Sisyphus woke up in the underworld.
And there, annoyed by an obedience so contrary to human love, he obtained from Pluto permission to
return to earth in order to chastise his wife. But when he had seen again the face of this world, enjoyed
water and sun, warm stones and the sea, he no longer wanted to go back to the infernal darkness. Recalls,
signs of anger, warnings were of no avail. Many years more he lived facing the curve of the gulf, the
sparkling sea, and the smiles of earth. A decree of the gods was necessary. Mercury came and seized the
impudent man by the collar and, snatching him from his joys, lead him forcibly back to the underworld,
where his rock was ready for him.
You have already grasped that Sisyphus is the absurd hero. He is, as much through his passions as
through his torture. His scorn of the gods, his hatred of death, and his passion for life won him that
unspeakable penalty in which the whole being is exerted toward accomplishing nothing. This is the price
that must be paid for the passions of this earth. Nothing is told to us about Sisyphus in the underworld.
Myths are made for the imagination to breathe life into them. As for this myth, one sees merely the whole
effort of a body straining to raise the huge stone, to roll it, and push it up a slope a hundred times over;
one sees the face screwed up, the cheek tight against the stone, the shoulder bracing the clay-covered
mass, the foot wedging it, the fresh start with arms outstretched, the wholly human security of two earthclotted hands. At the very end of his long effort [121]measured by skyless space and time without depth,
the purpose is achieved. Then Sisyphus watches the stone rush down in a few moments toward that lower
world whence he will have to push it up again toward the summit. He goes back down to the plain.
It is during that return, that pause, that Sisyphus interests me. A face that toils so close to stones is
already stone itself! I see that man going back down with a heavy yet measured step toward the torment
of which he will never know the end. That hour like a breathing-space which returns as surely as his
suffering, that is the hour of consciousness. At each of those moments when he leaves the heights and
gradually sinks toward the lairs of the gods, he is superior to his fate. He is stronger than his rock.
If this myth is tragic, that is because its hero is conscious. Where would his torture be, indeed, if at
every step the hope of succeeding upheld him? The workman of today works everyday in his life at the
same tasks, and his fate is no less absurd. But it is tragic only at the rare moments when it becomes
conscious. Sisyphus, proletarian of the gods, powerless and rebellious, knows the whole extent of his
wretched condition: it is what he thinks of during his descent. The lucidity that was to constitute his
torture at the same time crowns his victory. There is no fate that cannot be surmounted by scorn.
*

*

*

Camus: The Myth of Sisyphus

24

If the descent is thus sometimes performed in sorrow, it can also take place in joy. This word is not
too much. Again I fancy Sisyphus returning toward his rock, and [122] the sorrow was in the beginning.
When the images of earth cling too tightly to memory, when the call of happiness becomes too insistent,
it happens that melancholy arises in man's heart: this is the rock's victory, this is the rock itself. The
boundless grief is too heavy to bear. These are our nights of Gethsemane. But crushing truths perish from
being acknowledged. Thus, Œdipus at the outset obeys fate without knowing it. But from the moment he
knows, his tragedy begins. Yet at the same moment, blind and desperate, he realizes that the only bond
linking him to the world is the cool hand of a girl. Then a tremendous remark rings out: "Despite so many
ordeals, my advanced age and the nobility of my soul make me conclude that all is well." Sophocles'
Œdipus, like Dostoevsky's Kirilov, thus gives the recipe for the absurd victory. Ancient wisdom confirms
modern heroism.
One does not discover the absurd without being tempted to write a manual of happiness. "What! by
such narrow ways—? " There is but one world, however. Happiness and the absurd are two sons of the
same earth. They are inseparable. It would be a mistake to say that happiness necessarily springs from the
absurd discovery. It happens as well that the felling of the absurd springs from happiness. "I conclude that
all is well," says Œdipus, and that remark is sacred. It echoes in the wild and limited universe of man. It
teaches that all is not, has not been, exhausted. It drives out of this world a god who had come into it with
dissatisfaction and a preference for futile suffering. It makes of fate a human matter, which must be
settled among men.
[123]All Sisyphus' silent joy is contained therein. His fate belongs to him. His rock is a thing
Likewise, the absurd man, when he contemplates his torment, silences all the idols. In the universe
suddenly restored to its silence, the myriad wondering little voices of the earth rise up. Unconscious,
secret calls, invitations from all the faces, they are the necessary reverse and price of victory. There is no
sun without shadow, and it is essential to know the night. The absurd man says yes and his efforts will
henceforth be unceasing. If there is a personal fate, there is no higher destiny, or at least there is, but one
which he concludes is inevitable and despicable. For the rest, he knows himself to be the master of his
days. At that subtle moment when man glances backward over his life, Sisyphus returning toward his
rock, in that slight pivoting he contemplates that series of unrelated actions which become his fate,
created by him, combined under his memory's eye and soon sealed by his death. Thus, convinced of the
wholly human origin of all that is human, a blind man eager to see who knows that the night has no end,
he is still on the go. The rock is still rolling.
I leave Sisyphus at the foot of the mountain! One always finds one's burden again. But Sisyphus
teaches the higher fidelity that negates the gods and raises rocks. He too concludes that all is well. This
universe henceforth without a master seems to him neither sterile nor futile. Each atom of that stone, each
mineral flake of that night filled mountain, in itself forms a world. The struggle itself toward the heights
is enough to fill a man's heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy.

Camus, Albert. The Myth of Sisyphus and Other Essays. translated by Justin O'Brien. New York: Vintage
Books, 1991. Translation originally published by Alfred A. Knopf, 1955. Originally published in
France as Le Mythe de Sisyphe by Librairie Gallimard, 1942.

