THE eONCEPI' OF ANXIETY
KIERKEGAARO'S WRITINGS, VIII

THE CONCEPT OF ANXIETY
A SIMPLE PSYCHOLOGICALLY
ORIENTING DELIBERATION
ON THE DOGMATIC ISSUE
OF HEREDITARY SIN

by S0ren Kierkegaard
Edited and Translated
with Introduction and Notes by

Reidar Thomte

in collaboration with

Albert B. Anderson

PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS
PRINCETON, NEW JERSEY

Copyriglll 0 19'0., Pti.rcrt<ltl UNill'mi1l Pms
P,,6lislld 6y P,I_""I Unillmity Pms, Ptii_1, twwJmq
I" ~ Uoild Kh~; Pti"CttQfl Uni"tlSity Prm, Oridttlln, Wm s.us<'X
AI1R,jp~4

"'"6Nq sf Conpu C'''''CfI''I-iQ·N/bMII o"w
KH'*'t-d, S#frq A.6~, fIIJ.IIH.
~tI1M«pI sf·n:My·
TIII1IIl.IIion rf &J1ric1 AlIFf.
Bib~y;,.

IndJtJn Inia.
1. $1'11, OftgiMl. 2.~, Rdft/oIu. J. AMiny.
I. 'lktmlr, RdtL.,. It. AnMrHtI, AIMf, 192'. 1tI. Trtlt.
81720.KS2 19'0 2JJ'.14 19·J217
ISBN ()'691·07244-2
ISBN ()'69t.fJ20tt.6 (pWt.)
E4i~1 ,""",WI

sf /his ""'" IIIIf MIl MJisId 6y • gNlltfrom

""'IIm.. ~, 'fiwIr,,141 btllffo J«ifty....111 ~/9""1U"
III ,\1iIUlNp"b'/, Mi'/ltnOf4

P'II,,«1OIl tMvmity Pms ....,., 'If prilirH Dol «i4:fm p4ptr
""I _I tht ,1IlU611tffor ptmW_ ..rJ 41U11W1i'1 sf ~
Commiu« OIl I'tH1'lIi<IH CwiMlilltJfor &.lit Lorlftlllty sf iht
COIIIItll "" "''''Nq RntHIIW

18 19 20
ISlIN·IJ: 978·0·69]·0201 1·2 jpbk. )

CONTENTS

HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

Vll

The Concept of Anxiety
1
PREFACE

7
INTRODUCTION

9
Anxiety as the Presupposition of Hereditary Sin
and as Explaining Hereditary Sin Retrogressively
in Terms of Its Origin

25

1.

HISTORICAL INTIMATIONS REGARDING THE

CONCEPT OF HEREDITARY SIN

25

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

29
35
38
41

THE CONCEPT OF THE FIRST SIN
THE CONCEPT OF THE INNOCENCE
THE CONCEPT OF THE FALL
THE CONCEPT OF ANXIETY
ANXIETY AS THE PRESUPPOSITION OF HEREDITARY

SIN AND AS EXPLAINING HEREDITARY SIN
RETROGRESSIVELY IN TERMS OF ITS ORIGIN

46

II Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin
Progressively

52

1.
2.

OBJECTIVE ANXIETY

A. The Consequence of the Relationship
of Generation
B. The Consequence of the Historical Relationship
SUBJECTIVE ANXIETY

56
60
62
73

Contents

VI

III Anxiety as the Consequence of that Sin which

Is Absence of the Consciousness of Sin
81

l.

THE ANXIETY OF spmITLESSNESS

2.

ANXIETY DEFINED DIALECTICALLY AS FATE

3. ANXIETY DEFINED DIALECTICALLY AS GUILT

93
96
103

IV Anxiety of Sin or Anxiety as the Consequence
of Sin in the Single Individual
111

l.
2.

ANXIETY ABOUT EVIL

I. Freedom Lost Somatically-Psychically
II. Freedom Lost Pneumatically

ANXIETY ABOUT THE GOOD (THE DEMONIC)

113
118
136
137

V Anxiety as Saving through Faith
155
SUPPLEMENT

Key to References

164

Original Title Page

166

Selected Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals
and Papers Pertaining to The Concept of Anxiety

169

EDITORIAL ApPENDIX

Acknowledgments

INDEX

163

215

Collation of The Concept of Anxiety in the Danish
Editions ofKierkegaard's Collected Works

217

Notes

221

Bibliographical Note

257

219

259

HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

Among those attending W.F.J. Schelling's series of lectures
on the philosophy of mythology and revelation (Philosophie
der Mythologie und Offenbarung) at the University of Berlin in
the winter of1841-1842 were both Friedrich Engels and S0ren
Kierkegaard. 1 After the second lecture Kierkegaard wrote: "I
am so happy to have heard Schelling's second lecture-indescribably. I have been pining and thinking mournful thoughts
long enough. The embryonic child of thought leapt for joy
within me, as in Elizabeth, when he mentioned the word 'actuality' in connection with the relation of philosophy to actuality. "2 Although this initial enthusiasm declined rapidly,
Kierkegaard continued to attend the lectures and took copious
notes. What interested him in particular was Schelling's criticism of Hegel's rationalistic system, and upon his return to
Copenhagen in 1842 he turned to the study of Leibniz, Descartes, and Aristotle, as well as to the anti-Hegelian writings
of Adolph Trendelenburg 3 and portions of W. G. Tennemann's history of philosophy.4 Each of these studies helped
him to shape his own philosophical position and also furnished him with an arsenal for his relentless battle with Hegel
and speculative idealism.
Leibniz's review of arguments pertaining to the problem of
freedom interested Kierkegaard especially. In response to
Leibniz's point in the Theodicy that the connection between
1 Paul Tillich, "Existential Philosophy," Journal of the History of Ideas, V
(1944),44.
2 See p. 229, note 51.
3 Adolph Trendelenburg, Logische Untersuchungen (Berlin: 1840; ASKB
842); Die logische Frage in Hegel's System. Zwei Streitschriften (Leipzig: 1843;
ASKB 846). See Niels Thulstrup, Kierkegaards Forhold til Hegel (Copenhagen:
Gyldendal, 1967), pp. 241, 269.
4 W. G. Tennemann, Geschichte der Philosophie, I-XII (Leipzig: 1798-1819;
ASKB 815-26). See Thulstrup, Kierkegaards Forhold. til Hegel, pp. 241, 243,
245-46, 249-50.

viii

Historical Introduction

judgment and will is not as necessary as one might think,
Kierkegaard asked: "In what relationship does the will stand
to the last act of the understanding ... ?"5 He agreed with
Leibniz that a completely indifferent will (~quilibrium) is an
absurdity and a chimera. 6 In another journal entry he noted
that Leibniz mentions two difficulties that have disturbed
man: the relation between freedom and necessity, and the
continuity of matter and its separate parts. The first problem
has engaged all men; the second, only the philosophers. 7 Subsequently, Kierkegaard dealt with the problem of freedom in
three of his pseudonymous works: Philosophical Fragments defines the ontological ground of freedom and its realm,
whereas The Concept of Anxiety and The Sickness unto Death
consider the anthropological aspects of freedom.
In response to Descartes's idea of freedom, Kierkegaard
noted in his papers that: "In freedom I can emerge only from
that into which I have entered in freedom .... IfI am going to
emerge from doubt in freedom, I must enter into doubt in
freedom. (Act ofWill.)"8 Therefore, Descartes, according to
Kierkegaard, had inverted the relationship between thought
and will:
Incidentally, it is noteworthy that Descartes, who himself
in one of the meditations explains the possibility of error by
recalling that freedom in man is superior to thought, nevertheless has construed thought, not freedom, as the absolute. Obviously this is the position of the elder Fichte-not
cogito ergo sum, but I act ergo sum, for this cogito is something
derived or it is identical with "I act"; either the consciousness of freedom is in the action, and then it should not read
cogito ergo sum, or it is the subsequent consciousness. 9

5 JP II 1241 (Pap. IV C 39).
6JP II 1241 (Pap. IV C 39); Leibniz, Theodiey, §§311ff., 319; God. Guil.
Leibnitii Opera philosophi(4 ... , ed. J. E. Erdmann (Berlin: 1840; ASKB 620),
pp. 595-98. See alsoJP 1112361, 3340; IV 4419; V 5581-85 (Pap. IV A 12,

14-18,22,35).
7 JP III 2360 (Pap. IV All).
9 JP II 2338 (Pap. IV ell).

8

JP I 777 (Pap. IV B 13:21).

Historical Introduction

IX

In a marginal notation Kierkegaard added: "This transition is
manifestly a pathos:filled transition, not dialectical, for dialectically nothing can be derived. To me this is important. A
pathos-filled transition can be achieved by every man if he
wills it, because the transition to the infinite, which consists in
pathos, takes only courage. "10
Kierkegaard criticized the Cartesian principle of methodical
doubt because it mistakenly gives more weight to reflection
(thought) than it does to act (will).
What skeptics should really be caught in is the ethical.
Since Descartes they have all thought that during the period
in which they doubted they dared not to express anything
definite with regard to knowledge, but on the other hand
they dared to act, because in this respect they could be
satisfied with probability. What an enormous contradiction! As if it were not far more dreadful to do something
about which one is doubtful (thereby incurring responsibility) than to make a statement. Or was it because the ethical
is in itself certain? But then there was something which
doubt could not reach!l1
Descartes's apparently epistemological problem is for Kierkegaard an existential one; that is, the solution of doubt lies
not in reflection but in resolution. 12
The remainder of Kierkegaard's studies during the fall of
1842 centered on Trendelenburg and Tennemann, and from
them Kierkegaard gained insights into Aristotle's thought.
References in his papers indicate that he also made use of primary sources. In a discussion of Aristotle's doctrine of motion, Tennemann wrote: "Because possibility and actuality
are distinguishable in all things, change, insofar as it is change,
is the actualization of the possible . ... The transition from possibility to actuality is a change, Kivll<nC;. This could be expressed more precisely by saying: change, motion, is the
10 JP

11

III 2339 (Pap. IV C 12).
JP I 776 (Pap. IV B 5:13).

11

JP I 774 (Pap. IV A 72).

x

Historical Introduction

actualization of the possible asfar as it is possible. "13 This conception of change held great significance for Kierkegaard, and he
made Tennemann's interpretation ofldvTJO"lC; the point of departure for his own theory of transition-what in The Concept
of Anxiety is referred to as the "qualitative leap."
Kierkegaard found support for his conception of the qualitative leap in Trendelenburg's idea that the highest principles
can be demonstrated only indirectly (negatively). Yet he reproached Trendelenburg for his failure to recognize the necessity of a qualitative leap in order to recognize the validity of
such principles. 14
Kierkegaard's primary criticism of Aristotle centers on his
view that the real self resides ultimately in the thinking part of
man, and that consequently the contemplative life constitutes
man's highest happiness. Kierkegaard found in Aristotle an
understanding that ethics will not admit of the precision required for scientific knowledge: "The definition of science
that Aristotle gives in 6,3 is very important. The objects of
science are things that can be only in a single way. What is
scientifically knowable is therefore the necessary, the eternal,
for everything that is absolutely necessary is also absolutely
everlasting. "15 He does then agree with Aristotle that, strictly
speaking, there is no scientific knowledge of human existence, since its essential qualification is one of freedom and not
of necessity. However, from Kierkegaard's point of view,
"Aristotle has not understood this self deeply enough, for
only in the esthetic sense does contemplative thought have an
entelechy, and the felicity of the gods does not reside in contemplation but in eternal communication. "16 For Kierkegaard, therefore, Aristotle falls short in his understanding
that the consummation of man's ethical life lies in the contemplative posture.
13 Tennemann, Geschichte der Philosophie, Ill, pp. 126-27. For Kierkegaard's
use of Jdvll<Jl<; see Philosophical Fragments, KW VII (SV IV 236-39).
14JP III 2341 (Pap. V A 74).
15JP II 2281 (Pap. IV C 23). The reference is to Nicomachean Ethics, 1115
b, 18 fr.
16JP IV 3892 (Pap. IV C 26).

Historical Introduction

Xl

Following his studies of Leibniz, Descartes, and Aristotle,
Kierkegaard began to delve deeper into the study of Hegel,
centering on the Phenomenology of Mind and the Encylopcedia of
the Philosophical Sciences. Where Hegel and his followers proclaimed the harmonious relationship of philosophical idealism
and Christianity, Kierkegaard argued that Christianity and
philosophy (Hegel's speculative idealism) present an irreconcilable opposition. 17 Thus, however else Kierkegaard may be
classified in the history of thought , he stands in direct opposition to the philosophical idealism of his day.
There is no question but that Kierkegaard's thought was
influenced by Hegel's; however, there is some disagreement
as to the degree and nature of that influence. Per L,mning
writes:
It has usually been maintained that Hegel's philosophy was
a decisive influence in the formulation of Kierkegaard's
thought, especially his conception of history and of the
paradox in relation to history .... Such a view seems to be
rooted in a complete failure to recognize fully how Kierkegaard's interpretation stands entirely independent of the
Hegelian philosophy of religion. However, many of Kierkegaard's conceptual formulations may be due to a relation
to Hege1. 18

The views of Stephen Crites and Mark Taylor would have
Kierkegaard considerably more indebted to Hegel, and as
evidence they indicate the similarities between Kierkegaard's
concept of the self in The Sickness unto Death and a passage in
Hegel's Phenomenology of Mind .19 However, Niels Thulstrup
17 JP

III 3245 (Pap. I A 94). October 17.1835.
Per L0nning, "Samtidighedens Situation" (Oslo: Forlaget Land og Kirke,
1954). p. 285.
19 Stephen Crites. In the Twilight of Christendom: Hegel vs. Kierkegaard on
Faith and History (Chambersburg, Pa.: American Academy of Religion,
1972), p. 70; Mark C. Taylor. Kierkegaard's Pseudonymous Authorship: A Study
of Time and the Self (Princeton: Princeton University Press. 1975), p. 104. See
The Sickness unto Death, KW XIX (SV XI 127-28); G.W.F. Hegel,
Phiinomenologie des Geistes, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel's Werke, vollstiindige
Ausgabe, I-XVIII, ed. Ph. Marheineke et al. (Berlin: 1832-40; ASKB 549-65),
18

Xli

Historical Introduction

warns against being misled by verbal or terminological correspondences between Kierkegaard and Hegel, particularly
with reference to Kierkegaard's triadic conception of selfhood
in The Concept of Anxiety and other works. 20

The Concept of Anxiety was published on June 17, 1844, the
year in which Nietzsche was born and Kierkegaard was
thirty-one years old. On the same day, Kierkegaard also published a book called Prefaces, and four days earlier Philosophical
Fragments had appeared. In addition to these works, he published in the same year Two Upbuilding Discourses, Three Upbuilding Discourses, and Four Upbuilding Discourses.
According to Jens Himmelstrup,21 Philosophical Fragments,
Prefaces, and Four Upbuilding Discourses received contemporary reviews; the last work was honored with a review by
Bishop J. P. Mynster, the primate of the Danish Church.
However, there were no reviews of The Concept of Anxiety; in
other words, this book, one of the most significant and possibly the most difficult of Kierkegaard's works, apparently
caused no stir among scholars of the day.
The Concept of Anxiety has deep roots in the personal history of its author. That Kierkegaard lived intimately with
anxiety is reflected in the numerous references' to this idea in
his journals and works both before and after he wrote The
Concept of Anxiety. In a journal entry for 1837, he speaks of
certain presentiments that seem to precede everything that
will happen and of an anxious consciousness by which "innocent but fragile souls can easily be tempted to believe themselves guilty. "22 However, to Kierkegaard anxiety is clearly
more pervasive and basic than simple presentiment. 23 On

II, pp. 14-18; Samtliche Werke,jubilaumsausgabe [J.A.). I-XXVI, ed. Hermann
Glockner (Stuttgart: Fr. Fromans Verlag, 1927-40), II, pp. 23-26; The Phenomenology if Mind, tr. J. P. Baillie (New York: Harper Torchbook, 1%7), pp.
80-84.
]0 Thulstrup, Kierkegaards Forhold til Hegel, p. 305. For the relation ofKierkegaard to Hegel and idealism, see the numerous references in the editorial
Notes to The Concept of Anxiety.
21 Siren Kierkegaard International Bibliograji (Copenhagen: Gyldendals Forlag, 1%2), p. 10.
22 See Supplement, p. 169 (Pap. II A 18).
23 See pp. 42-43.

Historical Introduction

XIll

May 12, 1839, he wrote, "All existence [Tilva'relsen], from
the smallest fly to the mysteries of the Incarnation, makes me
anxious. "24 Three years after the publication of The Concept of
Anxiety, he observed: "Deep within every human being there
still lives the anxiety over the possibility of being alone in the
world, forgotten by God, overlooked by the millions and
millions in this enormous household. "25 Again, in an 1848
entry he reflected upon his own upbringing and the anxiety
with which his father had filled his soul, upon his frightful
melancholy, and upon his anxiety over Christianity, to which
he was nevertheless drawn. 26 Finally, in 1850 he spoke of a
"melancholy anxiety" and an "inborn anxiety. "27 The idea of
anxiety and its relation to his own life was therefore a lifelong
and pervasive concern.
The first published indication of Kierkegaard's deep interest in anxiety appears in his treatment of Mozart's Don
Giovanni in EitherlOr, where the concept is explored in its relation to sensuousness. Don Giovanni's anxiety, Kierkegaard
suggests, is a substantial or prototypical kind,28 whereas that
of Antigone is tragic,29 and Nero's anxiety is psychopathic. 3o
However, it is in The Concept of Anxiety that Kierkegaard
deals for the first time with "anxiety over nothing"-that
pregnant anxiety that is directed toward the future and that is
a pristine element in every human being. 31
The psychological concern that fostered The Concept of
Anxiety figures in many ofKierkegaard's other works. Repetition is "A Venture in Experimenting32 Psychology"; the subtitle of " 'Guilty?' I'Not Guilty?' " in Stages on Life's Way is

See Supplement, p. 170 (Pap. II A 420).
See Supplement, p. 171 (Pap. VIIP A 363).
26 See Supplement, pp. 170-72 (Pap. IV A 107; III A 164; IX A 411).
27 See Supplement, pp. 172-73 (Pap. X2 A 493).
28 Either/Or, I, KW III (S V I 107-08).
29 Either/Or, I, KW III (SV 1131-32).
30 Either/Or, II, KW IV (SV II 168-69).
31 For the numerous references to anxiety in Kierkegaard's works, see
Stlren Kierleegaard-Register, Sag- og Forjatte"egister, by A. Ibsen, Terminologisk
Register, by I. HimmeJstrup (Copenhagen: Gyldendalske BoghandeJ, Nordisk Forlag, 1936).
32 Danish: experimenterende. On this word in its various forms, see Fear and
24
25

XIV

Historical Introduction

"An Imaginary Psychological Construction"; the subtitle of
The Sickness unto Death is "A Christian Psychological Exposition for Upbuilding and Awakening"; and The Concept of
Anxiety has as its subtitle, "A Simple Psychologically Orienting Deliberation on the Dogmatic Issue of Hereditary Sin."
These subtitles reflect the history of Kierkegaard's personal
experience and the extent to which these works represent an
analysis of his own self.
His contribution to psychological thought did not go unnoticed. In 1881 Georg Brandes,33 a celebrated writer and
literary critic, wrote in a letter to Nietzsche, "In my opinion,
he [Kierkegaard] is one of the most profound psychologists
who ever lived."
Historically, the psychology with which Kierkegaard
worked is quite different from present-day psychological research. His is a phenomenology that is based on an ontological view of man, the fundamental presupposition of which is
the transcendent reality of the individual, whose intuitively
discernible character reveals the existence of an eternal component. Such a psychology does not blend well with any
purely empirical science and is best understood by regarding
soma, psyche, and spirit as the principal determinants of the
human structure, with the first two belonging to the temporal
realm and the third to the eternal.
From the positivistic point of view, the psychology of The
Concept of Anxiety was attacked by the philosopher Harald
Heffding,34 whose criticism was directed especially against
the idea of the "qualitative leap." He maintained that the sciences, including the science of psychology, are based on the
assumption that there is an unbroken continuity in the passage from possibility to actuality and that every new state is
Trembling and Repetition, KW VI, Historical Introduction, notes 30-55 and related texts; note on subtide.
33 Correspondence de Georg Brandes, I-VI, ed. Paul Kruger (Copenhagen:
Rosenkilde og Bagger, 1966), III, p. 448 (ed. tr.).
34 S,ren Kierleegaard som Filosof (Copenhagen: Gyldendaisk Boghandels
rorlag, 1877; 2 ed., 1919), pp. 7~2.

Historical Introduction

xv

thereby the simple consequence of a previous state. For
H0ffding, a presuppositionless leap would abrogate the strict
continuity required in every science. Yet this is precisely
Kierkegaard's point, namely, that the "qualitative leap" is a
category outside the scope of scientific procedures and that its
confirmation is therefore not reducible to the principles of
verification assumed by the sciences. Kierkegaard expressed
this difference by positing not only psychosomatic dimensions in human existence but also a dimension of spirit, distinguishing the "outwardness" of scientific observation from
the "inwardness" of spiritual experience. A psychology that
does not account for the determining and transforming activity of spirit in the self-conscious subject will not accurately
reflect what grounds and generates the quality of man's becoming. The Concept of Anxiety then suggests that the psychologist could analyze this notion and its relation to the
"qualitative leap" produced in the dialectic of freedom in
order to work toward a more adequate grasp of man's nature
and the ontological determinants that shape the human condition.
In recent years The Concept of Anxiety has been recognized
by philosphers, theologians, and psychologists as one of
Kierkegaard's major works. Kierkegaard's method is keyed
to the principle unum noris omnes,35 which actually expresses
the same as the Socratic "know yourself," provided that unum
is understood to be the observer himself, who does not look
for an omnes but determinedly holds fast to himself, the one
who actually is all. Thus every human being possesses, or is
within himself, a complete expression of humanness, whose
essential meaning cannot be gained from scientific studies.
That is, neither rational speculation nor natural science will
disclose to the existing individual his essential nature and purpose. Self-knowledge is attained by man in existing; that is,
self-knowledge is coordinate with the actualizing of one's potentiality to become oneself. 36
35
36

See p. 79.
See Concluding Unscientific Postscript, KW XII (SV VII 307-09).

xvi

Historical Introduction

Kierkegaard's principle of unum noris omnes has created interest among thinkers who draw heavily upon existential psychology. Martin Heidegger "denies that it is possible to
approach Being through objective reality, and insists that
'Existential Being,' Dasein, self-relatedness, is the only door
to Being itself. The obj~ctive world (Das Vorhandene) is a late
product of immediate personal experience. "37 According to
Karl Jaspers, personal existence ("Existential Subjectivity") is
the center and aim of reality. No being who lacks such personal experience "can ever understand existence. "38 In this
connection, it is only proper to state that Kierlc.egaard's principle of unum noris omnes refers to self-knowledge. The task of
the subjective thinker is to understand himself in his existence. "Know yourself" is to be understood in the Greek way
as the Greeks would have understood it if they had possessed
Christian presuppositions. 39
Paul Tillich's view of anxiety somewhat parallels that of
Kierkegaard. He defines anxiety as "finitude in awareness":
"Anxiety is the self-awareness of the finite self as finite." Like
finitude, anxiety is ontological; it cannot be derived from anything. Anxiety differs from fear in that the object of anxiety is
"nothingness," and nothingness is not an "object." Fear
relates itself to objects-for example, a danger, a pain, an
enemy-for it is psychological and can be conquered. Anxiety cannot be conquered, for no finite being can conquer its
finitude. Anxiety is always present, although it may be latent.
Because it is ontological, anxiety expresses finitude from the
inside. Tillich also speaks of "the anxiety of losing our ontological structure," which is "the anxiety of not being what
we essentially are. It is anxiety about disintegrating and falling into non-being through existential disruption," with "the
consequent destruction of the ontological structure." In a
very significant footnote, Tillich says: "Psychotherapy cannot remove ontological anxiety, because it cannot change the
structure of finitude. But it can remove compulsory forms of
37

38

Quoted by Tillich, "Existential Philosophy," p. 57.
Ibid.
39 See p. 79.

Historical Introduction

xvii

anxiety and can reduce the frequency and intensity of fears. It
can put anxiety 'in its proper place.' "40
Kierkegaard's concepts of the self and of anxiety are basic
to Reinhold Niebuhr's doctrine of man. Man stands at the
juncture of nature and spirit; he is involved both in freedom
and necessity; he is both limited and limitless. "Anxiety is the
inevitable concomitant of freedom and finiteness in which
man is involved .... It is the inevitable spiritual state of man,
standing in the paradoxical situation of freedom and finiteness. "41 Anxiety is the permanent internal preconditioning of
sin as well as of creativity.
Similarly, Rollo May emphasizes that anxiety is not an affect among other affects, such as pleasure and sadness. It is an
ontological characteristic of man, rooted in his very existence.
Fear is a threat to the periphery of one's existence and can be
studied as an affect among other affects. Anxiety is a threat to
the foundation and center of one's existence. It is ontological
and can be understood only as a threat to Dasein. If the individual did not have some measure of freedom, there could be
no experience of anxiety. 42
Kierkegaard emphatically affirms the religious dimension
of the self: "The formula that describes the state of the self
when despair is completely rooted out is this: in relating itself
to itself and in willing to be itself, the self rests [or, has its
ground 1transparently in the power that established it. "43 For
Kierkegaard this power is God. 44 The God-relation is an ontological quality of the self, apart from which the self cannot
fully actualize itself or know itself as the infinite self.
Although Kierkegaard's ontological structure of the self has
influenced philosophers like Heidegger and Sartre and psychologists of the existential-analytical school, these thinkers

40 Paul Tillich, Systematic Theology, I-III (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1959-64), I, pp. 191-92, 199.
41 Reinhold Niebuhr, The Nature and Destiny oj Man, I-II (New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons, 1947), I, p. 182.
42 Rollo May et aI., Existence (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1958), pp.
50-51.
43 The Sickness unto Death, KW XIX (SV XI 128).
44 Pap. VIIP B 170:2.

XVl11

Historical Introduction

do not accept the God-relation of the self. Thus Ludwig
Binswanger acknowledges his indebtedness to Kierkegaard
and draws upon aspects of his thought, but he rejects the God
concept, which in Kierkegaard's structure of the self is the
ultimate. 4s
Kierkegaard's style is different from that of contemporary
writers, and readers may think this translation both stilted
and long-winded. The Concept of Anxiety does not read like a
popular book on psychological problems. There is an inordinate number of categorical terms and substantive phrases, and
clause upon clause in sentence upon sentence leaves the reader
breathless. However, to break up some of Kierkegaard's
longer sentences would probably obscure rather than clarify
his meaning.
Although every translation leaves something to be desired
by comparison with the original, in this one every effort has
been made to emulate what was done in a studied and deliberate manner by the author of The Concept of Anxiety. The
work, by the pseudonymous Vigilius Haufniensis, is original
and seminal and therefore demands new and arresting classifications. His expression is the result of an exacting analysis of
concepts, which he carries on without apology in the need to
drive home vital distinctions. Moreover, if the style used for
this purpose is relentless and often overwhelming, from
Kierkegaard's point of view this mood is essential. Although
the tone is more direct and didactic than in his other pseudonymous works, the magnitude of the reflection surrounding the concept of anxiety requires the reader to examine
every pertinent implication in order to arrive at an increasingly profound and multidimensioned awareness of what
anxiety is. Such is the kind of reflection that provides the approach to self-knowledge, and such, therefore, is the character ofKierkegaard's dialectic.
45 Ludwig Binswanger, "Insanity as Life-Historical Phenomenon and as
Mental Disease: The Case of Ellen Ilse," and "The Case of Ellen West, an
Anthropological-Clinical Study," in May et al., Existence, pp. 236, 297-98.

THE CONCEPf OF ANXIElY
A SIMPLE PSYCHOLOGICALLY
ORIENTING DELIBERATION
ON THE DOGMATIC ISSUE
OF HEREDITARY SIN
by Vigilius Haufniensis

The age of making distinctions is past. It has been
vanquished by the system. In our day, whoever
loves to make distinctions is regarded as an eccentric whose soul clings to something that has long
since vanished. Be that as it may, yet Socrates still
is what he was, the simple wise man, because of
the peculiar distinction that he expressed both in
words and in life, something that the eccentric
Hamann first reiterated with great admiration two
thousand years later: "For Socrates was great in
'that he distinguished between what he understood and what he did not understand.' "

TO THE LATE

PROFESSOR POUL MARTIN M0LLER
THE HAPPY LOVER OF GREEK CULTURE, THE ADMIRER OF
HOMER, THE CONFIDANT OF SOCRATES, THE INTERPRETER OF
ARISTOTLE-DENMARK'S JOY IN "JOY OVER DENMARK,"
THOUGH "WIDELY TRAVELED" ALWAYS "REMEMBERED IN
THE DANISH SUMMER"-THE OBJECT OF MY
ADMIRATION, MY PROFOUND LOSS,

THIS WORK
IS DEDICATED.

PREFACE!

In my opinion, one who intends to write a book ought to
consider carefully the subject about which he wishes to write.
Nor would it be inappropriate for him to acquaint himself as
far as possible with what has already been written on the subject. If on his way he should meet an individual who has dealt
exhaustively and satisfactorily with one or another aspect of
that subject, he would do well to rejoice as does the bridegroom's friend who stands by and rejoices greatly as he hears
the bridegroom's voice. 2 When he has done this in complete
silence and with the enthusiasm of a love that ever seeks solitude, nothing more is needed; then he will carefully write his
book as spontaneously as a bird sings its song, 3 and if someone derives benefit or joy from it, so much the better. Then
he will publish the book, carefree and at ease and without any
sense of self-importance, as if he had brought everything to a
conclusion or as if all the generations of the earth were to be
blessed4 by his book. Each generation has its own task and
need not trouble itself unduly by being everything to previous and succeeding generations. Just as each day's trouble is
sufficient for the day, S so each individual in a generation has
enough to do in taking care of himself and does not need to
embrace the whole contemporary age with his paternal solicitude or assume that era and epoch6 begin with his book,
and still less with the New Year's torch 7 of his promise or
with the intimations of his farseeing promises or with the referral of his reassurance to a currency of doubtful value. 8 Not
everyone who is stoop-shouldered is an Atlas, nor did he become such by supporting a world. Not everyone who says
Lord, Lord, shall enter the kingdom of heaven. 9 Not
everyone who offers himself as surety for the whole contemporary age proves by such action that he is reliable and can
vouch for himself. Not everyone who shouts Bravo, schwere
Noth, Gottsblitz, bravissimo lO has therefore understood himself
and his admiration.

IV
279

IV
280

The Concept of Anxiety

8

Concerning my own humble person,l1 I frankly confess
that as an author I am a king without a country and also, in
fear and much trembling,12 an author without any claims. If
to a noble envy or jealous criticism it seems too much that I
bear a Latin name, I shall gladly assume the name Christen
Madsen. Nothing could please me more than to be regarded
as a layman who indeed speculates but is still far removed
from speculation, although I am as devout in my belief in authority as the Roman was tolerant in his worship of God.
When it comes to human authority, I am a fetish worshipper
and will worship anyone with equal piety, but with one proviso, that it be made sufficiently clear by a beating of drums
that he is the one I must worship and that it is he who is the
authority and Imprimatur 13 for the current year. The decision
is beyond my understanding, whether it takes place by lottery
or balloting, or whether the honor is passed around so that
each individual has his turn as authority, like a representative
of the burghers on the board of arbitration.
Beyond this I have nothing to add except to wish everyone
who shares my view and also everyone who does not,
everyone who reads the book and also everyone who has had
enough in reading the Preface, a well meant farewell.

Copenhagen

Respecifully,

VIGILIUS HAUFNIENSIS

INTRODUCTION

IV
281

The sense in which the subject of our deliberation is a task of psychological
interest and the sense in which, after having been the task and interest of
psychology, it points directly to dogmatics.

The view that every scientific issue within the larger compass
of science has its definite place, its measure and its limit, and
thereby precisely its harmonious blending in the whole as
well as its legitimate participation in what is expressed by the
whole, is not merely a pium desiderium [pious wish] that ennobles the man of science by its enthusiastic and melancholy infatuation. This view is not merely a sacred duty that commits
him to the service of the totality and bids him renounce lawlessness and the adventurous desire to lose sight of the mainland; it also serves the interest of every more specialized deliberation, for when the deliberation forgets where it properly
belongs, as language often expresses with striking ambiguity,
it forgets itself and becomes something else, and thereby acquires the dubious perfectibility of being able to become anything and everything. By failing to proceed in a scientific
manner and by not taking care to see that the individual issues
do not outrun one another, as if it were a matter of arriving
first at the masquerade, a person occasionally achieves a brilliance and amazes others by giving the impression that he has
already comprehended that which is still very remote. At
times he makes a vague agreement with things that differ.
The gain is always avenged, as is every unlawful acquisition,
which cannot be owned legally or scientifically.
Thus when an author entitles the last section of the Logic
"Actuali ty, "14 he thereby gains theadvantageofmakingitappear that in logic the highest has already been achieved, or if
one prefers, the lowest. In the meantime, the loss is obvious,
for neither logic nor actuality is served by placing actuality in

IV
282

10

IV
283

The Concept of Anxiety

the Logic. Actuality is not served thereby, for contingency,
which is an essential part of the actual, cannot be admitted
within the realm of logic. Logic is not served thereby, for if
logic has thought actuality, it has included something that it
cannot assimilate, it has appropriated at the beginning what it
should only praedisponere [presuppose]. The penalty is obvious. Every deliberation about the nature of actuality is rendered difficult, and for a long time perhaps made impossible,
since the word "actuality" must first have time to collect itself, time to forget the mistake.
Thus when in dogmaticsfaith is called the immediate 15 without any further qualification, there is gained the advantage
that everybody is convinced of the necessity of not stopping
with faith. The admission may be elicited even from one who
subscribes to orthodoxy, because at first he perhaps does not
discern the misunderstanding, that it does not have its source
in a subsequent error but in that 1tpm'tov "'EUOO~ [fundamental
error]. The loss is quite obvious. Faith loses by being regarded as the immediate, since it has been deprived of what
lawfully belongs to it, namely, its historical presupposition.
Dogmatics loses thereby, because it does not begin where it
properly should begin, namely, within the scope of an earlier
beginning. Instead of presupposing an earlier beginning, it
ignores this and begins without ceremony, just as if it were
logic. Logic does indeed begin with something produced by
the subtlest abstraction, namely, what is most elusive: the
immediate. What is quite proper in logic, namely, that immediacy is eo ipso canceled, becomes in dogmatics idle talk.
Could it ever occur to anyone to stop with the immediate
(with no further qualification), since the immediate is annulled 16
at the very moment it is mentioned, just as a somnambulist wakes up at the very moment his name is mentioned?
Thus when one sometimes finds, and almost solely in propaedeutic investigation, the word "reconciliation"17 [Forsoning] used to designate speculative knowledge, or to designate the identity of the perceiving subject and the object perceived, or to designate the subjective-objective, etc., it is
obvious that the author is brilliant and that by means of this

Introduction

11

brilliance he has explained every riddle, especially to all those
who even in matters of science use less care than they do in
daily life, where they listen carefully to the words of the riddle before they attempt to guess its meaning. Otherwise he
gains the incomparable reputation of having posed by virtue
of his explanation a new riddle, namely, how it could ever
occur to any man that this might be the explanation. The notion that thought on the whole has reality was assumed by all
ancient and medieval philosophy. With Kant, this assumption
became doubtful. If it is now assumed that Hegelian philosophy has actually grasped Kant's skepticism 18 thoroughly
(something that might continue to remain a great question
despite all that Hegel and his school have done with the help
of the slogan "method and manifestation"19 to conceal what
Schelling20 with the slogan "intellectual intuition and construction" openly acknowledged as a new point of departure)
and now has reconstructed the earlier in a higher form and in
such a way that thought does not possess reality by virtue of a
presupposition-does it therefore also follow that this reality,
which is consciously brought forth by thought, is a reconciliation? In that case, philosophy has only been brought back to
where the beginning was made in the old days, when reconciliation did in fact have enormous significance. There is an
old, respectable philosophical terminology: thesis, antithesis,
synthesis. A more recent terminology has been chosen in
which "mediation" takes the third place. Is this such an extraordinary advance? "Mediation" is equivocal, for it suggests simultaneously the relation between the two and the result of the relation, that in which the two relate themselves to
each other as well as the two that related themselves to each
other. It indicates movement as well as repose. Whether this
is a perfection must be determined by subjecting mediation to
a more profound dialectical test, but, unfortunately, this is
something for which we still must wait. One rejects synthesis
and says "mediation." Very well. Brilliance, however, demands more--one says "reconciliation" [Forsoning], and what
is the result? The propaedeutic investigations are not served
by it, for naturally they gain as little in clarity as does the

IV
284

12

IV
285

IV
284

IV
285

The Concept oj Anxiety

truth, as little as a man's soul gains in salvation by having a
title conferred upon him. On the contrary, two sciences,
ethics and dogmatics, become radically confused, especially
when after the introduction of the term "reconciliation" it is
further pointed out that logic and A.oyo<; [the dogmatical] correspond to each other, and that logic is the proper doctrine of
A.oyO<;.21 Ethics and dogmatics struggle over reconciliation in
a confinium [border area] fraught with fate. Repentance and
guilt torment forth reconciliation ethically, while dogmatics,
in its receptivity to the proffered reconciliation, has the historically concrete immediacy with which it begins its discourse
in the great dialogue of science. And now what will be the
result? Presumably language will celebrate a great sabbatical
year in which speech and thought may be at rest so that we
can begin at the beginning.
In logic, the negative 22 is used as the impelling power to
bring movement into all things. One must have movement in
logic no matter how it is brought about, and no matter by
what means. The negative lends a hand, and what the negative cannot accomplish, play on words and platitudes can,just
as when the negative itself becomes a play on words." In
• Exempli gratia: Wesen ist was ist gewesen; ist gewesen is a tempus prlf!teritum of
seyn, ergo, Wesen is das au)gehobene Seyn, the Seyn that has been [For example:
Essence is what has been; "has been" is past tense of "to be," ergo, essence is
annulled being, being tha t has been). 23 This is a logical movement! If anyone
would take the trouble to collect and put together all the strange pixies and
goblins who like busy clerks bring about movement in Hegelian logic (such
as this is in itself and as it has been improved by the [Hegelian) school}, a later
age would perhaps be surprised to see that what are regarded as discarded
witticisms once played an important role in logic, not as incidental explanations and ingenious remarks but as masters of movement, which made
Hegel's logic something of a miracle and gave logical thought feet to move
on, without anyone's being able to observe them. Just as Lulu24 comes running without anyone's being able to observe the mechanism of movement,
so the long mantle of admiration conceals the machinery of logical movement. To have brought movement into logic is the merit of Hegel. In comparison with this, it is hardly worth mentioning the unforgettable merit that
was Hegel's, namely, that in many ways he corrected the categorical definitions and their arrangement, a merit he disdained in order to run aimlessly. 25

Introduction

13

logic, no movement must come about, for logic is, and whatever is logical only is." This impotence of the logical consists
in the transition of logic into becoming, where existence
[Tilvcneise)26 and actuality come forth. So when logic becomes deeply absorbed in the concretion of the categories,
that which was from the beginning is ever the same. Every
movement, if for the moment one wishes to use this expression, is an immanent movement, which in a profound sense is
no movement at all. One can easily convince oneself of this
by considering that the concept of movement is itself a transcendence that has no place in logic. The negative, then, is immanent in the movement, is something vanishing, is that
which is annulled. If everything comes about in this manner,
nothing comes about at all, and the negative becomes an illusion. Nevertheless, precisely in order to make something
come about in logic, the negative becomes something more;
it becomes that which brings forth the opposition, not a negation but a contraposition. And thus the negative is not the
stillness of the immanent movement; it is "the necessary
other,"27 indeed, something that may be very necessary for
logic in order to bring about movement, but it is something
that the negative is not. Turning from logic to ethics, we find
again the same indefatigable negative that is active in the entire Hegelian philosophy. Here one is astonished to discover
that the negative is the evil. 28 As a result, confusion is in full
swing and there are no limits to cleverness, and what Mme
Stad-Holstein 29 has said of Schelling's philosophy, namely,
that it makes a man clever for his whole life, applies in every
way to Hegelianism. One can see how illogical the movements must be in logic, since the negative is the evil, and how
unethical they must be in ethics, since the evil is the negative.
In logic they are too much and in ethics too little. They fit
nowhere if they are supposed to fit both. If ethics has no other
transcendence, it is essentially logic. If logic is to have as
• The eternal expression for the logical is what the Eleatics through a misunderstanding transferred to existence: nothing comes into being [opkommer j, everything is.

IV
286

IV
285

14

IV

287

IV
286

IV
287

The Concept of Anxiety

much transcendence as common propriety requires of ethics,
it is no longer logic.
What has been developed here is probably too complicated
in proportion to the space that it occupies (yet, considering
the importance of the subject it deals with, it is far from too
lengthy); however, it is in no way extraneous, because the details are selected in order to allude to the subject of the book.
The examples are taken from a greater realm, but what happens in the greater can repeat itself in the lesser, and the
misunderstanding is similar, even if there are less harmful
consequences. He who presumes to develop the system30 is
responsible for much, but he who writes a monograph can
and also ought to be faithful over a little. 31
The present work has set as its task the psychological
treatment of the concept of "anxiety," but in such a way that
it constantly keeps in mente [in mind] and before its eye the
dogma of hereditary sin. Accordingly, it must also, although
tacitly so, deal with the concept of sin. Sin, however, is no
subject for psychological concern, and only by submitting to
the service of a misplaced brilliance could it be dealt with psychologically. Sin has its specific place, or more correctly, it
has no place, and this is its specific nature. When sin is treated
in a place other than its own, it is altered by being subjected to
a nonessential refraction of reflection. The concept is altered,
and thereby the mood that properly corresponds to the correct concept" is also disturbed, and instead of the endurance of
the true mood there is the fleeting phantom of false moods.
Thus when sin is brought into esthetics, the mood becomes
either light-minded or melancholy, for the category in which
sin lies is that of contradiction, and this is either comic or
• That science, just as much as poetry and art, presupposes a mood in the
creator as well as in the observer, and that an error in the modulation is just as
disturbing as an error in the development of thought, have been entirely forgotten in our time, when inwardness has been completely forgotten, and also
the category of appropriation, because of the joy over all the glory men
thought they possessed or in their greed have given up as did the dog that
preferred the shadow. 32 Yet every error gives birth to its own enemy. Outside of itself, the error of thought has dialectics as its enemy, and outside of
itself, the absence or falsification of mood has the comical as its enemy.

Introduction

15

tragic. The mood is therefore altered, because the mood that
corresponds to sin is earnestness. The concept of sin is also
altered, because, whether it become comic or tragic, it becomes in any case something that endures, or something
nonessential that is annulled, whereas, according to its true
concept, sin is to be overcome. In a deeper sense, the comic
and the tragic have no enemy but only a bogeyman at which
one either weeps or laughs.
If sin is dealt with in metaphysics, the mood becomes that
of dialectical uniformity and disinterestedness, which ponder
sin as something that cannot withstand the scrutiny of
thought. The concept of sin is also altered, for sin is indeed to
be overcome, yet not as something to wh.lch thought is unable to give life, but as that which is, and as such concerns
every man.
If sin is dealt with in psychology, the mood becomes that of
persistent observation, like the fearlessness of a secret agent,
but not that of the victorious flight of earnestness out of sin.
The concept becomes a different concept, for sin becomes a
state. However, sin is not a state. Its idea is that its concept is
continually annulled. As a state (de potentia [according to possibility D, it is not, but de actu or in actu [according to actuality
or in actuality] it is, again and again. The mood of psychology would be antipathetic curiosity, whereas the proper
mood is earnestness expressed in courageous resistance. The
mood of psychology is that of a discovering anxiety, and in
its anxiety psychology portrays sin, while again and again it is
in anxiety over the portrayal that it itself brings forth. When
sin is dealt with in this manner, it becomes the stronger, because psychology relates itself to it in a feminine way. That
this state has its truth is certain; that it occurs more or less in
every human life before the ethical manifests itself is certain.
But in being considered in this manner sin does not become
what it is, but a more or a less.
Whenever the issue of sin is dealt with, one can observe by
the very mood whether the concept is the correct one. For instance, whenever sin is spoken of as a disease, an abnormality,
a poison, or a disharmony, the concept is falsified.

IV
288

16

IV
289

IV
2K8

The Concept of Anxiety

Sin does not properly belong in any science,33 but it is the
subject of the sermon, in which the single individual speaks as
the single individual t<;> the single individual. In our day, scientific self-importance has tricked pastors into becoming
something like professorial clerks who also serve science and
find it beneath their dignity to preach. Is it any wonder then
that preaching has come to be regarded as a very lowly art?
But to preach is really the most difficult of all arts and is essentially the art that Socrates praised, the art of being able to
converse. It goes without saying that the need is not for
someone in the congregation to provide an answer, or that it
would be of help continually to introduce a respondent. What
Socrates criticized in the Sophists, when he made the distinction, that they indeed knew how to make speeches but not
how to converse, 34 was that they could talk at length about
every subject but lacked the element of appropriation. Appropriation is precisely the secret of conversation.
Corresponding to the concept of sin is earnestness. Now
ethics should be a science in which sin might be expected to
find a place. But here there is a great difficulty. Ethics is still
an ideal science, and not only in the sense that every science is
ideal. Ethics proposes to bring ideality into actuality. On the
other hand, it is not the nature of its movement to raise actuality up into ideality. II- Ethics points to ideality as a task and
assumes that every man possesses the requisite conditions.
Thus ethics develops a contradiction, inasmuch as it makes
clear both the difficulty and the impossibility. What is said of
the law3s is also true of ethics: it is a disciplinarian that demands, and by its demands only judges but does not bring
forth life. Only Greek ethics made an exception, and that was
because it was not ethics in the proper sense but retained an
esthetic factor. This appears clearly in its definition of virtue 36
and in what Aristotle frequently, also in Ethica Nicomachea,
• If this is considered more carefully, there will be occasions enough to
notice the brilliance of heading the last section of the Logic" Actuality," inasmuch as ethics never reaches it. The actuality with which logic ends means,
,therefore, no more in regard to actuality than the "being" with which it
begins.

Introduction

17

states with amiable Greek naivete, namely, that virtue alone
does not make a man happy and content, but he must have
health, friends, and earthly goods and be happy in his family.
The more ideal ethics is, the better. It must not permit itself to
be distracted by the babble that it is useless to require the impossible. For even to listen to such talk is unethical and is
something for which ethics has neither time nor opportunity.
Ethics will have nothing to do with bargaining; nor can one in
this way reach actuality. To reach actuality, the whole
movement must be reversed. This ideal characteristic of
ethics is what tempts one to use first metaphysical, then esthetic, and then psychological categories in the treatment of it.
But ethics, more than any other science, must resist such
temptations. It is, therefore, impossible for anyone to write
an ethics without having altogether different categories in reserve.
Sin, then, belongs to ethics only insofar as upon this concept it is shipwrecked with the aid of repentance." If ethics is

• In his work Fear and Trembling (Copenhagen: 1843). Johannes de Silentio
makes several observations concerning this point. In this book. the author
several times allows the desired ideality of esthetics to be shipwrecked on the
required ideality of ethics. in order through these collisions to bring to light
the religious ideality as the ideality that precisely is the ideality of actuality.
and therefore just as desirable as that of esthetics and not as impossible as the
ideality of ethics. This is accomplished in such a way that the religious
ideality breaks forth in the dialectical leap and in the positive mood-"Behold
all things have become new"37 as well as in the negative mood that is the passion of the absurd to which the concept "repetition" corresponds. Either all of
existence [Tilv~relsen 1comes to an end in the demand of ethics. or the condition is provided and the whole of life and of existence begins anew, not
through an immanent continuity with the former existence, which is a contradiction, but through a transcendence. This transcendence separates repetition from the former existence [Tilv~relse 1by such a chasm that one can only
figuratively say that the former and the latter relate themselves to each other
as the totality of living creatures in the ocean relates itself to those in the air
and to those upon the earth. Yet, according to the opinion of some natural
scientists, the former as a prototype prefigures in its imperfection all that the
latter reveals. With regard to this category, one may consult Repetition by
Constantin Constantius (Copenhagen: 1843). This is no doubt a witty book,
as the author also intended it to be. To my knowledge, he is indeed the first
to have a lively understanding of "repetition" and to have allowed the preg-

IV
290

IV
289

IV
290

18

IV
291

IV
291

The Concept of Anxiety

to include sin, its ideality comes to an end. The more ethics
remains in its ideality, and never becomes so inhuman as to
lose sight of actuality, but corresponds to actuality by presenting itself as the task for every man in such a way that it will
make him the true and the whole man, the man Kat' t;OXTJV
nancy of the concept to be seen in the explanation of the relation of the ethnical and the Christian,38 by directing attention to the invisible point and to the
discrimen rerum [turning point] where one science breaks against another until
a new science comes to light. But what he has discovered he has concealed
again by arraying the concept in the jest of an analogous conception. What
has motivated him to do this is difficult to say, or more correcdy, difficult to
understand. He himself mentions that he writes in this manner so "that the
heretics would not understand him. "39 Since he wanted to occupy himself
with repetition only esthetically and psychologically, everything had to be
arranged humorously so as to bring about the impression that the word in
one instant means everything and in the next instant the most insignificant of
things, and the transition, or rather the constant falling down from the
clouds, is motivated by its farcical opposite. In the meantime, he has stated
the whole matter very precisely on page 34: 40 "repetition is the interest [Interesse] of metaphysics, and also the interest upon which metaphysics comes
to grief; repetition is the watchword [L,snet] in every ethical view; repetition is conditio sine qua non [the indispensable condition) for every issue of
dogmatics." The first statement has reference to the thesis that metaphysics
as such is disinterested, something that Kant41 had said about esthetics. As
soon as interest steps forth, metaphysics steps aside. For this reason, the word
is italicized. In actuality, the whole interest of subjectivity steps forth, and
now metaphysics runs aground. Ifrepetition is not posited, ethicshecomes a
binding power. No doubt it is for this reason that the author states that repetition is the watchword in every ethical view. If repetition is not posited,
dogmatics cannot exist at all, for repetition begins in faith, and faith is the
organ for issues of dogma. In the realm of nature, repetition is present in its
immovable necessity. In the realm of the spirit, the task is not to wrest a
change from repetition or to find oneself moderately comfortable during the
repetition, as if spirit stood only in an external relation to the repetition
of spirit (according to which good and evil would alternate like summer and
winter), but to transform repetition into something inward, into freedom's
own task, into its highest interest, so that while everything else changes, it
can actually realize repetition. At this point the finite spirit despairs. This is
something Constantin has suggested by stepping aside himself and by allowing repetition to break forth in the young man by virtue of the religious. For
this reason Constantin mentions several times that repetition is a religious
category, too transcendent for him, that it is the movement by virtue of the
absurd, and on page 14242 it is further stated that eternity is the true repetition. All of this Professor Heiberg failed to notice. Instead, through his learn-

Introduction

19

[in an eminent sense], the more it increases the tension of the
difficulty. In the struggle to actualize the task of ethics, sin
shows itself not as something that belongs only accidentally
to the accidental individual, but as something that withdraws
deeper and deeper as a deeper and deeper presupposition, as a
presupposition that goes beyond the individual. Then all is
lost for ethics, and ethics has helped to bring about the loss of
all. A category that lies entirely beyond its reach has appeared. Hereditary sin makes everything still more desperate,
that is, it removes the difficulty, yet not with the help of
ethics but with the help of dogmatics. As all ancient knowledge
and speculation was based on the presupposition that thought
has reality [Realitet], so all ancient ethics was based on the
presupposition that virtue can be realized. Sin's skepticism is
altogether foreign to paganism. Sin is for the ethical consciousness what error is for the knowledge of it-the particular exception that proves nothing.
With dogmatics begins the science that, in contrast to that
science called ideal stricte [in the strict sense 1, namely, ethics,
proceeds from actuality. It begins with the actual in order to
raise it up into ideality. It does not deny the presence of sin;
on the contrary, it presupposes it and explains it by presupposing hereditary sin. However, since dogmatics is very seldom treated purely, hereditary sin is often brought within its
confines in such a way that the impression of the heterogeneous originality of dogmatics does not always come clearly

ing, which like his New Year's Gift43 is superbly elegant and neat, he kindly
wished to help this work [Repetition I to become a tasteful and elegant triviality by pompously bringing the matter to the point where Constantin begins, or, to recall a recent work, by bringing the matter to the point where
the esthete in EitherlOr had brought it in "The Rotation of Crops." If Constantin had actually felt himself flattered by enjoying the singular honor of
having been brought into such undeniably select company in this manner, he
must, in my opinion, since he wrote the book, have gone stark mad. But if,
on the other hand, an author such as he, writing to be misunderstood, forgot
himself and did not have ataraxia enough to count it to his credit that Professor Heiberg had failed to understand him, he must again be stark mad. This is
something I need not fear, since the circumstance that hitherto he has made
no reply to Professor Heiberg indicates sufficiently that he understands himself.

IV
292

20

IV

293

The Concept oj Anxiety

into view but becomes confused. This also happens when one
finds in it a dogma concerning angels,44 concerning the Holy
Scriptures, etc. Therefore dogmatics must not explain hereditary sin4s but rather explain it by presupposing it, like that
vortex about which Greek speculation concerning nature had
so much to say, 46 a moving something that no science can
grasp.
That such is the case with dogmatics will readily be granted
if once again time is taken to understand Schleiermacher's
immortal service 47 to this science. He was left behind long
ago when men chose Hegel. Yet Schleiermacher was a thinker in the beautiful Greek sense, a thinker who spoke only of
what he knew. Hegel, on the contrary, despite all his outstanding ability and stupendous learning, reminds us again
and again by his performance that he was in the German sense
a professor of philosophy on a large scale, because he a tout
prix [at any price] must explain all things.
So the new science begins with dogmatics 48 in the same
sense that immanental science begins with metaphysics. Here
ethics again finds its place as the science that has as a task for
actuality the dogmatic consciousness of actuality. This ethics
does not ignore sin, and it does not have its ideality in making
ideal demands; rather, it has its ideality in the penetrating
consciousness of actuality, of the actuality of sin, but note
carefully, not with metaphysical light-mindedness or with
psychological concupiscence.
It is easy to see the difference in the movements, to see that
the ethics of which we are now speaking belongs to a different
order of things. The first ethics was shipwrecked on the sinfulness of the single individual. Therefore, instead of being
able to explain this sinfulness, the first ethics fell into an even
greater and ethically more enigmatic difficulty, since the sin
of the individual expanded into the sin of the whole race. 49 At
this point, dogmatics came to the rescue with hereditary sin.
The new ethics presupposes dogmatics, and by means of hereditary sin it explains the sin of the single individual, while at
the same time it sets ideality as a task, not by a movement
from above and downward but from below and upward.

Introduction

21

It is common knowledge that Aristotle used the term
npoo'tTJ q)lAoO"oq>iu [first philosophy]50 primarily to designate
metaphysics, though he included within it a part that·according to our conception belongs to theology. In paganism it is
quite in order for theology to be treated there. It is related to
the same lack of an infinite penetrating reflection that endowed the theater in paganism with reality as a kind of divine
worship. If we now abstract from this ambiguity, we could
retain the designation and by npoo'tTJ q>lAOO"oq>iu" understand
that totality of science which we might call "ethnical," whose
essence is immanence and is expressed in Greek thought by
"recollection," and by secunda philosophia [second philosophy] understand that totality of science whose essence is
transcendence or repetition .....
The concept of sin does not properly belong in any science;
only the second ethics can deal with its manifestation, but not
with its coming into existence [Tilblivelse]. If any other science were to treat of it, the concept would be confused. To
get closer to our present project, such would also be the case if
psychology were to do so.
The subject of which psychology treats must be something
in repose that remains in a restless repose, not something restless that always either produces itself or is repressed. But this
abiding something out of which sin constantly arises, not by
necessity (for a becoming by necessity is a state, as, for example, the whole history of the plant is a state) but by
freedom-this abiding something, this predisposing presupposition, sin's real possibility, is a subject of interest for psychology. That which can be the concern of psychology and
• Schelling 51 called attention to this Aristotelian term in support of his own
distinction between negative and positive philosophy. By negative philosophy he meant "logic"; that was clear enough. On the other hand, it was less
clear to me what he really meant by positive philosophy, except insofar as it
became evident that it was the philosophy that he himself wished to provide.
However, since I have nothing to go by except my own opinion, it is not
feasible to pursue this subject further.
•• Constantin Constantius has called attention to this by pointing out that
immanence runs aground upon "interest." With this concept, actuality for
the first time properly comes into view.

IV
294

IV
29.1

22

IV
295

The Concept of Anxiety

with which it can occupy itself is not that sin comes into existence [bliver til], but how it can come into existence. Psychology can bring its concern to the point wh~re it seems as if
sin were there, but the next thing, that sin is there, is q ualitatively different from the first. The manner in which this presupposition for scrupulous psychological contemplation and
observation appears to be more and more comprehensive is
the interest of psychology. Psychology may abandon itself,
so to speak, to the disappointment that sin is there as an actuality. But this last disappointment reveals the impotence of
psychology and merely shows that its service has come to an
end.
That human nature is so constituted that it makes sin possible is, psychologically speaking, quite correct, but wanting to
make the possibility of sin its actuality is revolting to ethics,
and to dogmatics it sounds like blasphemy, because freedom
is never possible; as soon as it is, it is actual, in the same sense
as it was said in an older philosophy that if God's existence
[Tilva.'relse 1is possible, it is necessary.52
As soon as sin is actually posited, ethics is immediately on
the spot, and now ethics follows every move sin makes. How
sin came into the world is not the concern of ethics, apart
from the fact that it is certain that sin came into the world as
sin. But still less than the concern of ethics.with sin's coming
into existence is its concern with the still-life of sin's possibility.
If one asks more specifically in what sense and to what extent psychology pursues the observation of its object, it is obvious in itself and from the preceding that every observation
of the actuality of sin as an object of thought is irrelevant to it
and that as observation it does not belong to ethics, for ethics
is never observing but always accusing, judging, and acting.
Furthermore, it is obvious in itself as well as from the preceding that psychology has nothing to do with the detail of the
empirically actual except insofar as this lies outside of sin. Indeed, as a science psychology can never deal empirically with
the detail that belongs to its domain, but the more concrete

introduction

23

psychology becomes, the more the detail attains a scientific
representation. In our day, this science, which indeed more
than any other is allowed almost to intoxicate itself in the
foaming multifariousness of life, has become as abstemious
and ascetic as a flagellant. However, this is not the fault of science but of its devotees. On the other hand, when it comes to
sin, the whole content of actuality is denied to psychology.
Only the possibility of sin still belongs to it. But for ethics the
possibility of sin never occurs. S3 Ethics never allows itself to
be fooled and does not waste time on such deliberations. Psychology, on the other hand, loves these, and as it sits and
traces the contours and calculates the angles of possibility, it
does not allow itself to be disturbed any more than did Archimedes.
As psychology now becomes deeply absorbed in the possibility of sin, it is unwittingly in the service of another science
that only waits for it to finish so that it can begin and assist
psychology to the explanation. This science is not ethics, for
ethics has nothing at all to do with this possibility. This science is dogmatics, and here in turn the issue of hereditary sin
appears. While psychology thoroughly explores the real possibility of sin, dogmatics explains hereditary sin, that is, the
ideal possibility of sin. The second ethics, however, has nothing to do with the possibility of sin or with hereditary sin.
The first ethics ignores sin. The second ethics has the actuality
of sin within its scope, and here psychology can intrude only
through a misunderstanding.
If what has been developed here is correct, it is easily seen
that the author is quite justified in calling the present work a
psychological deliberation, and also how this deliberation, insofar as it becomes conscious ofits relation to science, belongs
to the domain of psychology and in turn tends toward dogmatics. S4 Psychology has been called the doctrine of the subjective spirit. 55 If this is pursued more accurately, 56 it will become apparent how psychology, when it comes to the issue
of sin, must first pass over [slaa over 1into the doctrine of the
absolute spirit. Here lies the place of dogmatics. The first

IV

2%

24

The Concept of Anxiety

ethics presupposes metaphysics; the second ethics presupposes dogmatics but completes it also in such a way that here,
as everywhere, the presupposition is brought out.
This was the task of the introduction. The introduction
may be correct, while the deliberation itself concerning the
concept of anxiety may be entirely incorrect. Whether this is
the case remains to be seen.

I

IV
297

Anxiety as the Presupposition of
Hereditary Sin and as Explaining
Hereditary Sin Retrogressively
in Terms of Its Origin
§J.1

HISTORICAL INTIMATIONS REGARDING THE CONCEPT
OF HEREDITARY SIN

Is the concept of hereditary sin identical with the concept of
the first sin, Adam's sin, the fall of man? At times it has been
understood so, and then the task of explaining hereditary sin
has become identical with explaining Adam's sin. When
thought met with difficulties, an expedient was seized upon.
In order to explain at least something, a fantastic presupposition was introduced, the loss of which constituted the fall as
the consequence. The advantage gained thereby was that
everyone willingly admitted that a condition such as the one
described was not found anywhere in the world, but that they
forgot that as a result the doubt became a different one,
namely, whether such a condition ever had existed, something that was quite necessary in order to lose it. The history
of the human race acquired a fantastic beginning. Adam was
fantastically placed outside this history. Pious feeling and fantasy got what they demanded, a godly prelude, but thought
got nothing. In a double sense, Adam was held fantastically
outside. The presupposition was dialectical-fantastic, especially in Catholicism (Adam lost donum divinitus datum supranaturale et admirable [a supernatural and wonderful gift bestowed by God D. 2 It was historical-fantastic, especially in the
federal theology, 3 which lost itself dramatically in a fantasy
view of Adam's appearance as a plenipotentiary for the whole
race. Obviously neither explanation explains anything. The

IV

298

26

IV
299

The Concept of A.nxiety

one merely explains away what it has fictitiously composed;
the other merely composes fiction that explains nothing.
Does the concept of hereditary sin differ from the concept
of the first sin in such a way that the particular individual participates in inherited sin only through his relation to Adam
and not through his primitive relation to sin? In that case
Adam is placed fantastically outside history. Adam's sin is
then more than something past (plus quam perfectum [pluperfect]). Hereditary sin is something present; it is sinfulness '.
and Adam is the only one in whom it was not found, since it
came into being through him. Hence one would not try to
explain Adam's sin but instead would explain hereditary sin
in terms of its consequences. However, the explanation is not
suitable for thought. One can therefore readily understand
that one of the symbolical books declares the impossibility of
an explanation, and that this declaration without contradiction gives the explanation. The Smalcald Articles 4 teach distinctly: peccatum haereditarium tam profunda et tetra est corruptio
naturae, ut nullius hominis ratione intelligi possit, sed ex scripturae
patefactione agnoscenda et credenda sit [hereditary sin is so profound and detestable a corruption in human nature that it
cannot be comprehended by human understanding, but must
be known and believed from the revelation of the Scriptures].
This statement is easily reconciled with the explanations, for
in these it is not so much rational definitions as such that are
brought forth, but a pious feeling (with an ethical tone) that
gives vent to its indignation over hereditary sin. This feeling
assumes the role of an accuser, who with an almost feminine
passion and with the fanaticism of a girl in love is now concerned only with making sinfulness and his own participation
in it more and more detestable, and in such a manner that no
word can be severe enough to describe the single individual's
participation in it. If with this in mind one reviews the different confessions, a gradation appears in which the profound
Protestant piety is victorious. The Greek Church speaks of
hereditary sin as the sin of the a~1I1ptTJ~a 7tproto7tatopuc6v
[first father].s It does not even have a concept, for the term is
only an historical designation, which does not, like the concept, designate what is present, but only what is historically

Anxiety as the Presupposition of Hereditary Sin

27

concluded. Vitium originis [vice of origin] (Tertullian)6 is indeed a concept; nevertheless, its linguistic form allows for the
conception of the historical as the predominant factor. Peccatum originale [original sin], because it has been quia originaliter tradatur [transmitted from the origin] (Augustine), designates the concept, which is still more clearly defined by the
distinction between peccatum originans and originatum [sin as a
cause and as caused]. Protestantism rejects the Scholastic
definitions, carentia imaginis dei, defectus justitiae originalis [the
absence of the image of God, the loss of original righteousness] ,7 as well as the view that hereditary sin is poena
[punishment]. Concupiscentiam poenam esse non peccatum, disputant adversarii [our adversaries contend that concupiscence is
punishment and not a sin] (Apologia A.C.).8 And now begins
the enthusiastic climax: vitium, peccatum, reatus, culpa [vice,
sin, guilt, transgression].9 Because the only concern is the
eloquence of the contrite soul, a quite contradictory thought
(nunc quoque afferens iram dei iis, qui secundum exemplum
Adami peccarunt [which now brings the wrath of God upon
them that have sinned after the example of Adam)) can occasionally be introduced into the discussion of hereditary sin.
Or a rhetorical concern, with no consideration whatever for
thought, makes the most terrifying pronouncement about hereditary sin: quo fit, ut omnes propter inobedientiam Adae et Hevae
in odio apud deum simus [from which it follows that all of us,
because of the disobedience of Adam and Eve, arc hated by
God ]-Formula of Concord .10 The Formula is nevertheless circumspect enough to protest against thinking this, for if one
were to think it, sin would become man's substance. It As soon
as the enthusiasm of faith and contrition disappear, one can no
longer be helped by such determinations, which only make it
easy for cunning prudence to escape the recognition of sin.
But to need other determinations is after all a dubious proof
of the perfection of our age, quite in the same sense as that of
needing other than Draconian laws. 11
* The fact that the Formula of Concord forbade thinking this concept must
nonetheless be commended as proof of the energetic passion by which it
knows how to let thought collide with the unthinkable, an energy that is very
admirable in contrast to modem thought, which is all too slack.

IV
300

IV
299

28

IV
301

IV
300

The Concept of Anxiety

The fantastic presentation that is evident here repeats itself
consistently at another point in dogmatics, namely, in the
Atonement. It is taught that Christ has made satisfaction for
hereditary sin. But what then happens to Adam? Was not he
the one who brought hereditary sin into the world? Was not
hereditary sin an actual sin in him? Or does hereditary sin signify the same for Adam as for everyone in the race? In that
case, the concept is canceled. Or was Adam's whole life hereditary sin? Did not the first sin beget other sins in him, i.e.,
actual sins? The error in the preceding is here more evident,
for as a result of this Adam is now so fantastically placed outside of history that he is the only one who is excluded from
the Atonement.
No matter how the problem is raised, as soon as Adam is
placed fantastically on the outside, everything is confused. To
explain Adam's sin is therefore to explain hereditary sin. And
no explanation that explains Adam but not hereditary sin, or
explains hereditary sin but not Adam, is of any help. The
most profound reason for this is what is essential to human
existence: that man is individuum and as such simultaneously
himself and the whole race, and in such a way that the whole
race participates in the individual and the individual in the
whole race." If this is not held fast, one will fall either into the
Pelagian, Socinian, and philanthropic singular 12 or into the
fantastic. The matter-of-factness of the understanding is that
the race is numerically resolved into an einmal ein [one times
one]. What is fantastical is that Adam enjoys the well-meant
honor of being more than the whole race or the ambiguous
honor of standing outside the race.
At every moment, the individual is both himself and the
race. This 13 is man's perfection viewed as a state. It is also a
contradiction, but a contradiction is always the expression of
a task, and a task is movement, but a movement that as a task
is the same as that to which the task is directed is an historical
~ If a particular individual could fall away entirely from the race, his falling
away would require a different qualification of the race. Whereas if an animal
should fall away from the species, the species would remain entirely unaffected.

Anxiety as the Presuppositi£m of Hereditary Sin

29

movement. 14 Hence the individual has a history. But if the
individual has a history, then the race also has a history. Each
individual has the same perfection, and precisely because of
this individuals do not fall apart from one another numerically any more than the concept of race is a phantom. Every
individual is essentially interested in the history of all other
individuals, and just as essentially as in his own. Perfection in
oneself is therefore the perfect participation in the whole. No
individual is indifferent to the history of the race any more
than the race is indifferent to the history of the individual. As
the history of the race moves on, the individual begins constantly anew, because he is both himself and the race, and by
this, in turn, the history of the race.
Adam is the first man. He is at once himself and the race. It
is not by virtue of the esthetically beautiful that we hold on to
him, nor is it by virtue of a magnanimous feeling that we join
ourselves to him in order, as it were, not to leave him in the
lurch as the one who was responsible for everything. It is not
by virtue of a zealous sympathy and the persuasion of piety
that we resolve to share his guilt with him the way a child
wishes to be guilty along with the father. It is not by virtue of
a forced compassion that teaches us to put up with that
which, after all, cannot be otherwise, but it is by virtue of
thought that we hold fast to him. Consequently, every attempt to explain Adam's significance for the race as caput
generis humani naturale, seminale, foederale [head of the human
race by nature, by generation, by covenant],1S to recall the
expression of dogmatics, confuses everything. He is not essentially different from the race, for in that case there is no
race at all; he is not the race, for in that case also there would
be no race. He is himself and the race. Therefore that which
explains Adam also explains the race and vice versa.
§2.
THE CONCEPT OF THE FIRST SIN

According to traditional concepts, the difference between
Adam's first sin and the first sin of every other man is this:

IV
302

30

IV
303

IV
302

IV
303

The Concept of Anxiety

Adam's sin conditions sinfulness as a consequence, the other
first sin presupposes sinfulness as a state. Were this so, Adam
would actually stand outside the race, and the race would not
have begun with him but would have had a beginning outside
itself, something that is contrary to every concept.
That the first sin signifies something different from a sin
(i.e., a sin like many others), something different from one sin
(i.e., no. 1 in relation to no. 2), is quite obvious. The first sin
constitutes the nature of the quality:16 the first sin is the
sin. This is the secret of the first, and is an offense to abstract
common sense, which maintains that one time amounts to
nothing but that many times amounts to something, which is
preposterous, since many times signifies either that each particular time is just as much as the first or that all of the times,
when added together, are not nearly as much. It is therefore a
superstition when it is maintained in logic that through a continued quantification a new quality is brought forth. It is an
unforgivable reticence when one makes no secret of the fact
that things indeed do not happen quite that way in the world
and yet conceals the consequence of this for the whole oflogical immanence by permitting it to drift into logical movement as does Hegel." The new quality appears with the first,
with the leap, with the suddeness of the enigmatic.
If the first sin means one sin in the numerical sense, no history can result from it, and sin will have no history, either in
the individual or in the race. For the conditionality is the same
• After all, this proposition about the relation between a quantitative determination and a new quality has a long history. Strictly speaking, all of
Greek sophistry merely consisted in affrrming a quantitative determination;
consequently its highest diversity was that oflikeness and unlikeuess. In recent philosophy, Schelling 1 ? was the first to make use of a quantitative determination to account for all diversity. Later he reproved Eschenmayer for
doing the same (in his doctoral disputation). Hegel made use of the leap, but
in logic. Rosenkranz (in his Psychology) admires Hegel for this. In his latest
publication (dealing with Schelling), Rosenkranz 18 reproves Schelling and
praises Hegel. However, Hegel's misfortune is exactly that he wants to maintain the new quality and yet does not want to do it, since he wants to do it in
logic, which, as soon as this is recognized, must acquire a different consciousness of itself and of its significance.

Anxiety as the PresI4pposition of Hereditary Sin

31

for both, although the history of the race is not that of the
individual any more than the history of the individual is that
of the race, except insofar as the contradiction continually expresses the task.
Through the first sin, sin came into the world. 19 Precisely
in the same way it is true of every subsequent man's first sin,
that through it sin comes into the world. That it was not in
the world before Adam's first sin is, in relation to sin itself,
something entirely accidental and irrelevant. It is of no significance at all and cannot justify making Adam's sin greater
or the first sin of every other man lesser. It is indeed a logical
and ethical heresy to wish to give the appearance that sinfulness 20 in a man determines itself quantitatively until at last,
through a generatio aequivoca [descent without mating], it
brings forth the first sin in a man. But this does not take place
any more than Trop,21 who by being a master in the service
of quantitative determination, could thereby attain a degree in
jurisprudence. Let mathematicians and astronomers save
themselves if they can with infinitely disappearing minute
magnitudes, but in life itself this does not help a man to obtain
his examination papers, and much less to explain spirit. If
every subsequent man's first sin were thus brought about by
sinfulness, his first sin would only in a nonessential way be
qualified as the first, and be essentially qualified-if this is
thinkable--by its serial number in the universal sinking fund
of the race. But this is not the case. It is equally foolish, illogical, unethical, and un-Christian to court the honor of being
the first inventor and then to shirk one's responsibility by
being unwilling to think something, by saying that one has
done nothing more than what everyone else has done. The
presence of sinfulness in a man, the power of the example,
etc.-these are only quantitative determinations that explain
nothing, It unless it be assumed that one individual is the race,
whereas every individual is both himself and the race.
The Genesis story of the first sin, especially in our day, has
• What significance they have otherwise in the history of the race or as preliminary runs to the leap. without being able to explain the leap. is something
else.

IV
304

32

IV
305

The Concept of Anxiety

been regarded somewhat carelessly as a myth. 22 There is a
good reason why it has, because what was substituted in its
place was precisely a myth, and a poor one at that. When the
understanding takes to the mythical, the outcome is seldom
more than small talk. The Genesis story presents the only
dialectically consistent view. Its whole content is really concentrated in one statement: Sin came into the world by a sin.
Were this not so, sin would have come into the world as
something accidental, which one would do well not to explain. The difficulty for the understanding is precisely the
triumph of the explanation and its profound consequence,
namely, that sin presupposes itself, that sin comes into the
world in such a way that by the fact that it is, it is presupposed. Thus sin comes into the world as the sudden, i.e., by a
leap; but this leap also posits the quality, and since the quality
is posited, the leap in that very moment is turned into the
quality and is presupposed by the quality and the quality by
the leap. To the understanding, this is an offense; ergo it is a
myth. As a compensation, the understanding invents its own
myth, which denies the leap and explains the circle as a
straight line, and now everything proceeds quite naturally.
The understanding talks fantastically about man's state prior
to the fall, and, in the course of the small talk, the projected
innocence is changed little by little into sinfulness, and so
there it is. The lecture of the understanding may on this occasion be compared with the counting rhyme in which children
delight: 23 one-nis-ball, two-nis-balls, three-nis-balls, etc., up
to nine-nis-balls and tennis balls. Here it is, brought about
quite naturally by the preceding. Insofar as the myth of the
understanding is supposed to contain anything, it would be
that sinfulness precedes sin. But if this were true in the sense
that sinfulness has come in by something other than sin, the
concept would be canceled. But if it comes in by sin, then sin
is prior to sinfulness. This contradiction is the only dialectical
consequence that accommodates both the leap and the immanence (i.e., the subsequent immanence).
By Adam's first sin, sin came into the world. This statement,
which is the common one, nevertheless contains an altogether

Anxiety as the Presupposition of Hereditary Sin

33

outward reflection that doubtless has contributed greatly to
the rise of vague misunderstanding. That sin came into the
world is quite true. But this does not really concern Adam.
To express this precisely and accurately, one must say that by
the first sin, sinfulness came into Adam. It could not occur to
anyone to say about any subsequent man that by his first sin
sinfulness came into the world; and yet it comes into the
world by him in a similar way (i.e., in a way not essentially
different), because, expressed precisely and accurately, sinfulness is in the world only insofar as it comes into the world by
Sill.

That this has been expressed differently in the case of Adam
is only because the consequence of his fantastic relation to the
race should become evident everywhere. His sin is hereditary
sin. Apart from this, nothing is known about him. But hereditary sin, as seen in Adam, is only that first sin. Is Adam,
then, the only individual who has no history? If so, the race
has its beginning with an individual who is not an individual,
and thereby the concepts of race and individual are both canceled. If any other individual in the race can by its history
have significance in the history of the race, then Adam has it
also. If Adam has it only by virtue of that first sin, the concept
ofhistory 24 is canceled, i.e., history has come to an end in the
very moment it began."
Since the race does not begin anew with every individual, ....
the sinfulness of the race does indeed acquire a history.
Meanwhile, this proceeds in quantitative determinations
while the individual participates in it by the qualitative leap.
For this reason the race does not begin anew with every indi• The problem is always that of getting Adam included as a member of the
race, and precisely in the same sense in which every other individual is included. This is something to which dogmatics should pay attention, especially for the sake of the Atonement. The doctrine that Adam and Christ correspond to each other 25 explains nothing at all but confuses everything. It
may be an analogy, but the analogy is conceptually imperfect. Christ alone is
an individual who is more than an individual. For this reason he does not
come in the beginning but in the fullness of time .
•• The contrary is expressed in §1. As the history of the race moves on, the
individual continually begins anew.

34

IV
306

The Concept of Anxiety

vidual, in which case there would be no race at all, but every
individual begins anew with the race.
In saying that Adam's sin brought the sin of the race into
the world, one may understand this fantastically, in which
case every concept is canceled, or one may be equally justified in saying this about every individual who by his own
first sin brings sinfulness into the world. To let the race begin
with an individual who stands outside the race is as much a
myth of the understanding as is that ofletting sinfulness begin
in any other way than with sin. What is accomplished is
merely to delay the problem, which naturally turns now to
man no. 2 for the explanation or, more correctly, to man no.
1, since no. 1 has now become no. O.
What often misleads and brings people to all kinds of fantastic imaginings is the problem of the relation of generations,
as though the subsequent man were essentially different from
the first by virtue of descent. Descent, however, is only the
expression for the continuity in the history of the race, which
always moves by quantitative determinations and therefore is
incapable of bringing forth an individual. A species of animals, although it has preserved itself through thousands of
generations, never brings forth an individual. If the second
human being were not descended from Adam, he would
never have been the second but only an empty repetition from
which could have been derived neither race nor individual.
Every particular Adam would have become a statue by himself, and hence qualified only by an indifferent determination,
i.e., number, and in a much more imperfect sense than the
"blue boys"26 who are named by number. At most, every
particular man would have been himself, not himself and the
race, and would never have acquired a history ,just as an angel
has no history but is only himself without participating in any
history.
It hardly needs to be said that this view is not guilty of
Pelagianism, which permits every individual to play his little
history in his own private theater unconcerned about the race.
For the history of the race proceeds quietly on its course, and
in this no individual begins at the same place as another, but

Anxiety as the Presupposition of Hereditary Sin

35

every individual begins anew, and in the same moment he is
at the place where he should begin in history.
§3.
THE CONCEPT OF INNOCENCE

Here, as everywhere, it is true that if one wants to maintain a
dogmatic definition in our day, one must begin by forgetting
what Hegel has discovered in order to help dogmatics. One
gets a queer feeling when at this point one finds in works on
dogmatics,27 which otherwise propose to be somewhat orthodox, a reference to Hegel's favored remark 28 that the nature of the immediate is to be annulled, as though immediacy
and innocence were exactly identical. Hegel29 has quite consistently volatilized every dogmatic concept just enough to
appeal to a man of reduced existence as a clever expression for
the logical. That the immediate must be annulled, we do not
need Hegel to tell us, nor does he deserve immortal merit for
having said it, since it is not even logically correct, for the
immediate is not to be annulled, because it at no time exists
[er til]. The concept of immediacy belongs in logic; the concept of innocence, on the other hand, belongs in ethics. Every
concept must be dealt with by the science to which it belongs,
whether the concept belongs to the science in such a way that
it is developed there or is developed by being presupposed.
It is indeed unethical to say that innocence must be annulled, for even if it were annulled at the moment this is uttered, ethics forbids us to forget that it is annulled only by
guilt. Therefore, if one speaks of innocence as immediacy and
is logically offensive and rude enough to have let this fleeting
thing vanish, or if one is esthetically sensitive about what it
was and the fact that it has vanished, he is merely geistreich
[clever] and forgets the point.
Just as Adam lost innocence by guilt, so every man loses it
in the same way. If it was not by guilt that he lost it, then it
was not innocence that he lost; and ifhe was not innocent before becoming guilty, he never became guilty.
As for Adam's innocence, there has been no lack of fantas-

IV

306

IV
307

36

IV
308

The Concept

of Anxiety

tic notions, whether these attained symbolic dignity in times
when the velvet on the church pulpit as well as on the origin
of the race was less threadbare than now or whether they
floated about more romantically like the suspicious inventions
of fiction. The more fantastically Adam was arrayed, the
more inexplicable became the fact that he could sin and the
more appalling became his sin. As it was, he had once and for
all forfeited all the glory, and about that, whenever it suited
them, men became sentimental or witty, melancholy or
frivolous, historically contrite or fantastically cheerful, but
the point of it they did not grasp ethically.
As for the innocence of subsequent men (i.e., all with the
exception of Adam and Eve), there has been only a faint conception. Ethical rigor overlooked the limit of the ethical and
was honest enough to believe that men would not avail themselves of the opportunity to slip away from the whole thing
when escape was made so easy. Light-mindedness grasped
nothing at all. But innocence is lost only by guilt. Every man
loses innocence essentially in the same way that Adam lost it.
It is not in the interest of ethics to make all men except Adam
into concerned and interested spectators of guiltiness but not
participants in guiltiness, nor is it in the interest of dogmatiCs
to make all men into interested and sympathetic spectators of
the Atonement [Forsoning] but not participants in the Atonement.
That the time of dogmatics and ethics, as well as one's own
time, has often been wasted by pondering what might have
happened had Adam not sinned merely proves that one brings
along an incorrect mood, and consequently an incorrect concept. It would never occur to the innocent person to ask such
a question, and when the guilty asks it, he sins, for in his
esthetic curiosity he ignores that he himself brought guiltiness
into the world and that he himselflost innocence by guilt.
Innocence, unlike immediacy, is not something that must
be annulled, something whose quality is to be annulled,
something that properly does not exist [er til], but rather,
when it is annulled, and as a result of being annulled, it for the
first time comes into existence [bliver til] as that which it was

Anxiety as the Presupposition of Hereditary Sin

37

before being annulled and which now is annulled. Immediacy
is not annulled by mediacy, but when mediacy appears, in
that same moment it has annulled immediacy. 30 The annulment of immediacy is therefore an immanent movement
within immediacy, or it is an immanent movement in the opposite direction within mediacy, by which mediacy presupposes immediacy. Innocence is something that is canceled by
a transcendence, precisely because innocence is something
(whereas the most correct expression for immediacy is that
which Hegel uses about pure being: 31 it is nothing). The reason is that when innocence is canceled by transcendence,
something entirely different comes out of it, whereas mediacy
is just immediacy. Innocence is a quality, it is a state that may
very well endure, and therefore the logical haste to have it annulled is meaningless, whereas in logic it should try to hurry a
little more,32 for in logic it always comes too late, even when
it hurries. Innocence is not a perfection that one should wish
to regain, for as soon as one wishes for it, it is lost, and then it
is a new guilt to waste one's time on wishes. Innocence is not
an imperfection in which one cannot remain, for it is always
sufficient unto itself, and he who has lost it, that is, not in a
manner in which it might have pleased him to have lost it but
in the only way in which it can be lost, that is, by guilt-to
him it could never occur to boast of his perfection at the expense of innocence.
The narrative in Genesis 33 also gives the correct explanation of innocence. Innocence is ignorance. It is by no means
the pure being of the immediate, but it is ignorance. The fact
that ignorance when viewed from without is regarded as
something defined in the direction of knowledge is of no concern whatever to ignorance.
Obviously this view is in no way guilty of any Pelagianism. The race has its history, within which sinfulness continues to have its quantitative determinability, but innocence
is always lost only by the qualitative leap of the individual. It
is no doubt true that this sinfulness, which is the progression
of the race, may express itself as a greater or lesser disposition
in the particular individual who by his act assumes it, but this

IV
309

38

The Concept of Anxiety

is a more or less, a quantitative determination, which does not
constitute the concept of guilt.

IV

§4.

309

THE CONCEPT OF THE FALL

IV
310

If innocence is ignorance, it might appear that, inasmuch as
the quantitative determinability of the guiltiness of the race is
present in the ignorance of the single individual and by his act
manifests itself as his guiltiness, there will be a difference between Adam's innocence and that of every subsequent person. The answer is already given: a "more" does not constitute a quality. It might also appear that it would be easier to
explain how a subsequent person lost innocence. But this is
only apparent. The greatest degree of quantitative determinability no more explains the leap than does the least degree; if I
can explain guilt in a subsequent person, I can explain it in
Adam as well. By habit, and especially by thoughtlessness
and ethical stupidity, it has been made to appear that the first
is easier than the last. We want so badly to sneak away from
the sunstroke of the consequence that aims at the top of our
heads. We would put up with sinfulness, go along with it,
etc., etc. One need not trouble oneself; sinfulness is not an
epidemic that spreads like cowpox, "and every mouth shall
be stopped. "34 It is true that a person can say in profound earnestness that he was born in misery and that his mother conceived him in sin,35 but he can truly sorrow over this only if
he himself brought guilt into the world and brought all this
upon himself, for it is a contradiction to sorrow esthetically
over sinfulness. The only one who sorrowed innocently over
sinfulness was Christ, but he did not sorrow over it as a fate
he had to put up with. He sorrowed as the one who freely
chose to carryall the sin of the world 36 and to suffer its
punishment. This is no esthetic qualification, for Christ was
more than an individual.
Innocence is ignorance, but how is it lost? I do not intend to
repeat all the ingenious and stupid hypotheses with which
thinkers and speculators have encumbered the beginning of

Anxiety as the Presupposition of Hereditary Sin

39

history, men who only out of curiosity were interested in the
great human concern called sin, partly because I do not wish
to waste the time of others in telling what I myself wasted
time in learning, and partly because the whole thing lies outside of history, in the twilight where witches and speculators
race on broomsticks and sausage-pegs.
The science that deals with the explanation is psychology,
but it can explain only up to the explanation and above all
must guard against leaving the impression of explaining that
which no science can explain and that which ethics explains
further only by presupposing it by way of dogmatics. If one
were to take the psychological explanation and repeat it a
number of times and thereby arrive at the opinion that it is
not improbable that sin came into the world in this way, everything would be confused. Psychology must remain within
its boundary; only then can its explanation have significance.
A psychological explanation of the fall is clearly and well
set forth in Usteri's development of the Pauline doctrines. 37
Now theology has become so speculative that it makes light
of such things, because, after all, it is much easier to explain
that the immediate must be annulled, and theology sometimes does what is still more convenient: it becomes invisible
to the speculative devotees at the decisive moment of the explanation. Usteri's explanation is to the effect that it was the
prohibition itself not to eat of the tree of knowledge that gave
birth to the sin of Adam. This does not at all ignore the ethical, but it admits that somehow the prohibition only predisposes that which breaks forth in Adam's qualitative leap. It is
not my intention to continue this account any further.
Everyone has read it or can read it in this author's work."
• Everyone who reflects upon the present subject is of course familiar with
what Franz Baader 38 has set forth with his usual vigor and authority in several works concerning the significance of temptation for the consolidation of
freedom, and the misunderstanding of conceiving temptation one-sidedly as
temptation to evil or as something with the purpose of bringing man to the
fall, when temptation should rather be viewed as freedom's "necessary
other." To repeat this is not necessary here. Franz Baader's works are obtainable. To pursue his thought any further is not feasible, for it seems to me that
Franz Baader has overlooked the intermediate terms. The transition from in-

IV
311

40

IV
312

IV
311

The Concept of Anxiety

Where this explanation falters is in its wish not to be altogether psychological, and for this it cannot be blamed, because it did not wish to be that but set itself another task, that
of developing the doctrines of St. Paul and of attaching itself
to the Bible. But in this respect the Bible has often had a
harmful effect. In beginning a deliberation, a person has certain classical passages fixed in his mind, and now his explanation and knowledge consist in an arrangement of these passages, as if the whole matter were something foreign. The
more natural the better, even ifhe is willing with all deference
to refer the explanation to the verdict of the Bible, and, ifit is
not in accord with the Bible, to try over again. Thus a person
does not bring himself into the awkward position of having
to understand the explanation before he has understood what
it should explain, 39 nor into the subtle position of using Scripture passages as the Persian king40 in the war against the
Egyptians used their sacred animals, that is, in order to shield
I;timself.
If the prohibition is regarded as conditioning the fall, it is
also regarded as conditioning concupiscentia [inordinate desire]. At this point psychology has already gone beyond its
competence. Concupiscentia is a determinant of guilt and sin
antecedent to guilt and sin, and yet still is not guilt and sin,
that is, introduced by it. The qualitative leap is enervated; the
fall becomes something successive. Nor can it be discerned
how the prohibition awakens concupiscentia, even though it is
certain from pagan as well as from Christian experience that
man's desire is for the forbidden. But a person cannot appeal
to experience as a matter of course, for it could be asked more
particularly in which period of life this is experienced. This
intermediate term, concupiscentia, is not ambiguous either,
nocence to guilt merely through the concept of temptation easily brings God
into an almost imaginatively constructed [experimenterende] relation to man
and ignores the intermed~te psychological observation, because the intermediate term still is concupiscentia [inordinate desire]. Finally, Baader's account is a rather dialectical deliberation of the concept of temptation instead
of a psychological explanation of the more specific.

Anxiety as the Presupposition of Hereditary Sin

41

from which it can be seen immediately that it is no psychological explanation. The strongest, indeed, the most positive ;xpression the Protestant Church uses for the presence of her editary sin in man is precisely that he is born with concupiscentia
(Omnes homines secundum naturam propagati nascuntur cum peccato h.e. sine metu dei, sinefiducia erga deum et cum concupiscentia
[all men begotten in a natural way are born with sin, i.e.,
without the fear of God, without trust in God, and with concupiscence]).41 Nevertheless, the Protestant doctrine makes
an essential distinction between the innocence of the subsequent person (if such a one can be spoken of) and that of
Adam.42
The psychological explanation must not talk around the
point but remain in its elastic ambiguity, from which guilt
breaks forth in the qualitative leap.
§s.
THE CONCEPT OF ANXIETY

Innocence is ignorance. In innocence, man is not qualified as
spirit but is psychically qualified in immediate unity with his
natural condition. The spirit in man is dreaming. This view is
in full accord with that of the Bible,43 which by denying that
man in his innocence has knowledge of the difference between
good and evil denounces all the phantasmagoria of Catholic
meritoriousness.
In this state there is peace and repose,44 but there is simultaneously something else that is not contention and strife, for
there is indeed nothing against which to strive. What, then, is
it? Nothing. But what effect does nothing have? It begets anxiety. This is the profound secret of innocence, that it is at the
same time anxiety. Dreamily the spirit projects its own actuality, but this actuality is nothing, and innocence always
sees this nothing outside itself.
Anxiety is a qualification of dreaming spirit, and as such it
has its place in psychology. Awake, the difference between
myself and my other is posited; sleeping, it is suspended;

IV

313

42

IV
314

The Concept

'!f Anxiety

dreaming, it is an intimated nothing. 45 The actuality of the
spirit constantly shows itself as a form that tempts its possibility but disappears as soon as it seeks to grasp for it, and it is a
nothing that can only bring anxiety. More it cannot do as
long as it merely shows itself. The concept of anxiety is almost never treated in psychology. Therefore, I must point
out that it is altogether different from fear and similar concepts that refer to something definite, whereas anxiety is freedom's actuality as the possibility ofpossibility.46 For this reason, anxiety is not found in the beast, precisely because by
nature the beast is not qualified as spirit.
When we consider the dialectical determinations of anxiety,
it appears that exactly these have psychological ambiguity.
Anxiety is a sympathetic antipathy and an antipathetic sympathy.47 One easily sees, I think, that this is a psychological
determination in a sense entirely different from the concupiscentia [inordinate desire] of which we spoke. Linguistic usage
confirms this perfectly. One speaks of a pleasing anxiety, a
pleasing anxiousness [Be~ngstelse], and of a strange anxiety, a
bashful anxiety, etc.
The anxiety that is posited in innocence is in the first place
no guilt, and in the second place it is no troublesome burden,
no suffering that cannot be brought into harmony with the
blessedness of innocence. In observing children, one will discover this anxiety intimated more particularly as a seeking for
the adventurous, the monstrous, and the enigmatic. That
there are children in whom this anxiety is not found proves
nothing at all, for neither is it found in the beast, and the less
spirit, the less anxiety. This anxiety belongs so essentially to
the child that he cannot do without it. Though it causes him
anxiety, it captivates him by its pleasing anxiousness
[Be~gstelse]. In all cultures where the childlike is preserved as
the dreaming of the spirit, this anxiety is found. The more
profound the anxiety, the more profound the culture. Only a
prosaic stupidity maintains that this is a disorganization. Anxiety has here the same meaning as melancholy at a much later
point, when freedom, having passed through the imperfect

Anxiety as the Presupposition of Hereditary Sin

43

forms of its history, in the profoundest sense will come to itself. ...
Just as the relation of anxiety to its object, to something
that is nothing (linguistic usage also says pregnantly: to be
anxious about nothing), is altogether ambiguous, so also the
transition that is to be made from innocence to guilt will be so
dialectical that it can be seen that the explanation is what it
must be, psychological. The qualitative leap stands outside of
all ambiguity. But he who becomes guilty through anxiety is
indeed innocent, for it was not he himself but anxiety, a
foreign power, that laid hold of him, a power that he did not
love but about which he was anxious. And yet he is guilty,
for he sank in anxiety, which he nevertheless loved even as he
feared it. There is nothing in the world more ambiguous;
therefore this is the only psychological explanation. But, to
repeat once more, it could never occur to the explanation that
it should explain the qualitative leap. Every notion that
suggests that the prohibition tempted him, or that the seducer
deceived him, has sufficient ambiguity only for a superficial
observation, but it perverts ethics, introduces a quantitative
determination, and will by the help of psychology pay man a
compliment at the sacrifice of the ethical, a compliment that
everyone who is ethically developed must reject as a new and
more profound seduction.
That anxiety makes its appearance is the pivot upon which
everything turns. Man is a synthesis of the psychical and the
physical; however, a synthesis is unthinkable if the two are
not united in a third. This third is spirit. 48 In innocence, man
is not merely animal, for if he were at any moment of his life
merely animal, he would never become man. So spirit is present, but as immediate, as dreaming. Inasmuch as it is now
present, it is in a sense a hostile power, for it constantly disturbs the relation between soul and body, a relation that in-

• Concerning this, one should consult EitherlOr (Copenhagen: 1843), especially if one is aware that the first part expresses the melancholy in its anguished [angesifulde I sympathy and egotism, which is explained in the second
part.

IV
315

IV
314

44

IV
316

The Concept of Anxiety

deed has persistence and yet does not have endurance, inasmuch as it first receives the latter by the spirit. On the other
hand, spirit is a friendly power, since it is precisely that which
constitutes the relation. What, then, is man's relation to this
ambiguous power? How does spirit relate itself to itself and to
its conditionality? It relates itself as anxiety. Do away with itself, the spirit cannot; lay hold of itself, it cannot, as long as it
has itself outside of itself. Nor can man sink down into the
vegetative, for he is qualified as spirit; flee away from anxiety,
he cannot, for he loves it; really love it, he cannot, for he flees
from it. Innocence has now reached its uttermost point. It is
ignorance; however, it is not an animal brutality but an ignorance qualified by spirit, and as such innocence is precisely
anxiety, because its ignorance is about nothing. Here there is
no knowledge of good and evil etc., but the whole actuality
of knowledge projects itself in anxiety as the enormous nothing of ignorance.
Innocence still is, but only a word is required and then ignorance is concentrated. Innocence naturally cannot understand this word, but at that moment anxiety has, as it were,
caught its first prey. Instead of nothing, it now has an enigmatic word. When it is stated in Genesis that God said to
Adam, "Only from the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil you must not eat," it follows as a matter of course that
Adam really has not understood this word, for how could he
understand the difference between good and evil when this
distinction would follow as a consequence of the enjoyment
of the fruit?
When it is assumed that the prohibition awakens the desire,
one acquires knowledge instead of ignorance, and in that case
Adam must have had a knowledge of freedom, because the
desire was to use it. The explanation is therefore subsequent.
The prohibition induces in him anxiety, for the prohibition
awakens in him freedom's possibility. What passed by innocence as the nothing of anxiety has now entered into Adam,
and here again it is a nothing-the anxious possibility of being
able. He has no conception of what he is able to do; otherwise-and this is what usually happens-that which comes

Allxiety as the Presuppositioll of Hereditary Sill

45

later, the difference between good and evil, would have to be
presupposed. Only the possibility of being able is present as a
higher form of ignorance, as a higher expression of anxiety,
because in a higher sense it both is and is not, because in a
higher sense he both loves it and flees from it.
After the word of prohibition follows the word of judgmen t: "You shall certainly die. "49 Naturally, Adam does not
know what it means to die. On the other hand, there is
nothing to prevent him from having acquired a notion of the
terrifying, for even animals can understand the mimic expression and movement in the voice of a speaker without understanding the word. If the prohibition is regarded as awakening the desire, the punishment must also be regarded as
awakening the notion of the deterrent. This, however, will
only confuse things. In this case, the terror is simply anxiety.
Because Adam has not understood what was spoken, there is
nothing but the ambiguity of anxiety. The infinite possibility
of being able that was awakened by the prohibition now
draws closer, because this possibility points to a possibility as
its sequence.
In this way, innocence is brought to its uttermost. In anxiety it is related to the forbidden and to the punishment. Innocence is not guilty, yet there is anxiety as though it were lost.
Further than this, psychology cannot go, but so far it can
go, and above all, in its observation of human life, it can point
to this again and again.
Here, in the conclusion, I have adhered to the Biblical narrative. I have assumed the prohibition and the voice of
punishment as coming from without. Of course, this is something that has troubled many thinkers. But the difficulty is
merely one to smile at. Innocence can indeed speak, inasmuch
as in language it possesses the expression for everything
spiritual. Accordingly, one need merely assume that Adam
talked to himself. The imperfection in the story, namely, that
another spoke to Adam about what he did not understand, is
thus eliminated. From the fact that Adam was able to talk, it
does not follow in a deeper sense that he was able to understand what was said. This applies ahove all to the difference

46

The Concept of Anxiety

between good and evil, which indeed can be expressed in language but nevertheless is only for freedom, because for innocence it can have only the meaning we have indicated in the
preceding account. Innocence can indeed express this difference, but the difference is not for innocence, and for innocence it can only have the meaning that was indicated in the
preceding account.
IV
317

§6.
ANXIETY AS THE PRESUPPOSITION OF HEREDITARY SIN
AND AS EXPLAINING HEREDITARY SIN
RETROGRESSIVELY IN TERMS OF ITS ORIGIN

Let us now examine the narrative in Genesis more carefully as
we attempt to dismiss the fixed idea that it is a myth, and as
we remind ourselves that no age has been more skillful than
our own in producing myths of the understanding, an age
that produces myths and at the same time wants to eradicate
all myths.
Adam was created; he had given names to the animals (here
there is language, though in an imperfect way similar to that
of children who learn by identifying animals on an ABC
board)SO but had not found company for himself. Eve was
created, formed from his rib. She stood in as intimate a relation to him as possible, yet it was still an external relation.
Adam and Eve are merely a numerical repetition. In this respect, a thousand Adams signify no more than one. So much
with regard to the descent of the race from one pair. Nature
does not favor a meaningless superfluity. Therefore, if we assume that the race descended from several pairs, there would
be a moment when nature had a meaningless superfluity. As
soon as the relationship of generation is posited, no man is
superfluous, because every individual is himself and the
race. 51
Now follows the prohibition and the judgment. But the
serpent was more cunningS2 than all the animals of the field.
He seduced the woman. Even though one may call this a
myth, it neither disturbs thought nor confuses the concept, as

Anxiety as the Presllpposition of Hereditary Sin

47

does a myth of the understanding. The myth allows something that is inward to take place outwardly.
First we must note that the woman was the first to be
seduced, and that therefore she in tum seduced the man. In
what sense woman is the weaker sex, as it is commonly said
of her, and also that anxiety belongs to her more than to
man," I shall try to develop in another chapter.
In the foregoing, it has been said several times that the view
presented in this work does not deny the propagation of sinfulness through generation, or, in other words, that sinfulness
has its history through generation. Yet it is said only that sinfulness moves in quantitative categories, whereas sin constantly enters by the qualitative leap of the individual. Here
already one can see one significant aspect of the quantitation
that takes place in generation. Eve is a derived creature. To be
sure, she is created like Adam, but she is created out of a previous creature. To be sure, she is innocent like Adam, but
there is, as it were, a presentiment of a disposition that indeed
is not sinfulness but may seem like a hint of the sinfulness that
is posited by propagation. It is the fact of being derived that
predisposes the particular individual, yet without making him
guilty.
Here we must remember what was said about the prohibition and the word ofjudgment in §5. The imperfection in the
narrative-how it could have occurred to anyone to say to
Adam what he essentially could not understand-is eliminated if we bear in mind that the speaker is language, and also
that it is Adam himself who speaks .....
• Nothing is hereby determined about woman's imperfection in relation to
man. Although anxiety belongs to her more than to man, anxiety is by no
means a sign of imperfection. If one is to speak of imperfection, this must be
found in something else, namely. that in anxiety she moves beyond herself to
another human being, to man .
•• If one were to say further that it then becomes a question of how the first
man learned to speak, I would answer that this is very true, but also that the
question lies beyond the scope of the present investigation. However, this
must not be understood in the manner of modem philosophy as though my
reply were evasive, suggesting that I could answer the question in another
place. But this much,is certain, that it will not do to represent man himself as
the inventor oflanguage. 53

IV
31H

IV
317

IV
31H

48

IV
319

The Concept of Anxiety

There remains the serpent. I am no friend of cleverness and
shall, volente deo [God willing], resist the temptations of the
serpent, who, as at the dawn of time when he tempted Adam
and Eve, has in the course of time tempted writers to be
clever. Instead, I freely admit my inability to connect any
definite thought with the serpent. 54 Furthermore, the difficulty with the serpent is something quite different, namely,
that of regarding the temptation as coming from without.
This is simply contrary to the teaching of the Bible, contrary
to the well-known classical passage in James,55 which says
that God tempts no man and is not tempted by anyone, but
each person is tempted by himself. If one indeed believes that
he has rescued God by regarding man as tempted by the serpent and believes that in this way one is in accord withJames,
"that God tempts no one," he is confronted with the second
statement, that God is not tempted by anyone. For the serpent's assault upon man is also an indirect temptation of God,
since it interferes in the relation between God and man, and
one is confronted by the third statement, that every man is
tempted by himself.
Now follows the fall. This is something that psychology is
unable to explain, because the fall is the qualitative leap.
However, let us for a moment consider the consequence as it
is presented in the narrative in order to fix our attention once
more on anxiety as the presupposition for hereditary sin.
The consequence is a double one, that sin came into the
world and that sexuality was posited; the one is to be inseparable from the other. This is of utmost importance in order to
show man's original state. If he were not a synthesis that reposed in a third, one thing could not have two consequences.
If he were not a synthesis of psyche and body that is sustained
by spirit, the sexual could never have come into the world
with sinfulness.
We shall leave project makers 56 out of consideration and
simply assume the presence of the sexual difference before the
fall, except that as yet it was not, because in ignorance it is
not. In this respect we have support in the Scriptures. 57
In innocence, Adam as spirit was a dreaming spirit. Thus

Anxiety as the Presupposition of Hereditary Sin

49

the synthesis is not actual, for the combining factor is precisely the spirit, and as yet this is not posited as spirit. In animals the sexual difference can be developed instinctively, but
this cannot be the case with a human being precisely because
he is a synthesis. In the moment the spirit posits itself, it
posits the synthesis, but in order to posit the synthesis it must
first pervade it differentiatingly, and the ultimate point of the
sensuous is precisely the sexual. Man can attain this ultimate
point only in the moment the spirit becomes actual. Before
that time he is not animal, but neither is he really man. The
moment he becomes man, he becomes so by being animal as
well.
So sinfulness is by no means sensuousness, but without sin
there is no sexuality, and without sexuality, no history. A
perfect spirit has neither the one nor the other, and therefore
the sexual difference is canceled in the resurrection, and therefore an angel has no history. Even if Michael had made a record of all the errands he had been sent on and performed, this
is nevertheless not his history. First in sexuality is the synthesis posited as a contradiction, but like every contradiction it is
also a task, the history of which begins at that same moment.
This is the actuality that is preceded by freedom's possibility.
However, freedom's possibility is not the ability to choose
the good or the evil. Such thoughtlessness is no more in the
interest of Scriptures than in the interest of thought. The possibility is to be able. In a logical system, it is convenient to say
that possibility passes over into actuality. However, in actuality it is not so convenient, and an intermediate term is
required. The intermediate term is anxiety, but it no more
explains the qualitative leap than it can justify it ethically.
Anxiety is neither a category of necessity nor a category of
freedom; it is entangled freedom, where freedom is not free in
itself but entangled, not by necessity, but in itself. If sin has
come into the world by necessity (which is a contradiction),
there can be no anxiety. Nor can there be any anxiety if sin
came into the world by an act of an abstract liberum arbitrium 58
(which no more existed in the world in the beginning than in
a late period, because it is a nuisance for thought). To want to

IV
320

50

IV
321

The Concept of Anxiety

give a logical explanation of the coming of sin into the world
is a stupidity that can occur only to people who are comically
worried about finding an explanation. 59
Were I allowed to make a wish, then I would wish that no
reader would be so profound as to ask: What if Adam had not
sinned? In the moment actuality is posited, possibility walks
by its side as a nothing that entices every thoughtless man. If
only science could make up its mind to keep men under
discipline and to bridle itself! When someone asks a stupid
question, care should be taken not to answer him, lest he who
answers becomes just as stupid as the questioner. The
foolishness of the above question consists not so much in the
question itself as in the fact that it is directed to science. If one
stays at home with it, and, like Clever Elsie60 with her projects, calls together like-minded friends, then he has tolerably
understood his own stupidity. Science, on the contrary, cannot explain such things. Every science lies either in a logical
immanence or in an immanence within a transcendence that it
is unable to explain. Now sin is precisely that transcendence,
that discrimen rerum [crisis] in which sin enters into the single
individual as the single individual. Sin never enters into the
world differently and has never entered differently. So when
the single individual is stupid enough to inquire about sin as if
it were something foreign to him, he only asks as a fool, for
either he does not know at all what the question is about, and
thus cannot come to know it, or he knows it and understands
it, and also knows that no science can explain it to him. However, science at times has been adequately accommodating in
responding to wishes with weighty hypotheses that it at last
admits are inadequate as explanations. This, of course, is entirely true, yet the confusion is that science did not energetically dismiss foolish questions but instead confirmed
superstitious men in their notion that one day there would
come a project maker who is smart enough to come up with
the right answer. That sin came into the world six thousand
years ago is said in the same way that one would say about
Nebuchadnezzar that it was four thousand years ago that he
became an OX. 61 When the case is understood in this way, it is

Anxiety as the Presupposition of Hereditary Sin

51

no wonder that the explanation accords with it. What in one
respect is the simplest thing in the world has been made the
most difficult. What the most ordinary man understands in
his own way, and quite correctly so---because he understands
that it is not just six thousand years since sin came into the
world--science with the art of speculators has announced as a
prize subject that as yet has not been answered satisfactorily.
How sin came into the world, each man understands solely by
himsel£ If he would learn it from another, he would eo ipso
misunderstand it. The only science that can help a little is psychology, yet it admits that it explains nothing, and also that it
cannot and will not explain more. If any science could explain
it, everything would be confused. That the man of science
ought to forget himself is entirely true; nevertheless, it is
therefore also very fortunate that sin is no scientific problem,
and thus no man of science has an obligation (and the project
maker just as little) to forget how sin came into the world. If
this is what he wants to do, if he magnanimously wants to
forget himself in the zeal to explain all of humanity, he will
become as comical as that privy councilor who was so conscientious about leaving his calling card with every Tom, Dick,
and Harry that in so doing he at last forgot his own name. Or
his philosophical enthusiasm will make him so absent-minded
that he needs a good-natured, level-headed wife whom he can
ask, as Sold in asked Rebecca when in enthusiastic absentmindedness he also lost himself in the objectivity of the chatter: "Rebecca, is it I who is speaking?"62
That the admired men of science in my most honored contemporary age, men whose concern in their search after the
system is known to the whole congregation and who are concerned also to find a place for sin within it, may find the above
position highly unscientific is entirely in order. But let the
congregation join in the search, or at least include these profound seekers in their pious intercessions; they will find the
place as surely as he who hunts for the burning tow fmds it
when he is unaware that it is burning in his own hand.

IV
322

IV
323

II
Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary
Sin Progressively

IV
324

With sinfulness, sexuality was posited. In that same moment
the history of the race begins. Just as the sinfulness of the race
moves in quantitative determinations, so also does anxiety.
The consequence of hereditary sin or the presence of hereditary sin in the single individual is anxiety, which differs only
quantitatively from that of Adam. In the state of innocence-and of such a state one might also speak in the case of
subsequent man-inherited sin must also have the same
dialectical ambiguity out of which guilt breaks forth by a
qualitative leap. On the other hand, anxiety will be more reflective in a subsequent individual than in Adam, because the
quantitative accumulation left behind by the race now makes
itself felt in that individual. Anxiety becomes no more an imperfection in man than before. On the contrary, the more
primitive a man is, the more profound is his anxiety, because
the presupposition of sinfulness, which his individual life
must assume when indeed he enters into the history of the
race, must be appropriated. Thus sinfulness has now attained
a greater power, and hereditary sin is growing. That there
may be men who never experience any anxiety must be understood in the sense that Adam would have perceived no
anxiety had he been merely animal.
The subsequent individual, like Adam, is a synthesis that is
sustained by spirit, but the synthesis is derived, and accordingly, the history of the race is posited in it. Herein lies the
more or less of anxiety in the subsequent individual. Nevertheless, his anxiety is not anxiety about sin, for as yet the distinction between good and evil is not, because this distinction
first comes about with the actuality of freedom. This distinc-

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

53

tion, if present, is only a foreboding presentiment that through
the history of the race may signify a more or a less.
Anxiety in a later individual is more reflective as Q consequence of his participation in the history of the racesomething that can be compared with habit, which is something of a second nature, not a new quality but simply a quantitative progression-because anxiety has now entered into
the world with a new significance. Sin entered in anxiety, but
sin in turn brought anxiety along with it. To be sure, the actuality of sin is an actuality that has no endurance. On the one
hand, the continuity of sin is the possibility that brings anxiety. On the other hand, the possibility of salvation is again a
nothing, which the individual both loves and fears, because
this is always possibility's relation to individuality. Only in
the moment that salvation is actually posited is this anxiety
overcome. Man's and creation's eager longingl is not, as has
been sentimentally expressed, a sweet longing; in order for
longing to be such, sin would have to be disarmed. He who
will truly acquaint himself with the state of sin, and with
what the expectation of salvation might be, will no doubt acknowledge this and be a little embarrassed by the esthetic unembarrassment. As long as it is only a question of expectation, sin continues to be in control and naturally conceives of
the expectation in a hostile manner. (This will be dealt with
later.) When salvation is posited, anxiety, together with possibility, is left behind. This does not mean that anxiety is annihilated, but that when rightly used it plays another role (see
Chapter V).
Strictly speaking, the anxiety that sin brings with it is only
when the individual himself posits sin, and yet this anxiety is
obscurely present as a more or a less in the quantitative history of the race. Hence one will even encounter the phenomenon that a person seems to become guilty merely through
anxiety about himself, something that could not have happened in the case of Adam. It is nevertheless true that every
individual becomes guilty only through himself; yet what is
quantitative in his relation to the race in this case reaches its
maximum here and will have the power to confuse every

54

IV
325

The Concept of Anxiety

view so long as one does not hold fast to the distinction
specified earlier between the quantitative accumulation and
the qualitative leap. This phenomenon2 will be considered
later. Usually it is ignored, which of course is easiest. Or it is
construed sentimentally and movingly with a cowardly sympathy that thanks God for not being like such a person,3
without understanding that such a thanksgiving is treason
against both God and oneself, and without considering that
life always holds in store analogous phenomena that one
probably will not escape. One must have sympathy. However, this sympathy is true only when one admits rightly and
profoundly to oneself that what has happened to one human
being can happen to all. Only then can one benefit both oneself and others. The physician at an insane asylum who is
foolish enough to believe that he is eternally right and that his
bit of reason is ensured against all injury in this life is in a
sense wiser than the demented, but he is also more foolish,
and surely he will not heal many.
Consequently, anxiety means two things: the anxiety in
which the individual posits sin by the qualitative leap, and the
anxiety that entered in and enters in with sin, and that also,
accordingly, enters quantitatively into the world every time
an individual posits sin.
It is not my intention to write a learned work or to waste
time in search of literary proof texts. Often the examples
mentioned in psychologies lack true psychological-poetic authority. They stand as isolated notarialiter [notarized facts],
and as a result one does not know whether to laugh or to
weep at the attempts of such lonely and obstinate persons to
form some sort of a rule. One who has properly occupied
himself with psychology and psychological observation acquires a general human flexibility that enables him at once to
construct his example which even though it lacks factual authority nevertheless has an authority of a different kind. The
psychological observer ought to be more nimble than a tightrope dancer in order to incline and bend himself to other

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

55

people and imitate their attitudes, and his silence in the moment of confidence should be seductive and voluptuous, so
that what is hidden may find satisfaction in slipping out to
chat with itself in the artificially constructed nonobservance
and silence. Hence he ought also to have a poetic originality in
his soul so as to be able at once to create both the totality and
the invariable from what in the individual is always partially
and variably present. Then, when he has perfected himself, he
will have no need to take his examples from literary repertoires and serve up half-dead reminiscences, but will bring his
observations entirely fresh from the water, wriggling and
sparkling in the play of their colors. Nor will he have to run
himself to death to become aware of something. On the contrary, he should sit entirely composed in his room, like a
police agent who nevertheless knows everything that takes
place. What he needs he can fashion at once; what he needs he
has at hand at once by virtue of his general practice, just as in a
well-equipped house one need not carry water from the street
but has it on his level by high pressure. If he were to become
doubtful, he is so well-oriented in human life and his eyes are
so inquisitorially sharp that he knows where to look to discover easily a suitable individuality who can be useful to the
imaginary construction [Experimentet]. His observation will
be more reliable than that of others, even though he does not
support it by references to names and learned quotationssuch as, that in Saxony there once lived a peasant girl in
whom a physician observed, that in Rome there was once an
emperor of whom a historian relates, etc.-as if such things
happen only once in a thousand years. What interest could
psychology have in that? No, such things happen every day,
if only the observer is present. His observation will have the
quality of freshness and the interest of actuality if he is prudent enough to control his observations. To that end he imitates in himself every mood, every psychic state that he discovers in another. Thereupon he sees whether he can delude
the other by the imitation and carry him along into the subsequent development, which is his own creation by virtue of
the idea. Thus if someone wants to observe a passion, he must

IV
326

56

The Concept of Anxiety

choose his individual. At that point, what counts is stillness,
quietness, and obscurity, so that he may discover the individual's secret. Then he must practice what he has learned until
he is able to delude the individual. Thereupon he fictitiously
invents the passion and appears before the individual in a preternatural magnitude of the passion. If it is done correctly, the
individual will feel an indescribable relief and satisfaction,
such as an insane person will feel when someone has uncovered and poetically grasped his fixation and then proceeds
to develop it further. If it does not succeed, it may be because
of a defect in the operation, but it may also be because the individual is a poor example.
IV

§1.

326

OBJECTIVE ANXIETY

IV
327

When we use the expression objective anxiety, it might seem
natural to think of the anxiety belonging to innocence, the
anxiety that is freedom's reflection within itself in its possibility. To object to this by saying that we now find ourselves at
a different place in the inquiry would be an unsatisfactory
claim. It might be more useful to remember that what distinguishes objective anxiety lies in its difference from subjective
anxiety, a distinction that does not pertain to Adam's state of
innocence. In the strictest sense, subjective anxiety is the anxiety that is posited in the individual and is the consequence of
his sin. Anxiety in this sense will be dealt with in a later chapter. If the term "anxiety" is to be understood in this sense, the
contrast of an objective anxiety is removed, and anxiety appears precisely as what it is, namely, as the subjective. The
distinction between objective and subjective anxiety belongs
in the contemplation of the world and the subsequent individual's state of innocence. The distinction made here is that
subjective anxiety signifies the anxiety that is present in the
individual's state of innocence and corresponds to that of
Adam, but it is nevertheless quantitatively different from that
of Adam because of the quantitative determination of the
generation. By objective anxiety we understand, on the other

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

57

hand, the reflection of the sinfulness of the generation in the
whole world.
The purpose of §2 of the previous chapter was to call to
mind that the expression "by Adam's sin, sinfulness came into
the world" contains an external reflection. Therefore we shall
return to that expression to discover the truth that may be
found in it. The moment Adam has posited sin, our consideration leaves him in order to consider the beginning of every
subsequent individual's sin, for as a result generation is introduced. Ifby Adam's sin 4 the sinfulness of the race is posited in
the same sense as his erect walking etc., the concept of the
individual is canceled. This was developed previously, where
objection also was made against the imaginatively constructing inquisitiveness that wants to treat sin as a curiosity. The
dilemma was also raised that one would have to imagine
either a questioner who did not even know what he was asking about or a questioner who knew and whose pretended ignorance became a new sin.
If all this is kept in mind, the above expression will have a
limited truth. The first posits the quality. Adam, then, posits
sin in himself, but also for the race. However, the concept of
race is too abstract to allow the positing of so concrete a category as sin, which is posited precisely in that the single individual himself, as the single individual, posits it. Thus sinfulness in the race becomes only a quantitative approximation.
Still this has its beginning with Adam. Herein lies the great
significance of AdamS above that of every other individual in
the race, and herein lies the truth of the above expression.
Even orthodoxy, if it is to understand itself, must admit this,
because it teaches that by the sin of Adam nature as well as the
race was brought under sin. However, in the case of nature it
certainly will not do to maintain that sin entered in as the
quality of sin.
By coming into the world, sin acquired significance for the
whole creation. This effect of sin in nonhuman existence
[Tilvcprelse 1I have called objective anxiety.
The meaning of this I can indicate by calling attention to
the Scriptural expression U7tOKupuoolCiu6 tii~ Ktt(rf;ro~ [the

IV
328

58

IV
329

The Concept of Anxiety

eager longing of creation] (Romans 8:19). Inasmuch as one
can speak of an eager longing, it follows as a matter of course
that the creation is in a state of imperfection. One often fails
to see that expressions and concepts such as longing, eager
longing, expectation, etc. imply a preceding state, and that
this state is present and makes itself felt at the same time that
longing is developing. A person is not in this state of expectation by accident etc., so that he finds himself a total stranger
to it, but he himself is at the same time producing it. The expression for such a longing is anxiety, for the state out of
which he longs to be proclaims itself in anxiety, and it proclaims itself because the longing alone is not sufficient to save
him.
The sense in which creation sank into corruption through
Adam's sin, how freedom was posited by the fact that its
misuse was posited and thus cast a reflection of possibility and
a trembling of complicity over creation, the sense in which
this had to take place because man is a synthesis whose most
extreme opposites were posited and whose one opposite, precisely on account of man's sin, became a far more extreme
opposite than it was before-all this has no place in a psychological deliberation but belongs in dogmatics, in the Atonement, in the explanation by which this science explains the
presupposition of sinfulness. *
This anxiety in creation may rightly be called objective anxiety. It is not brought forth by creation but by the fact that
creation is placed in an entirely different light because of
Adam's sin, and insofar as it continues to come into the
world, sensuousness is constantly degraded to mean sinfulness. One can easily see that this interpretation also has its
eyes open in the sense that it parries the rationalistic view according to which sensuousness as such is sinfulness. After sin
came into the world, and every time sin comes into the
world, sensuousness becomes sinfulness. But what it be• Dogmatics must be designed in this way. Above all, every science must
vigorously lay hold of its own beginning and not live in complicated relations
with other sciences. If dogmatics begins by wanting to explain sinfulness or
by wanting to prove its actuality, no dogmatics will come out of it, but the
entire existence of dogmatics will become problematic and vague. 7

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

59

comes is not what it first was. Franz Baader has often protested against the proposition that finitude 8 and sensuousness
as such are sinfulness. If care is not taken at this point, Pelagianism emerges from an entirely different side. Franz Baader,
however, did not take into account the history of the race. In
the quantitation of the race (i.e., nonessentially), sensuousness is sinfulness, but, in relation to the individual, this is not
the case until he himself, by positing sin, again makes sensuousness sinfulness.
Some men of Schelling's school*9 have been especially
aware of the alteration** that has taken place in nature because
• Schelling himself has often spoken of anxiety, anger, anguish, suffering,
etc. But one ought always to be a little suspicious of such expressions, so as
not to confuse the consequence of sin in creation with what Schelling also
characterizes as states and moods in God. By these expressions, he characterizes, if! may say so, the creative birth pangs of the deity. By such figurative expressions he signifies what in some cases he has called the negative and
what in Hegel became: the negative more strictly defined as the dialectical (to
€tEPOV).'o The ambiguity is also found in Schelling because he speaks of a
melancholy that is spread over nature, as well as of a depression in the deity.ll Yet, above all, Schelling's main thought is that anxiety, etc., characterize especially the suffering of the deity in his endeavor to create. In Berlin,
he expressed the same thought'2 more defmitely by comparing God with
Goethe andJoh. von Miiller, both of whom felt well only when producing,
and also by calling attention to the fact that such a bliss, when it cannot
communicate itself, is unhappiness. I mention this here because his remark
has already found its way into print in a pamphlet by Marheineke,13 who
treats it with irony. This, however, one ought not to do, for a vigorous and
full-blooded anthropomorphism has considerable merit. The mistake, however, is a different one, and here is an example of how strange everything
becomes when metaphysics and dogmatics are distorted by treating dogmatics metaphysically and metaphysics dogmatically .
•• The word "alteration"'4 in Danish expresses the ambiguity very well.
The word "alterate" is used in the sense of changing, distorting, or bringing
out of its original state (the thing becomes something else). But one also
speaks of "becoming alterated" [altereret] in the sense of becoming
frightened, for this is fundamentally the first unavoidable consequence. To
my knowledge, the word is not used at all in Latin, which instead, strangely
enough, uses the word adulterare [to seduce to adultery, to falsify, to distort].
The Frenchman says alterer les monnaies [to counterfeit money] and etre altere
[to be frightened]. In Danish, the word is used in everyday speech almost
only in the sense of being frightened, and so one may hear an ordinary person
say, "I am quite altereret." At least I have heard a peddler use it in that way.

IV
330

IV
329

IV
330

60

The Concept of Anxiety

of sin. Mention has been made also of the anxiety that is supposed to be in inanimate nature. The effect, however, is
weakened when at one moment one is to believe that he is
dealing with a subject in natural philosophy that is treated
cleverly with the help of dogmatics, and in another moment a
dogmatic definition that glories in the borrowed reflection of
the magical marvels of the contemplation of nature.
However, at this point I break off the digression, which for
a moment I permitted to go beyond the boundary of this investigation. Anxiety as it appeared in Adam will never again
return, for by him sinfulness came into the world. Because of
this, Adam's anxiety has two analogies, the objective anxiety
in nature and the subjective anxiety in the individual, of
which the latter contains a more and the first a less than the
anxiety in Adam.
IV
331

§2.
SUBJECTIVE ANXIETY

The more reflective one dares to posit anxiety, the easier it
may seem for anxiety to pass over into guilt. But here it is
important not to allow oneself to be deluded by determinants
of approximation: a "more" cannot bring forth the leap, and
no "easier" can in truth make the explanation easier. If this is
not held fast, one runs the risk of suddenly meeting a phenomenon in which everything takes place so easily that the
transition becomes a simple transition, or the other risk of
never daring to bring one's thought to a conclusion, since a
purely empirical observation can never be finished. 1s Therefore, although anxiety becomes more and more reflective, the
guilt that breaks forth in anxiety by the qualitative leap retains
the same accountability as that of Adam, and the anxiety the
same ambiguity.
To want to deny that every subsequent individual has and
must be assumed to have had a state of innocence analogous
to that of Adam would be shocking to everyone and would
also annul all thought, because there would then be an individual who is not an individual and who relates himself

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

61

merely as a specimen [Exemplar] to his species, although he
would at the same time be regarded as guilty under the category of the individual.
Anxiety may be compared with dizziness. He whose eye
happens to look down into the yawning abyss becomes dizzy.
But what is the reason for this? It is just as much in his own
eye as in the abyss, for suppose he had not looked down.
Hence anxiety is the dizziness of freedom, which emerges
when the spirit wants to posit the synthesis and freedom
looks down into its own possibility, laying hold of finiteness
to support itself. Freedom succumbs in this dizziness. Further
than this, psychology cannot and will not go. In that very
moment everything is changed, and freedom, when it again
rises, sees that it is guilty. Between these two moments lies
the leap, which no science has explained and which no science
can explain. He who becomes guilty in anxiety becomes as
ambiguously guilty as it is possible to become. Anxiety is a
feminine weakness in which freedom faints. Psychologically
speaking, the fall into sin always takes place in weakness. 16
But anxiety is of all things the most selfish, and no concrete
expression of freedom is as selfish as the possibility of every
concretion. This again is the overwhelming factor that determines the individual's ambiguous relation, sympathetic
and antipathetic. 17 In anxiety there is the selfish infinity of
possibility, which does not tempt like a choice but ensnaringly disquiets [amgster J with its sweet anxiousness
[Becengstelse J.
In each subsequent individual, anxiety is more reflective.
This may be expressed by saying that the nothing that is the
object of anxiety becomes, as it were, more and more a something. We do not say that it actually becomes a something or
actually signifies something; we do not say that instead of a
nothing we shall now substitute sin or something else, for
what holds true of the innocence of the subsequent individual
also holds true of Adam. All of this is only for freedom, and it
is only as the single individual himself posits sin by the qualitative leap. Here the nothing of anxiety is a complex of presentiments, which, reflecting themselves in themselves, come

IV
332

62

The Concept of Anxiety

nearer and nearer to the individual, even though again, when
viewed essentially in anxiety, they signify a nothing-yet,
mark well, not a nothing with which the individual has nothing to do, but a nothing that communicates vigorously with
the ignorance of innocence. This reflectiveness is a predisposition that, before the individual becomes guilty, signifies essentially nothing; whereas when by the qualitative leap he
becomes guilty, it is the presupposition by which he goes beyond himself, because sin presupposes itself, obviously not
before it is posited (which is predestination), but in that it is
posited.
We shall now consider more particularly the something
that the nothing of anxiety may signify in the subsequent individual. In the psychological deliberation, it truly counts as
something. But the psychological deliberation does not forget
that if an individual becomes guilty as a matter of course by
this something, then all consideration is annulled. This something, which hereditary sin signifies stricte sic dicta [in the strict
sense of the word], is:

A. The Consequence of the Relationship of Generation

IV
333

It is obvious that our subject is not one that may occupy
physicians, such as whether one is born deformed etc., nor is
the subject that of arriving at results by tabulated surveys.
Here, as elsewhere, it is important that the mood be the correct one. When a person has been taught that hail and crop
failures are to be ascribed to the devil, this may be very well
meant, but such a teaching is essentially a cleverness that
weakens the concept of evil and introduces into it an almost
jesting note, just as, esthetically, it is jest to speak of a stupid
devil. So when in dealing with the concept of faith the historical is made so one-sidedly significant that the primitive originality of faith in the individual is overlooked, faith becomes a
finite pettiness instead of a free infinitude. The consequence is
that faith may come to be regarded in the manner of Hieronymus in Holberg's play,18 when he says about Erasmus
Montanus that he has heretical views of faith because he believes that the earth is round and not flat, as one generation

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

63

after another in the village had believed. Thus a person might
become a heretic in his faith by wearing wide pants when
everyone else in the village wears tight pants. When someone
offers statistical surveys of the proportions of sinfulness,
draws a map of it in color and relief, so as to guide the eye
quickly in its perspicuity, he makes an attempt at treating sin
as a peculiarity of nature that is not to be annulled but is to be
calculated just as atmospheric pressure and rainfall are. The
mean and the arithmetical average that result are nonsense of a
kind that has no comparison in the purely empirical sciences.
It would be a very ridiculous abracadabra if anyone should
seriously suggest that sinfulness averages 3% inches in every
man or that in Languedoc the average is merely 2Y4 inches,
while in Bretagne it is 3;/s. Examples such as these are no
more superfluous than those in the introduction, because they
are drawn from the sphere within which the following discusSIon moves.
By sin, sensuousness became sinfulness. This proposition
has a double significance: by sin sensuousness becomes sinfulness, and by Adam sin entered into the world. These two
determinations must constantly counterbalance each other;
otherwise what is said becomes something untrue. That sensuousness at one time became sinfulness is the history of the
generation, but that sensuousness becomes sinfulness is the
qualitative leap of the individual.
Attention has been called to the fact (Chapter I §6) that the
creation of Eve outwardly prefigures the consequence of the
relationship of generation. In "a sense, she signifies that which
is derived. What is derived is never as perfect as the original."
However, here the difference is merely quantitative. Each
subsequent individual is essentially as original as the first. The
difference in pleno [common] to all subsequent individuals is
derivation, but for the single individual derivation may again
signify a more or a less.
• This, of course, pertains only to the human race, because the individual is
qualified as spirit. In animal species, on the other hand, every subsequent
specimen [Exemplar I is just as good as the first, or, more correcdy, to be the
first in such a case signifies nothing at all.

IV
334

IV
333

64

The Concept of Anxiety

The derivation of woman also contains an explanation of
the sense in which she is weaker than man, something that in
all times has been assumed, whether it is a pasha speaking or a
romantic knight. Nevertheless, the difference is not such that
man and woman are not essentially alike despite the dissimilarity. The expression for the difference is that anxiety is reflected more in Eve than in Adam. This is because woman is
more sensuous than man. Obviously, the point here is not an
empirical state or an average, but the dissimilarity in the synthesis. Ifin one part of the synthesis there is a "more," a consequence will be that when the spirit posits itself the cleft becomes deeper and that in freedom's possibility anxiety will
find a greater scope. In the Genesis account, it is Eve who
seduces Adam. But from this it in no way follows that her
guilt is greater than Adam's, and still less that anxiety is an
imperfection;19 on the contrary, the greatness of anxiety is a
prophecy of the greatness of the perfection.
At this point, the investigation already shows that the proportion of sensuousness corresponds to that of anxiety.
Therefore, as soon as the relationship of generation appears,
whatever was said of Eve becomes an intimation of every
subsequent individual's relation to Adam, namely, that as
sensuousness is increased in the generation, anxiety is also increased. The consequence of the relationship of generation
signifies a "more" in such a way that no individual can escape
this "more," which is a "more" to all subsequent individuals
in their relation to Adam. But this "more" is never of such a
kind that one becomes essentially different from Adam.
However, before we proceed to this, I shall first shed some
light on the proposition that woman is more sensuous than
man and has more anxiety.
That woman is more sensuous than man appears at once in her
physical structure. To deal more particularly with this is not
my concern but is a task for physiology. However, I shall
present my proposition in a different way. First I shall introduce her esthetically under her ideal aspect, which is beauty.
To call attention to the circumstance that this is her ideal as-

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

65

pect indicates precisely that she is more sensuous than man.
Then I shall introduce her ethically under her ideal aspect,
which is procreation, and point out that the circumstance that
this is her ideal aspect indicates precisely that she is more
sensuous than man.
When beauty must reign, a synthesis results, from which
spirit is excluded. 20 This is the secret of all of Greek culture.
Because of this, there is a repose, a quiet solemnity about
Greek beauty, but precisely for this reason there is also an
anxiety of which the Greek was scarcely aware, although his
plastic beauty trembled with this anxiety. Therefore there is
light-heartedness in Greek beauty, because the spirit is
excluded, and also a profound, unexplained sorrow. Thus
sensuousness is not sinfulness but an unexplained riddle that
causes anxiety. Hence this naivete is accompanied by an inexplicable nothing, which is the nothing of anxiety.
It is true that Greek beauty conceives of man and of woman
in the same way, as nons pi ritual. Nevertheless, there is a distinction within this likeness. The spiritual has its expression in
the face. In the beauty of the man, the face and its expression
are more essential than in the beauty of the woman, although
the eternal youthfulness of plastic art constantly prevents the
more deeply spiritual from appearing. To develop this further
is not my task, but I shall indicate the dissimilarity with a
single suggestion. Venus is essentially just as beautiful when
she is represented as sleeping, possibly more so, yet the sleeping state is the expression for the absence of spirit. For this
reason, the older and the more spiritually developed the individuality is, the less beautiful it is in sleep, whereas the child is
more beautiful in sleep. Venus arises from the sea and is represented in a position of repose, a position that reduces the
expression of the face to the nonessential. If, on the other
hand, Apollo is to be represented, it would no more be appropriate to have him sleep than it would be to have Jupiter
do so. Apollo would thereby become ugly and Jupiter ridiculous. One might make an exception of Bacchus, because in
Greek art he represents the similarity between manly and

IV
335

66

IV
336

The Concept of Anxiety

womanly beauty, as a consequence of which his forms are
also feminine. In the case of a Ganymede, however, the expression of the face is already more essential.
As the conception of beauty becomes different in romanticism, the dissimilarity is again repeated within the essential
likeness. While the history of spirit (and it is precisely the secret of spirit that it has a history) ventures to stamp itself upon
the countenance of the man in such a way that everything is
forgotten if only the imprint is distinct and noble, the woman
on the other hand will make her effect as a whole in another
way, even though her face has acquired a greater significance
than in classical art. The expression must be that of a totality
with no history. Therefore silence is not only woman's
greatest wisdom but also her highest beauty.
Viewed ethically, woman culminates in procreation.
Therefore the Scriptures 21 say that her desire shall be for her
husband. Although it is also true that the husband's desire is
for her, his life does not culminate in this desire, unless his life
is wretched or lost. But the fact that woman's life culminates
in procreation indicates precisely that she is more sensuous. 22
Woman is more anxious than man. This is not because of her
lesser physical strength etc., for that kind of anxiety is not the
issue here, but because she is more sensuous than man and
yet, like him, is essentially qualified as spirit. What has often
been said about her, that she is the weaker sex, is something
entirely indifferent to me, because she therefore could very
well be less anxious than man. In this investigation, anxiety
is always conceived in the direction of freedom. So when
the Genesis story, 23 contrary to all analogy, represents the
woman as seducing the man, this is on further reflection quite
correct, for this seduction is precisely a feminine seduction,
because only through Eve could Adam be seduced by the serpent. In every other place where there is a question of seduction, linguistic usage (delude, persuade, etc.) always attributes superiority to man.
What is assumed to be recognized in all experience, I shall
merely point out by an imaginatively constructed observation. Picture an innocent young girl; let a man fasten his de-

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

67

sirous glance upon her, and she becomes anxious. In addition,
she might become indignant etc., but first she will be in anxiety. On the other hand, if I picture a young woman fastening
her desirous look upon an innocent young man, his mood
will not be anxiety but disgust mingled with modesty, precisely because he is more qualified as spirit.
By Adam's sin, sinfulness entered into the world, and for
Adam, sexuality came to signify sinfulness. The sexual was
posited. There has been a great deal of idle talk both spoken
and written in the world about naivete. However, although
innocence alone is naive, it is also ignorant. As soon as the
sexual is brought to consciousness, to speak of naivete is
thoughtlessness, affectation, and, what is worse, a disguise
for lust. 24 But from the fact that man is no longer naive, it by
no means follows that he sins. Such dull flatteries only allure
men precisely by diverting their attention from the true and
the moral. 2S
The whole question of the significance of the sexual, as well
as its significance in the particular spheres, has undeniably
been answered poorly until now;26 moreover, it has seldom
been answered in the correct mood. To offer witticisms about
the sexual is a paltry art, to admonish is not difficult, to preach
about it in such a way that the difficulty is omitted is not hard,
but to speak humanly about it is an art. To leave it to the stage
and the pulpit to undertake the answer in such a way that the
one is embarrassed by what the other says, with the result that
the explanation of the one is revoltingly different from that of
the other, is really to surrender all and to place upon men the
heavy burden, 27 which one does not oneself lift a finger to relieve, fmding meaning in both explanations while the respective teachers continually expound the one or the other. This
inconsistency would long since have been recognized if in our
day men had not perfected themselves thoughtlessly to waste
lives so beautifully designed, and thoughtlessly to participate
noisily whenever there is talk about one or another imposing,
prodigious idea, in the fulfillment of which they unite in an
unshakable faith that in union there is strength, a faith as marvelous as that of the alehouse keeper who sold his beer for a

IV
337

68

IV
338

The Concept of Anxiety

penny less than he paid for it and still counted on a profit, "for
it is the quantity that does it." Since this is the case, it is not
surprising that in these days no one pays attention to such a
deliberation. But this I know: had Socrates lived now, he
would have reflected on such things and would have done it
better and, if I may say so, more divinely than I can do. I am
convinced that he would have said to me: "My dear fellow,
you act correctly in considering such things, which are well
worth pondering; indeed, one could converse whole nights
and never fmish fathoming the wonders of human nature."
And this assurance is worth infmitely more to me than the
loud praises of all my contemporaries, for this assurance
makes my soul unshakable; the applause would make it
doubtful.
The sexual as such is not the sinful. Real ignorance of it,
when it nevertheless is essentially present, is reserved for the
beast, which therefore is a slave of blind instinct and acts
blindly. An ignorance that is also an ignorance of that which
is not is the ignorance of the child. Innocence is a knowledge
that denotes ignorance. Its distinction from moral ignorance
is easily recognized by the fact that innocence is qualified in
the direction of knowledge. With innocence, a knowledge
begins that has ignorance as its first qualification. This is the
concept of modesty (Scham). In modesty there is an anxiety,
because spirit is found at the extreme point of the difference of
the synthesis in such a way that spirit is not merely qualified
as body but as body with a generic difference. Nevertheless,
modesty is a knowledge of the generic difference, but not as a
relation to a generic difference, which is to say, the sexual
urge as such is not present. The real significance of modesty is
that spirit, so to speak, cannot acknowledge itself at the extreme point of the synthesis. Therefore the anxiety found in
modesty is prodigiously ambiguous. There is no trace of sensuous lust, and yet there is a sense of shame. Shame of what?
Of nothing. And yet the individual may die of shame. A
wounded modesty is the deepest pain, because it is the most
inexplicable of all. For this reason, the anxiety in modesty can
awaken by itself. 28 Here, of course, it is important that it is

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

69

not lust that plays this role. An example of the latter is found
in one of Friedrich Schlegel's tales (Siimmtliche Werke, vol. 7,
p. 15, the story of Merlin).
In modesty, the generic difference is posited, but not in relation to its other. That takes place in the sexual drive. But since
the drive is not instinct or instinct only, it eo ipso has a ttA.OC;
[end], which is propagation, while the reposing is love, the
purely erotic. As yet spirit is not posited. As soon as it is posited not merely as that which constitutes the synthesis but as
spirit, the erotic comes to an end. The highest pagan expression for this is that the erotic is the comic. Of course, this
must not be understood in the sense in which a sensualist
might take the erotic to be comical and material for his lascivious wit; but it is the power of intelligence and its preponderance that in the indifference of the spirit neutralize both the
erotic and the moral relation to the erotic. This power has a
very deep source. The anxiety in modesty arose from the
spirit's feeling that it was a foreigner; now spirit has conquered completely and perceives the sexual as the foreign and
as the comic. Modesty naturally could not have this freedom
of the spirit. The sexual is the expression for the prodigious
Widerspruch [contradiction] that the immortal spirit is determined as genus. This contradiction expresses itself in the profound Scham that conceals this contradiction and does not
dare to understand it. In the erotic, the contradiction is understood as the beautiful, for beauty is precisely the unity of the
psychic and the somatic. But this contradiction, which the
erotic transfigures in beauty, is for spirit at once both the
beautiful and the comic. The expression of spirit for the erotic
is, therefore, that it is simultaneously the beautiful and the
comic. Here there is no sensuous reflection upon the erotic,
for that would be sensuality, in which case the individual
would lie far below the beauty of the erotic; rather it is the
maturity of spirit. Obviously, very few have understood this
in its purity. Socrates did. Therefore when Xenophon represents Socrates as having said that one ought to love ugly
women,29 this expression, like everything else by Xenophon,
becomes a repulsive, narrow-minded philistinism, which is

IV
339

70

IV
340

IV
339

IV
340

The Concept of Anxiety

most unlike Socrates. The meaning is that Socrates has reduced the erotic to indifference, and the contradiction that
underlies the comic he expresses correctly by the corresponding ironic contradiction that one should love the ugly. *30
However, such a view rarely occurs in its lofty purity. It requires an unusual interplay of a fortunate historical development and primitive talent. If such an objection is even remotely possible, the view is repulsive and an affectation.
In Christianity, the religious has suspended the erotic,31 not
merely as sinful, through an ethical misunderstanding, but as
indifferent, because in spirit there is no difference between
man and woman. 32 Here the erotic is not neutralized by
irony, but it is suspended because the tendency of Christianity
is to bring the spirit further. When in modesty the spirit becomes anxious of and shy of putting on the generic difference,
• What Socrates said to Critobulus about the kiss 33 must be understood in
this way. I believe it must be obvious to everyone that it would have been
impossible for Socrates to have spoken in all seriousness with such pathos
about the danger of the kiss, and also that he was no timid ninny who did not
dare to look at a woman. In southern countries and among more passionate
peoples. the kiss no doubt means more than in the north (concerning this one
may refer to Puteanus's letter to John Bapt. Saccum: nesciunt nostrae virgines
ullum libidinis rudimentum oculis aut osculis inesse, ideoque fruuntur. Vestrae sciunt
[our Belgian maidens do not know that a kiss or a glance of the eye can be the
beginning of lust, and therefore abandon themselves to it. Your Italian
maidens know it). Cf. Kempius, Dissertatio de osculis, in Bayle).34 Nevertheless, it is unlike Socrates both as an ironist and as a moralist to speak in this
way. When one is too zealous a moralist, one awakens desire and tempts the
pupil almost against his will to become ironical toward the teacher. Socrates'
relation to Aspasia points to the same thing. He associated with her, quite
unconcerned about her ambiguous life. He only wanted to learn from her
(Athenaeus),35 and as a teacher she seems to have had talents, because it is
told that husbands brought their wives with them to Aspasia 36 so that they
might learn from her. However, as soon as Aspasia wanted to impress Socrates by her loveliness, he presumably explained to her that one ought to love
the ugly women, and that she should not exert her charms any further, because for the attainment of his purpose he had enough in Xantippe (cf.
Xenophon's account37 of Socrates' view of his relation to Xantippe). Unfortunately, because again and again men approach the reading of everything
with preconceived opinions, it is no wonder that everyone has the opinion
that a Cynic is a profligate . Yet it might be possible precisely among the
Cynics to fmd an example of the interpretation of the erotic as the comic.

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressil'ely

71

the individuality suddenly leaps off and, instead of pervading
the generic difference ethically, seizes an explanation from the
highest sphere of the spirit. This is one side of the monastic
view, whether it is more particularly determined as ethical
rigor or as predominantly contemplation."
As anxiety is posited in modesty, so it is present in all erotic
enjoyment, and by no means because it is sinful. This is the
case even though the minister blesses the couple ten times.
Even when the erotic expresses itself as beautifully, purely,
and, morally as possible, undisturbed in its joy by any lascivious reflection, anxiety is nevertheless present, not as a disturbing but as an accompanying factor.
In these matters, it is extremely difficult to make observations. The observer !pust especially exercise the caution of
physicians who when they take the pulse make sure that it is
not their own they feel but that of the patient. In the same
manner, the observer must take care that the movement he
discovers is not his own restlessness in carrying out his observation. It is indeed certain that all poets describe love, but
however pure and innocent, it is presented in such a way that
anxiety is also posited with it. To pursue this further is a matter for an esthetician. But why this anxiety? It is because spirit
cannot participate in the culmination of the erotic. Let me express myself in the manner of the Greeks. The spirit is indeed
present, because it is spirit that establishes the synthesis, but it
cannot express itself in the erotic. It feels itself a stranger. It
says, as it were, to the erotic: My dear, in .this I cannot be a
third party; therefore I shall hide myself for the time being.
But this precisely is anxiety, and modesty as well. For it is a
great stupidity to assume that the marriage ceremony of the
church or the faithfulness of the husband in keeping himself
to his wife alone is all that is needed. Many a marriage has
been profaned, and not by a stranger. However, when the
• However strange it may seem to one who is unaccustomed to view phenomena intrepidly, there is nevertheless a perfect analogy between Socrates'
ironic view of the erotic as comical and the relation of a monk to mulieres
subintroductae [women who were secretly brought in).38 The abuse naturally
concerns only those who have a liking for abuse.

IV
341

IV
340

72

IV

342

The Concept of Anxiety

erotic is pure, innocent, and beautiful, this anxiety is friendly
and gentle. Therefore the poets are correct in speaking of a
sweet anxiousness. 39 Yet it is quite obvious that anxiety is
greater in woman than in man.
We shall now return to the subject with which we were
dealing, namely, the consequence of the relationship of generation in the individual, which is the "more" that every subsequent individual has in his relation to Adam. In the moment
of conception, spirit is furthest away, and therefore the anxiety is the greatest. In this anxiety the new individual comes
into being. In the moment of birth, anxiety culminates a second time in the woman, and in this moment the new individual comes into the world. It is well-known that a woman in
childbirth is in anxiety. Physiology has its explanation, and
psychology must also have its explanation. In childbirth the
woman is again at the furthest point of one extreme of the
synthesis. Therefore the spirit trembles, for in this moment it
does not have its task, it is as if it were suspended. Anxiety,
however, is an expression of the perfection of human nature;
therefore it is only among aboriginal peoples that one finds
the analogy to the easy delivery of animals.
The more anxiety, the more sensuousness. The procreated
individual is more sensuous than the original, and this
"more" is the universal "more" of the generation for every
subsequent individual in relation to Adam.
But this "more" of anxiety and sensuousness for every subsequent man in relation to Adam may, of course, signify a
more or a less in the particular individual. Here lie differences
that in truth are so appalling that surely no one would dare to
think about them in a deeper sense, i.e., with true human
sympathy, unless he was firmly and unshakably convinced
that never in the world has there been or ever will be a
"more" such that by a simple transition it transforms the
quantitative into the qualitative. What Scripture teaches,40
that God avenges the iniquity of the fathers upon the children
to the third and fourth generation, life proclaims loudly
enough. To want to talk oneself out of this dreadful fact by
explaining that this saying is a Jewish teaching is of no help.

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

73

Christianity has never assented to giving each particular individual the privilege of starting from the beginning in an external sense. Each individual begins in an historical nexus, and
the consequences of nature still hold true. The difference,
however, consists in that Christianity teaches him to lift himself above this "more," and it judges him who does not do so
as being unwilling.
Precisely because sensuousness is here determined as a
"more," the spirit's anxiety in assuming responsibility for
sensuousness becomes a greater anxiety. At the maximum we
find here the dreadful fact that anxiety about sin produces sin. If
evil desire, concupiscence, etc. are regarded as innate in the
individual, there is not the ambiguity in which the individual
becomes both guilty and innocent. In the impotence of anxiety, the individual succumbs, and precisely for that reason he
is both guilty and innocent.
I shall not cite detailed examples of this infinitely fluctuating more or less. To have any significance, such examples
would require extensive and careful esthetic-psychological
treatment.

B. The Consequence oJthe Historical Relationship

If I should express in a single sentence the "more" that every
subsequent individual has in his relation to Adam, I would
say: It is that sensuousness may signify sinfulness, that is, signify the obscure knowledge of it, in addition to an obscure
knowledge of whatever else sin might signify, as well as a
misunderstood appropriation of the historical de te Jabula narratur [the story is told about you], in which the point, the
originality of the individual, is excluded, and the individual
forthwith confounds himself with the race and its history. We
do not say that sensuousness is sinfulness, but that sin makes
it sinfulness. Now if we consider the subsequent individual,
every such individual has an historical environment in which
it may become apparent that sensuousness can signify sinfulness. For the individual himself, sensuousness does not signify this, but this knowledge gives anxiety a "more." So
spirit is posited not only in relation to the opposite of sensu-

IV
343

74

IV
344

The Concept of Anxiety

ousness, but also to that of sinfulness. It follows as a matter of
course that the innocent individual does not as yet understand
this knowledge, for it can only be understood qualitatively.
However, this knowledge is again a new possibility, so that
freedom in its possibility, as it relates itself to the sensuous,
comes into still greater anxiety.
That this universal "more" may indicate a more and a less
for the particular individual follows as a matter of course. Attention is at once called to an imposing difference. After
Christianity had come into the, world and redemption was
posited, sensuousness was placed in a light of opposition such
as was not found in paganism, which serves to confirm the
proposition that sensuousness is sinfulness.
Within the Christian difference, this "more" may again
signify a more and a less. This is owing to the relation of the
particular innocent individual to his historical environment.
In this respect, the most dissimilar things may produce the
same effect. Freedom's possibility announces itself in anxiety.
Consequently, a warning may bring an individual to succumb to anxiety (it should be remembered that, as always, I
only speak psychologically and never annul the qualitative
leap), although of course the warning was intended to do the
opposite. The sight of the sinful may save one individual and
bring another to fall. Ajest may have the effect of seriousness,
but also the opposite. Speech and silence can produce an effect
opposite to what was intended. In this respect there are no
limits. So here again one observes the correctness of the determination that this is a quantitative more or less, for the
quantitative is precisely the infinite limit. 41
I shall not pursue this any further by means of imaginatively constructed observations, because to do so would cause
a delay. However, life is rich enough, if only one understands
how to see. One need not travel to Paris and London; besides,
this would be of no help if one is unable to see.
Moreover, anxiety has the same ambiguity here as it always
has. At this point a maximum may appear that corresponds to
the aforementioned-that the individual in anxiety about sin

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

75

brings forth sin-namely, the individual, in anxiety not about becoming guilty but about being regarded as guilty, becomes guilty.
Furthermore, the ultimate more in this respect is that an individual from his earliest awakening is placed and influenced
in such a way that sensuousness for him has become identical
with sinfulness,42 and this ultimate more will appear in the
most painful form of collision if in the whole surrounding
world he finds nothing that can give him support. If to this
ultimate more is added the confusion that the individual confounds himself with his historical knowledge of sinfulness,
and in the pallor of anxiety at once subsumes himself qua individual under the same category while forgetting the pronouncement of freedom, "If you do likewise"-then the ultimate more is present.
What has here been briefly indicated, namely, that it requires a very rich experience to understand and that much has
been said both clearly and definitely, has often enough been
the object of deliberation. This deliberation is usually called:
concerning the power of the example. It cannot be deniedalthough this has not been the case in recent superphilosophical times-that fine things have been said about this subject;
however, a psychological intermediate term is frequently
lacking, namely, the explanation of how it happens that the
example has such power. Moreover, in these spheres the matter is often treated a little too carelessly and without the
awareness that a single little mistake in the smallest detail is
capable of confusing the prodigious balance sheet oflife. The
attention of psychology is fixed exclusively upon the particular phenomenon, but at the same time it does not have its
eternal categories ready and does not lay adequate emphasis
upon saving mankind, which can be done only by saving each
particular individual into the race, whatever the cost may be.
The example is supposed to have had an influence upon the
child. The child is represented as just a little angel, but the
corrupt environment plunged it into corruption. Accounts
are given again and again of how bad the environment wasand so, so the child became depraved. But if this takes place

76

IV
345

The Concept of Anxiety

through a simple quantitative process, every concept is canceled. This is something that is overlooked. The child is represented as being basically wicked, as having not had the advantage of the good example. However, care must be taken
that the child does not become so wicked that it acquires the
power to make fools not only of its parents but of all human
speech and thought, just as the rana paradoxa [paradoxical
frog]43 mocks and defies the naturalists' classification of
frogs. There are many men who well understand how to
view the particular, but who at the same time are unable to
keep the totality in mente [in mind]. Every such view, although otherwise meritorious, can only bring about confusion. Or, the child was, like most children, neither good nor
bad. But then it came into good company and became good
or into bad company and became evil. Intermediate terms! Intermediate terms! 1).n intermediate term is provided that has
the ambiguity that rescues thought (without which the salvation of the child becomes an illusion), namely, that the child,
whatever its circumstance was, can become both guilty and
innocent. If one does not have the intermediate terms
promptly and clearly at hand, the concepts of hereditary sin,
of sin, of race, and of the individual are lost, and with these
the child also.
Sensuousness, then, is not sinfulness, but since sin was posited and continues to be posited, it makes sensuousness sinfulness. That sinfulness consequently signifies something else
as well goes without saying. But what sin further signifies is
not within the scope of our investigation, the task of which is
to immerse oneself psychologically in the state that precedes
sin and, psychologically speaking, predisposes more or less to
SID.

By the eating of the fruit of the tree of knowledge , the distinction between good and evil came into the world, but also
the sexual difference as a drive. How this came about, no science can explain. Psychology comes closest and explains the
last approximation, which is freedom's showing-itself-for-

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

77

itself in the anxiety of possibility, or in the nothing of possibility, or in the nothing of anxiety. If the object of anxiety is a
something, we have no leap but a quantitative transition. The
subsequent individual has a "more" in relation to Adam, and
again a more or a less in relation to other individuals. Nevertheless, it remains true that the object of anxiety is a nothing.
If the object of anxiety is such a something that when viewed
essentially, i.e., in the direction of freedom, it signifies something, then we do not have a leap but a quantitative transition
that confuses every concept. Even when I say that for an individual sensuousness is posited as sinfulness before the leap, it
remains true nevertheless that it is not essentially posited as
such, for essentially the individual does not posit it or understand it. Even when I say that there is posited a "more" of
sensuousness in the procreated individual with respect to the
leap, this "more" is nevertheless an invalid "more."
Consequently, if science has any other psychological intermediate term that has the dogmatic, the ethical, and the
psychological advantages that anxiety possesses, then that
should be preferred.
Moreover, it is easily seen that what has been presented
here can very well be brought into conformity with the explanation commonly given of sin, namely, that it is selfishness. But when someone becomes absorbed in this qualification, he does not undertake at all to explain the preceding
psychological difficulty. Furthermore, this also defines sin too
pneumatically, and it is not adequately observed that by being
introduced, sin posits just as much a sensuous as a spiritual
consequence.
Although in the newer science 44 sin has so often been explained as selfishness, it is incomprehensible that it has not
been recognized that precisely here lies the difficulty of finding a place for its explanation in any science. For selfishness is
precisely the particular, and what this signifies only the single
individual can know as the single individual, because when it
is viewed under universal categories it may signify everything
in such a way that it signifies nothing at all. The definition of
sin as selfishness may therefore be quite correct, especially

IV
346

78

IV
347

The Concept of Anxiety

when at the same time it is held that scientifically It IS so
empty of content that it signifies nothing at all. Finally, in the
definition of sin as selfishness, no account is taken of the distinction between sin and hereditary sin, nor of the sense in
which the one explains the other, sin explaining hereditary sin
and hereditary sin explaining sin.
As soon as one wants to speak scientifically about this
selfishness, everything is dissolved into tautology, or one becomes clever and everything becomes confused. Who can
forget that natural philosophy found selfishness in all creation, found it in the movement of the stars that nevertheless
are bound in obedience to the laws of the universe, found that
the centrifugal force in nature is selfishness. If a concept is
brought that far, it might just as well lie down and, if possible, sleep off its drunkenness and become sober again. In this
respect, our age has been untiring in its efforts to make everything signify all things. Has it not often been seen how cleverly and doggedly some clever mystagogue4S prostituted a
whole mythology so that by his falcon eye every particular
myth might become a whim for his jew's-harp? Cannot at
times an entire Christian terminology be seen to degenerate
into ruin by some pretentious speculator's treatment?
If a person does not first make clear to himself the meaning
of "self," it is of no use to say of sin that it is selfishness. But
"self" signifies precisely the contradiction of positing the
universal as the particular. Only when the concept of the particular is given can there be any talk of selfishness; however,
although there have lived countless millions of such "selves,"
no science can say what the self is without again stating it
quite generally. It And this is the wonder oflife, that each man
• This is well worth further consideration, for precisely at this point it
must become apparent to what extent the recent principle that thought and
being are one is adequate, if on the one hand a person does not impair it with
untimely and partly foolish misunderstandings, and if on the other hand he
does not wish to have a highest principle that commits him to thoughtlessness. Only the universal is by the fact that it is thought and can be thought
(not merely in imaginative constructing, for what cannot be thought!) and is
as that which can be thought. The point about the particular is precisely its
negative relation to the universal and its repellent relation to it. But as soon as

Anxiety as Explaining Hereditary Sin Progressively

79

who is mindful of himself knows what no science knows,
since he knows who he himself is, and this is the profundity
of the Greek saying yvr091 crsau't6v [know yourself],· which
too long has been understood in the German way as pure
self-consciousness, the airiness of idealism. 46 It is about time
to seek to understand it in the Greek way, and then again as
the Greeks would have understood it if they had possessed
Christian presuppositions. However, the real "self" is posited only by the qualitative leap. In the prior state there can be
no question about it. Therefore, when sin is explained by
selfishness, one becomes entangled in indistinctness, because,
on the contrary, it is by sin and in sin that selfishness comes
into being. If selfishness is supposed to have been the occasion
for Adam's sin, the, explanation becomes a game in which the
interpreter finds what he himself first has hidden. If it is to be
said that selfishness brought about Adam's sin, one has leaped
over the intermediate state and the explanation has acquired a
suspicious ease. Moreover, it gives us no knowledge of the
significance of the sexual. Here I am back to myoId point.
Sexuality is not sinfulness. However, to speak foolishly for a
moment and by way of accommodation, let us suppose that
Adam had not sinned: then the sexual would never have come
into being as a drive. A perfect spirit cannot be conceived as
sexually qualified. This is also in accord with the teaching of
the Church about the nature of the Resurrection,47 in accord
with its representation of angels,48 and in accord with the
dogmatic definitions with respect to the person of Christ. 49
Just by way of suggestion, while it is said that Christ was
a person thinks the particular away it is canceled, and as soon as it is thought,
it is altered. Therefore, either he does not think the particular but only imagines that he thinks it, or he thinks it and merely imagines that it is included in
thought.
• The Latin saying unum noris omnes [if you know one, you know all]50
light-mindedly expresses the same and actually expresses the same, if by
unum is understood the observer himself, and one does not inquisitively look
for an omnes but eamesdy holds fast to the one that actually is all. Men generally do not believe this and even think that it is too proud; the reason is that
they are rather too cowardly and comfortably inclined to venture to understand and to acquire understanding of true pride.

IV

348

80

IV
349

The Concept of Anxiety

tried in all human ordeals, there is no mention of a temptation
in this respect, which has its explanation precisely in that he
withstood all temptations.
Sensuousness is not sinfulness. Sensuousness in innocence
is not sinfulness; nevertheless, sensuousness is there. Adam of
course needed food, drink, etc. The generic difference is posited in innocence, but it is not posited as such. Only at the
moment that sin is posited is the generic difference posited as
a drive.
Here, as everywhere, I must decline every misunderstood
conclusion, as if, for instance, the true task should now be to
abstract from the sexual, i.e., in an outward sense to annihilate it. When the sexual is once posited as the extreme point of
the synthesis, all abstraction is of no avail. The task, of
course, is to bring it under the qualification of the spirit (here
lie all the moral problems of the erotic). The realization of this
is the viCtory oflove in a person in whom the spirit is so victorious that the sexual is forgotten, and recollected only in
forgetfulness. When this has come about, sensuousness is
transfigured in spirit and anxiety is driven out.
If this view, whether called Christian or called by any other
name, is compared with -the Greek view, then I believe that
more has been gained than lost. Doubtless something of the
plaintive, erotic Heiterkeit [cheerfulness ]51 has been lost. But
something has also been gained, namely, a qualification of
spirit unknown to Greek culture. The only ones who truly
lose are the many who constantly live on as if it were 6,000
years since sin entered into the world, as if it were a curiosity
that did not concern them. They do not gain the Greek
Heiterkeit, which precisely cannot be won but can only be lost,
nor do they gain the eternal qualification of spirit. 52

III

IV
350

Anxiety as the Consequence of that Sin
which Is Absence of
the Consciousness of Sin
In the two previous chapters, it was maintained continually
that man is a synthesis of psyche and body that is constituted
and sustained by spirit. In the individual life, anxiety is the
moment-to use a new expression that says the same as was
said in the previous discussion, but that also points toward
that which follows.
In recent philosophy there is a category that is continually
used in logical no less than in historical-philosophical inquiries. It is the category of transition.! However, no further
explanation is given. The term is freely used without any ado,
and while Hegel and the Hegelian school startled the world
with the great insight of the presuppositionless beginning of
philosophy, or the thought that before philosophy there must
be nothing but the most complete absence of presuppositions,
there is no embarrassment at all over the use in Hegelian
thought of the terms "transition," "negation," "mediation,"
i.e., the principles of motion, in such a way that they do not
find their place in the systematic progression. If this is not a
presupposition, I do not know what a presupposition is. For
to use something that is nowhere explained is indeed to presuppose it. The system is supposed to have such marvelous
transparency and inner vision that in the manner of the omphalopsychoi [navel souls F it would gaze immovably at the
central nothing 3 until at last everything would explain itself
and its whole content would come into being by itself. Such
introverted openness to the public was to characterize the system. Nevertheless, this is not the case, because systematic
thought seems to pay homage to secretiveness with respect to

IV
351

82

IV
.152

IV
352

The Concept I?f Anxiety

its innermost movements. Negation, transition, mediation
are three disguised, suspicious, and secret agents (agentia
[main springs]) that bring about all movements. Hegel would
hardly call them presumptuous, because it is with his gracious
permission that they carryon their ploy so unembarrassedly
that even logic uses terms and phrases borrowed from transition in time: "thereupon," "when," "as being it is this," "as
becoming it is this," etc.
Let this be as it may. Let logic take care to help itself. The
term "transition" is and remains a clever turn in logic. Transition belongs in the sphere of historical freedom, for transition
is a state and it is actual." Plato fully recognized the difficulty
of placing transition in the realm of the purely metaphysical,
and for that reason the category of the moment.... cost him so
much effort. To ignore the difficulty certainly is not to "go
.. Therefore, when Aristotle says that the transition from possibility to actuality is a ICivllcr~ Imovementj,4 it is not to be understood logically but with
reference to historical freedom .
.... Plato conceives of the moment as purely abstract. In order to become
acquainted with its dialectic, one should keep in mind that the moment is
non-being under the category of time. Non-being (to I'l'J /'Iv; tOlCEv6v [that
which is not; the emptyj5 of the Pythagoreans) occupied the interest of ancient philosophers more than it does modem philosophers. Among the Eleatics, non-being was conceived ontologically in such a way that what was
affirmed about it could be stated only in the contradictory proposition that
only being is. If one pursues this further, he will see that it reappears in all the
spheres. In metaphysical propaedeutics, the proposition was expressed thus:
He who expresses non-being says nothing at all (this misunderstanding is refuted in The Sophist,6 and in a more mimical way it was refuted in an earlier
dialogue, Gor;giaS).7 Finally, in the practical spheres the Sophists used nonbeing as a means to do away with all moral concepts; non-being is not, er;go
everything is true, er;go everything is good, er;go deceit etc. are not. This position is refuted by Socrates in several dialogues. Plato dealt with it especially in
The Sophist, which like all of his dialogues at the same time artistically illustrates what it also teaches, for the Sophist, whose concept and defmition the
dialogue seeks while it deals principally with non-being, is himself a nonbeing. Thus the concept and the example come into being at the same time in
the warfare in which the Sophist is attacked, and which ends not with his
annihilation but with his coming into being [bliver til], which is the worst
thing that can happen to him, for despite his sophistry, which like the armor
ofMars 8 enables him to become invisible, he must come forth into the light.
Recent philosophy has not essentially come any further in its conception of

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

83

further" than Plato. To ignore it, and thus piously to deceive
thought in order to get speculation afloat and the movement
in logic going, is to treat speculation as a rather finite affair.
However, I remember once having heard a speculator9 say
that one must not give undue thought to the difficulties beforenon-being, even though it presumes to be Christian. Greek philosophy and
the modern alike maintain that everything turns on bringing non-being into
being, for to do away with it or to make it vanish seems extremely easy. The
Christian view takes the position that non-being is present everywhere as the
nothing from which things were created, as semblance and vanity, as sin, as
sensuousness removed from spirit, as the temporal forgotten by the eternal;
consequently, the task is to do away with it in order to bring forth being.
Only with this orientation in mind can the concept of Atonement be correctly understood historically, that is, in the sense in which Christianity
brought it into the world. If the term is understood in the opposite sense (the
movement proceeding from the assumption that non-being is not), the
Atonement is volatilized and turned inside out.
It is in Pannenides that Plato sets forth "the moment." This dialogue is engaged in pointing out contradictions within the concepts themselves, something that Socrates expressed in so decisive a way, that while it does not serve
to put to shame the beautiful old Greek philosophy, it may well put to shame
a more recent boastful philosophy, which unlike the Greek does not make
great demands upon itself but upon men and their admiration. Socrates
points out that there is nothing wonderful about being able to demonstrate
contrariety (to tvavtiov) of a particular thing participating in diversity, but if
anyone were able to show contradictions in the concepts themselves, that
would be something to admire (QU' &i (, tattV fv, auto tOUtO ItOAAa
Qlto&t!;&t lCai a~ ta ltoUa Iii! fv, tOUtO 1\1il] 9aulLclO"0lLat. lCai 1t&pi tCbv
dAA.o>V ciltclvtmV mo-autm<; [But if anyone can prove that what is simply unity
itself is many or that plurality itself is one, then I shall begin to be surprised]
129 B C).
The procedure is that of an imaginatively constructing dialectic. to It is assumed both that the one (to fv) is and that is not, and then the consequences for it and for the rest are pointed out. As a result, the moment appears to be this strange entity (litoltov [that which has no place ],11 the Greek
word is especially appropriate) that lies between motion and rest without occupying any time, and into this and out from this that which is in motion
changes into rest, and that which is at rest changes into motion. Thus the
moment becomes the category of transition (IL&ta60A iJ), for Plato shows in
the same way that the moment is related to the transition of the one to the
many, of the many to the one, oflikeness to unlikeness, etc., and that it is the
moment in which there is neither fv [one] nor ltoA.M [many], neither a being
determined nor a being combined (OUt& IitalCpiv&tat OUt& ~UY1Cpiv&tat,12

IV
353
IV
354

IV
353

84

The Concept of Anxiety

hand, because then one never arrives at the point where he can
speculate. If the important thing is to get to the point where
one can begin to speculate, and not that one's speculation in
fact becomes true speculation, it is indeed resolutely said that
the important thing is to get the point of speculating, just as it
is praiseworthy for a man who has no means of riding to Deer
Park in his own carriage to say: One must not trouble himself
about such things, because he can just as well ride a coffee
grinder. 13 This, of course, is the case. Both riders hope to arrive at Deer Park. On the other hand, the man who firmly
resolves not to trouble himself about the means of con-

IV
353

IV
354

§157 A). Plato deserves credit for having clarified the difficulty; yet the moment remains a silent atomistic abstraction, which, however, is not explained
by ignoring it. Now iflogic would be willing to state that it does not have the
category of transition (and if it does have this category, it must find a place
for it within the system itself, although in fact it also operates in the system),
it will become clearer that the historical spheres and all the knowledge that
rests on a historical presupposition have the moment. This category is of utmost importance in maintaining the distinction between Christianity and
pagan philosophy, as well as the equally pagan speculation in Christianity.
Another passage in the dialogue Parmenides points out the consequence of
treating the moment as such an abstraction. It shows how, if the one is assumed to have the determination of time, the contradiction appears that the
one (,to fv) becomes older and younger than itself and the many (ta ltoA.A.a),
and then again neither younger nor older than itself or the many (§151 E).
The one must nevertheless be, so it is said, and then "to be" is defined as follows: Participation in an essence or a nature in the present time14 (to at dval
1iA.A.o ti tcrn ij ji£9&~l~ oo<ri~ II£ta Xpovou toO 7tIlpOvt~, §151 E). In the
further development of the contradictions [§152 B C], it appears that the
present (to vUv) vacillates between meaning the present, the eternal, and the
moment. This "now" (to vUv) lies between "was" and "will become," and
naturally "the one" cannot, in passing from the past to the future, bypass this
"now." It comes to a halt in the now, does not become older but is older. In
the most recent philosophy,15 abstraction culminates in pure being, but pure
being is the most abstract expression for eternity, and again as "nothing" it is
precisely the moment. Here again the importance of the moment becomes
apparent, because only with this category is it possible to give eternity its
proper significance, for eternity and the moment become the extreme opposites, whereas dialectical sorcery, on the other hand, makes eternity and the
moment signify the same thing. It is only with Christianity that sensuousness, temporality, and the moment can be properly understood, because only
with Christianity does eternity become essential.

Anxiety as the Consequence oj Sin

85

veyance, just as long as he can get to the point where he can
speculate, will hardly reach speculation.
In the sphere of historical freedom, transition is a state.
However, in order to understand this correctly, one must not
forget that the new is brought about through the leap. If this
is not maintained, the transition will have a quantitative preponderance over the elasticity of the leap.
Man, then, is a synthesis of psyche and body, but he is also
a synthesis oj the temporal and the eternal. That this often has
been stated, I do not object to at all, for it is not my wish to
discover something new, but rather it is my joy and dearest
occupation to ponder over that which is quite simple. 16
As for the latter synthesis, it is immediately striking that it
is formed differently from the former. In the former, the two
factors are psyche and body, and spirit is the third, yet in such
a way that one can speak of a synthesis only when spirit is
posited. The latter synthesis has only two factors, the temporal and the eternal. Where is the third factor? And if there is
no third factor, there really is no synthesis, for a synthesis that
is a contradiction cannot be completed as a synthesis without
a third factor, because the fact that the synthesis is a contradiction asserts that it is not. What, then, is the temporal?
If time is correctly defined as an infinite succession,17 it
most likely is also defined as the present, the past, and the future. This distinction, however, is incorrect if it is considered
to be implicit in time itself, because the distinction appears
only through the relation of time to eternity and through the
reflection of eternity in time. If in the infinite succession of
time a foothold could be found, i.e., a present, which was the
dividing point, the division would be quite correct. However, precisely because every moment, as well as the sum of
the moments, is a process (a passing by), no moment is a
present, and accordingly there is in time neither present, nor
past, nor future. If it is claimed that this division can be maintained, it is because the moment is spatialized, but thereby the
infinite succession comes to a halt, it is because representation
i., introduced that allows time to be represented instead of
being thought. Even so, this is not correct procedure, for

IV

.155

86

IV
356

The Concept of Anxiety

even as representation, the infinite succession of time is an infinitely con tentless present (this is the parody of the eternal).
The Hindus 18 speak of a line of kings that has ruled for 70,000
years. Nothing is known about the kings, not even their
names (this I assume). If we take this as an example of time,
the 70,000 years are for thought an infinite vanishing; in representation it is expanded and is spatialized into an illusionary
view of an infmite, contentless nothing." As soon as the one is
regarded as succeeding the other, the present is posited.
The present, however, is not a concept of time, except precisely as something infmitely contentless, which again is the
infinite vanishing. If this is not kept in mind, no matter how
quickly it may disappear, the present is posited, and being
posited it again appears in the categories: the past and the future.
The eternal, on the contrary, is the present. For thought, the
eternal is the present in terms of an annulled succession (time
is the succession that passes by). For representation, it is a
going forth that nevertheless does not get off the spot, because the eternal is for representation the infinitely contentful
present. So also in the eternal there is no division into the past
and the future, because the present is posited as the annulled
succession.
Time is, then, infmite succession; the life that is in time and
is only of time has no present. In order to define the sensuous
life, it is usually said that it is in the moment19 and only in the
moment. By the moment, then, is understood that abstraction from the eternal that, if it is to be the present, is a parody
of it. The present is the eternal, or rather, the eternal is the
present, and the present is full. In this sense the Latin said of
the deity that he is praesens (praesentes dii [the presence of the
gods]),20 by which expression, when used about the deity,
he also signified the powerful assistance of the deity.
• Incidentally, this is space. The skillful reader will no doubt see herein the
proof of the correctness of my presentation, because for abstract thought,
time and space are entirely identical (nacheinander, nebeneinander) , and become
so for representation, and are truly so in the definition of God as omnipresent.

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

87

The moment signifies the present as that which has no past
and no future, and precisely in this lies the imperfection of the
sensuous life. The eternal also signifies the present as that
which has no past and no future, and this is the perfection of
the eternal.
If at this point one wants to use the moment to define time
and let the moment signify the purely abstract exclusion of
the past and the future and as such the present, then the moment is precisely not the present, because the intermediary between the past and the future, purely abstractly conceived, is
not at all. Thus it is seen that the moment is not a determination of time, because the determination of time is that it
"passes by." For this reason time, if it is to be defined by any
of the determinations revealed in time itself, is time past. If,
on the contrary, time and eternity touch each other, then it
must be in time, and now we have come to the moment.
"The moment" is a figurative expression,21 and therefore it
is not easy to deal with. However, it is a beautiful word to
consider. Nothing is as swift as a blink of the eye, and yet it is
commensurable with the content of the eternal. Thus when
Ingeborg 22 looks out over the sea after Frithiof, this is a picture of what is expressed in the figurative word. An outburst
of her emotion, a sigh or a word, already has as a sound more
of the determination of time and is more present as something
that is vanishing and does not have in it so much of the presence of the eternal. For this reason a sigh, a word, etc. have
power to relieve the soul of the burdensome weight, precisely
because the burden, when merely expressed, already begins
to become something of the past. A blink is therefore a designation of time, but mark well, of time in the fateful conflict
when it is touched by eternity." What we call the moment,
• It is remarkable that Greek art culminates in the plastic, which precisely
lacks the glance. This, however, has its deep source in the fact that the Greeks
did not in the profoundest sense grasp the concept of spirit and therefore did
not in the deepest sense comprehend sensuousness and temporality. What a
striking contrast to Christianity, in which God is pictorially represented as an
eye.

IV
357

88

IV
358

The Concept oj Anxiety

Plato calls 'to e~(li<pvl1<; [the sudden]. Whatever its etymological explanation, it is related to the category of the invisible,
because time and eternity were conceived equally abstractly,
because the concept of temporality was lacking, and this again
was due to the lack of the concept of spirit. The Latin term is
momentum (from movere [to move]), which by derivation expresses the merely vanishing. IIThus understood, the moment is not properly an atom of
time but an atom of eternity. It is the first reflection of eternity in time, its first attempt, as it were, at stopping time. For
this reason, Greek culture did not comprehend the moment,
and even if it had comprehended the atom of eternity, it did
not comprehend that it was the moment, did not define it
with a forward direction but with a backward direction. Because for Greek culture the atom of eternity was essentially
eternity, neither time nor eternity received what was properly
its due.
The synthesis of the temporal and the eternal is not another
synthesis but is the expression for the first synthesis, according to which man is a synthesis of psyche and body that is
sustained by spirit. As soon as the spirit is posited, the moment is present. Therefore one may rightly say reproachfully
of man that he lives only in the moment, because that comes
• In the New Testament there is a poetic paraphrase of the moment.
Paup3 says the world will pass away in a moment, tv ch6j.1q> Kai tv pmfj
6<p9aJ..j.1oii [in the twinkling of an eye). By this he also expresses that the
moment is commensurable with eternity, precisely because the moment of
destruction expresses eternity at the same moment. Permit me to illustrate
what I mean, and forgive me if anyone should find the analogy offensive.
Once here in Copenhagen there were two actors who probably never
thought that their performance could have a deeper significance. They
stepped forth onto the stage, placed themselves opposite each other, and then
began the mimical representation of one or another passionate conflict. When
the mimical act was in full swing and the spectators' eyes followed the story
with expectation of what was to follow, they suddenly stopped and remained
motionless as though petrified in the mimical expression of the moment. The
effect of this can be exceedingly comical, for the moment in an accidental way
becomes commensurable with the eternal. The plastic effect is due to the fact
that the eternal expression is expressed eternally; the comic effect, on the
other hand, consists in the eternalization of the accidental expression.

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

89

to pass by an arbitrary abstraction. Nature does not lie in the
moment.
It is with temporality as it is with sensuousness, for temporality seems still more imperfect and the moment still more
insignificant than nature's apparently secure endurance in
time. However, the contrary is the case. Nature's security has
its source in the fact that time has no significance at all for nature. 24 Only with the moment does history begin. By sin,
man's sensuousness is posited as sinfulness and is therefore
lower than that of the beast, and yet this is because it is here
that the higher begins, for at this point spirit begins.
The moment is that ambiguity in which time and eternity
touch each other, and with this the concept of temporality is
posited, whereby time constantly intersects eternity and eternity constantly pervades time. As a result, the above-mentioned division acquires its significance: the present time,
the past time, the future time.
By this division, attention is immediately drawn to the fact
that the future in a certain sense signifies more than the present and the past, because in a certain sense the future is the
whole of which the past is a part, and the future can in a certain sense signify the whole. This is because the eternal first
signifies the future or because the future is the incognito in
which the eternal, even though it is incommensurable with
time, nevertheless preserves its association with time. Linguistic usage at times also takes the future as identical with the
eternal (the future life-the eternal life). In a deeper sense, the
Greeks did not have the concept of the eternal; so neither did
they have the concept of the future. Therefore Greek life cannot be reproached for being lost in the moment, or more correctly, it cannot even be said that it was lost, for temporality
was conceived by the Greeks just as naively as sensuousness,
because they lacked the category of spirit.
The moment and the future in turn posit the past. If Greek
life in any way denotes any qualification of time, it is past
time. However, past time is not defined in its relation to the
present and the future but as a qualification of time in general,
as a passing by. Here the significance of the Platonic "recol-

IV
359

90
IV
360

IV

.361
IV
360

The Concept of Anxiety

lection"25 is obvious. For the Greeks, the eternal lies behind as
the past that can only be entered backwards." However, the
eternal thought of as the past is an altogether abstract concept,
whether the eternal is further defined philosophically (a philosophical dying away)26 or historically.
On the whole, in defming the concepts of the past, the future, and the eternal, it can be seen how the moment is defined. If there is no moment, the eternal appears behind as the
past. It is as when I imagine a man walking along a road but
do not posit the step, and so the road appears behind him as
the distance covered. If the moment is posited but merely as a
discrimen [division), then the future is the eternal. If the moment is posited, so is the eternal, but also the future, which
reappears as the past. This is clearly seen in the Greek, the
Jewish, and the Christian views. The pivotal concept in
Christianity, that which made all things new, is the fullness of
time,27 but the fullness of time is the moment as the eternal,
and yet this eternal is also the future and the past. If attention
is not paid to this, not a single concept can be saved from a
heretical and treasonable admixture that annihilates the concept. One does not get the past by itself but in a simple continuity with the future (with this the concepts of conversion,
atonement, and redemption are lost in the world-historical
significance and lost in the individual historical development).
The future is not by itself but in a simple continuity with the
present (thereby the concepts of resurrection and judgment
are destroyed).
Let us now consider Adam and also remember that every
subsequent individual begins in the very same way, but
within the quantitative difference that is the consequence of
the relationship of generation and the historical relationship.
Thus the moment is there for Adam as well as for every subsequent individual. The synthesis of the psychical and the
physicaP8 is to be posited by spirit; but spirit is eternal, and
the synthesis is, therefore, only when spirit posits the first
synthesis along with the second synthesis of the temporal and
• Here the category that I maintain should be kept in mind, namely, repetition, by which eternity is entered forwards.

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

91

the eternal. As long as the eternal is not introduced, the moment is not, or is only a discrimen [boundary]. Because in innocence spirit is qualified only as dreaming spirit, the eternal
appears as the future, for this is, as has been said, the first expression of the eternal, and its incognito. Just as (in the previous chapter) the spirit, when it is about to be posited in the
synthesis, or, more correctly, when it is about to posit the
synthesis as the spirit's (freedom's) possibility in the individuality, expresses itself as anxiety, so here the future in turn is
the eternal's (freedom's) possibility in the individuality expressed as anxiety. As freedom's possibility manifests itself
for freedom, freedom succumbs, and temporality emerges in
the same way as sensuousness in its significance as sinfulness.
Here again I repeat that this is only the final psychological expression for the final psychological approximation to the
qualitative leap. The difference between Adam and the subsequent individual is that for the latter the future is reflected
more than for Adam. Psychologically speaking, this more
may signify what is appalling, but in terms of the qualitative
leap it signifies the nonessential. The highest difference in relation to Adam is that the future seems to be anticipated by
the past or by the anxiety that the possibility is lost before it
has been.
The possible corresponds exactly to the future. For freedom, the possible is the future, and the future is for time the
possible. To both of these corresponds anxiety in the individuallife. An accurate and correct linguistic usage 29 therefore
associates anxiety and the future. When it is sometimes said
that one is anxious about the past, this seems to be a contradiction of this usage. However, to a more careful examination, it appears that this is only a manner of speaking and that
the future in one way or another manifests itself. The past
about which I am supposed to be anxious must stand in a relation of possibility to me. If I am anxious about a past misfortune, then this is not because it is in the past but because it
may be repeated, i.e., become future. IfI am anxious because
of a past offense, it is because I have not placed it in an essential relation to myself as past and have in some deceitful way

92

IV
362

IV
363

The Concept of Anxiety

or another prevented it from being past. If indeed it is actually
past, then I cannot be anxious but only repentant. If I do not
repent, I have allowed myself to make my relation to the offense dialectical, and by this the offense itself has become a
possibility and not something past. If I am anxious about the
punishment, it is only because this has been placed in a dialectical relation to the offense (otherwise I suffer my punishment), and then I am anxious for the possible and the future.
Thus we have returned to where we were in Chapter I.
Anxiety is the psychological state that precedes sin. It approaches sin as closely as possible, as anxiously as possible,
but without explaining sin, which breaks forth only in the
qualitative leap.
The moment sin is posited, temporality is sinfulness." We
• From the determination of the temporal as sinfulness, death in tum follows as punishment. This is a progression, with the analogue, si placet [ifone
wishes I, that even in relation to the external phenomenon, death declares itself more terrible the more perfect the organism is. Thus while the death and
decay of a plant spread a fragrance almost more pleasing than its spring
breath, the decay of an animal infects the air. It is true in a deeper sense that
the higher man is valued, the more terrifying is death. The beast does not
really die, but when the spirit is posited as spirit, death shows itself as the
terrifying. The anxiety of death therefore corresponds to the anxiety of birth,
yet I do not wish to repeat here what has been said, partly truly and pardy
cleverly, partly enthusiastically and partly frivolously, that death is a
metamorphosis. At the moment of death, man finds himself at the uttermost
point of the synthesis. It is as though spirit cannot be present, for it cannot
die, and yet it must wait, because the body must die. Because the pagan view
of sensuousness was more naive, its temporality more carefree, so the pagan
view of death was milder and more -attractive, but it lacked the ultimate. In
reading the beautiful essay of Lessing30 on the representation of death in classical art, one cannot deny being sadly and pleasurably moved by the picture
of this sleeping genius or by seeing the beautiful solemnity with which the
genius of death bows his head and extinguishes the torch. There is, if you
will, something indescribably persuasive and alluring in trusting oneself to
such a guide who is as conciliatory as a recollection in which nothing is recollected. On the other hand, there is something sinister in following this silent
guide, because he does not conceal anything. His form is no incognito. Just as
he is, so is death,31 and with that, everything is over. There is an incomprehensible sadness in seeing this genius with his friendly figure bend down
over the dying and with the breath of his last kiss extinguish the last spark of
life, while all that was experienced has already vanished little by little, and

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

93

do not say that temporality is sinfulness any more than that
sensuousness is sinfulness, but rather that when sin is posited,
temporality signifies sinfulness. Therefore he sins who lives
only in the moment as abstracted from the eternal. But to
speak foolishly and by way of accommodation, had Adam
not sinned, he would in the same moment have passed over
into eternity. On the other hand, as soon as sin is posited, it is
of no help to wish to abstract from the temporal any more
than from the sensuous. *32

IV
363

§1.
THE ANXIETY OF SPIRITLESSNESS

IV
363

A person who observes life will soon convince himself that
what has been set forth here is correct, namely, that anxiety is
the final psychological state from which sin breaks forth in
the qualitative leap. Nevertheless, the whole of paganism and
its repetition within Christianity lie in a merely quantitative
determination from which the qualitative leap of sin does not
break forth. This state, however, is not the state of innocence;
rather, viewed from the standpoint of spirit, it is precisely
that of sinfulness.
It is quite remarkable that Christian orthodoxy has always
taught that paganism lay in sin, while the consciousness of sin
was first posited by Christianity. Orthodoxy, however, is
correct when it explains itself more precisely. By quantitative
determinations, paganism stretches out time, as it were, and
never arrives at sin in the deepest sense, yet this is precisely
sm.
It is easy to show that this is the case in paganism. 33 But in
death remains as that which, itself unexplained, explains that the whole oflife
was a game that came to an end, and in which everyone, the greatest and well
as the least, made their departures like school children, 34 extinguished like
sparks of burning paper, and last of all the soul itself as the schoolmaster. And
so there is also a muteness of annihilation found in the fact that the whole was
merely a children's game, and now the game is over.
* What has been set forth here could just as well have been dealt with in
Chapter I. However, I wished to deal with it here because it leads to what
follows.

IV
364

IV
363

94

The Concept of Anxiety

the case of paganism within Christianity, it is a different matter. The life of Christian paganism is neither guilty nor not
guilty. It really knows no distinction between the present, the
past, the future, and the eternal. Its life and its history go on
crabbedly like the writing in ancient manuscripts, without
any punctuation marks, one word, one sentence after the
other. From an esthetic point of view, this is very comical, for
while it is beautiful to listen to a brook running murmuring
through life, it is nevertheless comical that a sum of rational
creatures is transformed into a perpetual muttering without
meaning. Whether philosophy can use this plebs [multitude]
as a category by making it a substratum for the greater,just as
vegetative sludge gradually becomes solid earth, first peat and
so on, I do not know. Viewed from the standpoint of spirit,
such an existence is sin, and the least one can do is to state this
and demand spirit from it.
What has been set forth here does not apply to paganism.
Such an existence can be found only within Christianity. The
reason for this is that the higher that spirit is posited, the more
profound the exclusion appears, and the higher that is which
is lost, the more wretched in their contentment are ot
a.1tTlA:YTl1C6t~C; [those who are past feeling] (Eph. 4: 19). If the
bliss of this spiritlessness is compared with the state of slaves
in paganism, then there is after all some sense in slavery, because it is nothing in itself. On the other hand, the lostness of
spiritlessness is the most terrible of all, because the misfortune
is precisely that spiritlessness has a relation to spirit, which is
nothing. To a certain degree, spiritlessness may therefore
possess the whole content of spirit, but mark well, not as
spirit but as the haunting of ghosts, as gibberish, as a slogan,
etc. It may possess the truth, but mark well, not as truth but
as rumor and old wives' tales. Esthetically viewed, this is the
profoundly comical in spiritlessness, something that is not
generally noticed, because the actor himself is more or less insecure with regard to spirit. So when spiritlessness is to be
represented, mere twaddle is simply put into the mouth of the
actor, because no one has the courage to put into the mouth of
spiritlessness the same words one uses oneself. This is insecu-

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

95

rity. Spiritlessness can say exactly the same thing that the
richest spirit has said, but it does not say it by virtue of spirit.
Man qualified as spiritless has become a talking machine, and
there is nothing to prevent him from repeating by rote a philosophical rigmarole, a confession offaith, or a political recitative. Is it not remarkable that the only ironist and the greatest
humorist 35 joined forces in saying what seems the simplest of
all, namely, that a person must distinguish between what he
understands and what he does not understand? And what can
prevent the most spiritless man from repeating the same thing
verbatim? There is only one proof of spirit,36 and that is the
spirit's proof within oneself. Whoever demands something
else may get proofs in superabundance, but he is already characterized as spiritless.
In spiritlessness there is no anxiety, because it is too happy,
too content, and too spiritless for that. But this is a very lamentable reason, and paganism differs from spiritlessness in
that the former is qualified toward spirit and the latter away
from spirit. Paganism is, if! may say so, the absence of spirit,
and thus quite different from spiritlessness. To that extent,
paganism is much to be preferred. Spiritlessness is the stagnation of spirit and the caricature of ideality. Spiritlessness,
therefore, is not dumb when it comes to repetition by rote,
but it is dumb in the sense in which salt is said to be so. If the
salt becomes dumb, with what shall it be salted?37 The lostness of spiritlessness, as well as its security, consists in its understanding nothing spiritually and comprehending nothing
as a task, even if it is able to fumble after everything with its
limp clamminess. If on a particular occasion spiritlessness is
touched by spirit and for a moment begins to twitch like a
galvanized frog, a phenomenon occurs that corresponds perfectly to pagan fetishism. For spiritlessness there is no authority, because it knows indeed that for spirit there is no authority; however, since it unfortunately is not spirit, despite its
knowledge, it is a perfect idol worshipper. It worships a
dunce and a hero 38 with equal veneration, but above anything
else its real fetish is a charlatan.
Even though there is no anxiety in spiritlessness, because it

%
IV
366

IV
366

The Concept of Anxiety

is excluded as is spirit, anxiety is nevertheless present, except
that it is waiting. It is conceivable that a debtor may be fortunate enough to slip away from a creditor and hold him off
with talk, but there is a creditor who never came off badly,
namely, spirit. Viewed from the standpoint of spirit, anxiety
is also present in spiritlessness, but it is hidden and disguised.
Even observation shudders at the sight of it, because just as
the figure of anxiety-if the imagination is allowed to form
such a figure-is appalling and terrifying to look at, so the
figure will terrify still more when it finds it necessary to disguise itself in order not to appear as what it is, even though it
nevertheless is what it is. When death appears in its true form
as the lean and dismal reaper, one does not look at it without
terror; however, when it appears disguised in order to mock
the men who fancy they can mock death, when the observer
sees that the unknown figure who captivates all by his courtesy and causes all to exult in the wild gaiety of desires is
death, then he is seized by a profound terror.
§2.
ANXIETY DEFINED DIALECTICALLY AS FATE

It is usually said of paganism that it lies in sin; perhaps it
might be more correct to say that it lies in anxiety. Paganism
on the whole is sensuousness, but it is a sensuousness that has
a relation to spirit, although spirit is not in the deepest sense
posited as spirit. Yet this possibility is precisely anxiety.
If we ask more particularly what the object of anxiety is,
then the answer, here as elsewhere, must be that it is nothing.
Anxiety and nothing always correspond to each other. As
soon as the actuality of freedom and of spirit is posited, anxiety is canceled. But what then does the nothing of anxiety
signify more particularly in paganism? This is fate.
Fate is a relation to spirit as external. It is a relation between
spirit and something else that is not spirit and to which fate
nevertheless stands in a spiritual relation. Fate may also signify exactly the opposite, because it is the unity of necessity
and the accidental. This is something to which we have not

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

97

fatum 39 (which is characterized differently in the Oriental con-

always paid attention. People have talked about the pagan

ception and in the Greek) as if it were necessity. A vestige of
this necessity has been permitted to remain in the Christian
view, in which it came to signify fate, i.e., the accidental, that
which is incommensurable with providence. However, this is
not the case, for fate is precisely the unity of necessity and the
accidental. This is ingeniously expressed in the saying, fate is
blind, for he who walks forward blindly walks as much by
necessity as by accident. A necessity that is not conscious of
itself is eo ipso the accidental in relation to the next moment.
Fate, then, is the nothing of anxiety. It is nothing because as
soon as spirit is posited, anxiety is canceled, but so also is fate,
for thereby providence is also posited. Therefore what Paul
said about the idol 40 may be said of fate: there is no idol in the
world; nevertheless, the idol is the object of the pagan's religiousness.
Thus in fate the anxiety of the pagan has its object, its nothing. He cannot come into a relation to fate, because in the one
moment it is the necessary and in the next it is the accidental.
And yet he stands related to it, and this relation is anxiety.41
Nearer to fate than this, the pagan cannot come. The attempt
of paganism to do so was profound enough to shed a new
light upon fate. Whoever wants to explain fate must be just as
ambiguous as fate. And this the oracle was. However, the oracle in turn might signify the exact opposite. So the pagan's
relation to the oracle is again anxiety. Herein lies the profound and inexplicable tragicalness of paganism. However,
what is tragic does not lie in the ambiguity of the utterance of
the oracle but in the pagan's not daring to forbear taking
counsel with it. He stands in relation to it; he dares not fail to
consult it. Even in the moment of consultation, he stands in
an ambiguous relation to it (sympathetic and antipathetic).
And at this point he reflects on the oracle's explanations!
The concepts of guilt and sin in their deepest sense do not
emerge in paganism. If they had emerged, paganism would
have perished upon the contradiction that one became guilty
by fate. Precisely thi!l,is the greatest contradiction, and out of

IV

367

98

IV
368

The Concept of Anxiety

this contradiction Christianity breaks forth. Paganism does
not comprehend it because it is too light-minded in its determination of the concept of sin.
The concepts of sin and guilt posit precisely the single individual as the single individual. There is no question about his
relation to the whole world or to all the past. The point is
only that he is guilty, and yet he is supposed to have become
guilty by fate, consequently by all that of which there is no
question, and thereby he is supposed to have become something that precisely cancels the concept of fate, and this he is
supposed to have become by fate.
A misunderstanding of this contradiction will result in a
misunderstanding of the concept of hereditary sin; rightly
understood, it gives the true concept, in the sense that every
individual is both himself and the race, and the subsequent individual is not essentially different from the first. In the possibility of anxiety, freedom collapses, overcome by fate, and as
a result, freedom's actuality rises up with the explanation that
it became guilty. Anxiety at its most extreme point, where it
seems as if the individual has become guilty, is not as yet
guilt. So sin comes neither as a necessity nor as an accident,
and therefore providence corresponds to the concept of sin.
Within Christianity, the anxiety of paganism in relation to
sin is found wherever spirit is indeed present but is not essentially posited as spirit. The phenomenon appears most clearly
in a genius. Immediately considered, the genius is predominantly subjectivity. 42 At that point, he is not yet posited as
spirit, for as such he can be posited only by spirit. As "immediate," he can be spirit (herein lies the deception that gives
the appearance that his extraordinary talent is spirit posited by
spirit), but then spirit has something else outside itself that is
not spirit and is itself in an external relation to spirit. Therefore the genius continually discovers fate, and the more profound the genius, the more profound the discovery of fate.
To spiritlessness, this is naturally foolishness, but in actuality
it is greatness, because no man is born with the idea of providence, and those who think that one acquires it gradually
through education are greatly mistaken, although I do not

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

99

thereby deny the significance of education. The genius shows
his primitive strength precisely by his discovery offate, but in
turn he also shows his impotence. To the immediate spirit,
which the genius always is, except that he is an immediate
spirit sensu eminentiori [in the eminent sense I, fate is the limit.
Not until sin is reached is providence posited. Therefore the
genius has an enormous struggle to reach providence. If he
does not reach it, truly he becomes a subject for the study of
fate.
The genius is an omnipotent Ansich [in-itself]43 which as
such would rock the whole world. For the sake of order,
another figure appears along with him, namely, fate. Fate is
nothing. It is the genius himself who discovers it, and the
more profound the genius, the more profoundly he discovers
fate, because that figure is merely the anticipation of providence. If he continues to be merely a genius and turns outward, he will accomplish astonishing things; nevertheless, he
will always succumb to fate, if not outwardly, so that it is
tangible and visible to all, then inwardly. Therefore a
genius-existence is always like a fairy tale if in the deepest
sense the genius does not turn inward into himself. The genius is able to do all things, and yet he is dependent upon an
insignificance that no one comprehends, an insignificance
upon which the genius himself by his omnipotence bestows
omnipotent significance. Therefore a second lieutenant, if he
is a genius, is able to become an emperor and change the
world, so that there becomes one empire and one emperor.
But therefore, too, the army may be drawn up for battle, the
conditions for the battle be absolutely favorable, and yet in
the next moment wasted; a kingdom of heroes may plead that
the order for battle be given-but he cannot: he must wait for
the fourteenth ofJune. And why? Because that was the date of
the battle of Marengo. So all things may be in readiness, he
himself stands before the legions, waiting only for the sun to
rise in order to announce the time for the oration that will
electrify the soldiers, and the sun may rise more glorious than
ever, an impiring and inflaming sight for all, only not for
him, because the sun did not rise as glorious as this at Auster-

IV

369

100

IV
370

The Concept of Anxiety

litz, and only the sun of Austerlitz 44 gives victory and inspiration. Thus the inexplicable passion with which such a one
may often rage against an entirely insignificant man, when
otherwise he may show humanity and kindness even toward
his enemies. Yes, woe unto the man, woe unto the woman,
woe unto the innocent child, woe unto the beast of the field,
woe unto the bird whose flight, woe unto the tree whose
branch comes in his way at the moment he is to interpret his
omen. 45
The outward as such has no significance for the genius, and
therefore no one can understand him. Everything depends
upon how he himself understands it in the presence of his secret friend (fate). All may be lost; both the simplest and the
wisest men unite in admonishing him not to undertake the
fruitless venture. But the genius knows he is stronger than the
whole world, provided that at this point there is found no
doubtful commentary to the invisible writing by which he
reads the will of fate. If he reads it according to his wish, he
says with his omnipotent voice to the captain of the ship,
"Sail on, you carry Caesar and his fortune. "46 All may be
won, and in the very moment he receives the intelligence,
perhaps there is uttered a word along with it, the significance
of which no creature, not even God in heaven, understands
(for in a certain sense God in heaven does not understand the
genius), and with that the genius collapses in impotence.
Thus the genius is placed outside the universal. He is great
by reason of his belief in fate whether he conquers or falls, for
he conquers by himself and falls by himself, or rather, both
are by fate. Usually his greatness is admired only when he
conquers, and yet he is never greater than when he falls by his
own hand. This, of course, must be understood in the sense
that fate does not proclaim itself outwardly. When, however,
at the very moment that, humanly speaking, all is won, he
discovers the doubtful writing and then collapses, one might
well exclaim, "What a giant it would take to overthrow
him." Therefore no one was capable of doing this except
himself. The belief that subdued the kingdoms and countries
of the world under his mighty hand, while men believed they

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

rot

envisioned a legend, is the same belief 'that overthrew him,
and his fall was an even more unfathomable legend.
Therefore the timing of the genius's anxiety is quite different from that of ordinary men who first discover the danger
in the moment of danger. Until then they feel secure, and
when the danger is past, they are again secure. In the moment
of danger, the genius is stronger than ever. His anxiety, on
the other hand, lies in the moment before and after the
danger, that trembling moment when he must converse with
the great unknown, which is fate. His anxiety is perhaps
greatest precisely in the moment after, because the impatience
of certitude always increases in inverse ratio to the brevity of
the distance to victory, since there is more and more to lose
the nearer one comes to victory, and most of all in the moment of victory, because the consistency of fate is precisely its
inconsistency.
The genius as such cannot apprehend himself religiously,
and therefore he reaches neither sin nor providence, and for
this reason the genius is found in the relation of anxiety to
fate. There has never existed a genius without this anxiety unless he was also religious.
If the genius remains thus immediately determined and
turned outward, he will indeed become great and his accomplishment astounding, but he will never come to himself
and never become great to himself. All his activity is turned
outward, and if I may so speak, the planetarean core that
radiates everything never comes into existence [bliver til]. The
significance of the genius to himself is nil, or as dubiously
melancholy as the sympathy with which the inhabitants of
one of the Faroe Islands would rejoice if on this island there
lived a native Faroese who astounded all of Europe by his
writings in various European languages and transformed the
sciences by his immortal contributions, but at the same time
never wrote a single line in Faroese, and then at last also forgot how to speak it. In the deepest sense, the genius does not
become significant to himself. His compass cannot be determined higher than that of fate in relation to fortune, misfortune, esteem, honor, power, immortal fame-all of which are

IV
371

102

IV
372

The Concept of Anxiety

temporal determinations. Every deeper dialectical determination of sin is excluded. The ultimate would be that of being
regarded as guilty in such a way that anxiety is not directed
toward guilt but toward the appearance of guilt, which is the
category of honor. Such a state of the soul would be very appropriate for poetic treatment. What has been described can
happen to every man, but the genius would at once lay hold
of it so profoundly that he would not be striving with men
but with the profoundest mysteries of existence [Tilvcerelsen].
That such a genius-existence is sin, despite its splendor,
glory, and significance, is something that requires courage to
understand, and it can hardly be understood before one has
learned to satisfy the hunger of the wishing soul. It is true
nonetheless. That such an existence may nevertheless be
happy to a certain degree proves nothing. Talent may be conceived of as a means of diversion, and in so doing one realizes
that at no moment is it possible to raise oneself above the
categories in which the temporal lies. Only through a religious reflection can genius and talent in the deepest sense be
justified. Take a genius like Talleyrand. 47 There was in him
the possibility of a much deeper reflection upon life. This he
shunned. He followed that constituent in him that turned
outward. As intriguer, his admired genius was gloriously
demonstrated; his resilience, the power of his genius to saturate (to use a term used by the chemists of corrosive acids) is
admired, but he belongs to the temporal. If such a genius had
disdained the temporal as immediate and turned toward himself and toward the divine, what a religious genius 48 would
have emerged! But what agonies he would have had to endure. To follow immediate qualifications is a relief in life,
whether one is great or small, but the reward is also in proportion to it, whether one is great or small. And he who is not
so spiritually mature as to apprehend that even immortal
honor throughout all generations is merely a qualification of
the temporal, he who does not apprehend that this for which
men strive and which keeps them sleepless with wishes and
desire is exceedingly imperfect in comparison with the im-

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

103

mortality that is for every man and that rightly would arouse
the justifiable envy of all the world if it were reserved for only
one man-he will not get far in his explanation of spirit and
immortality.
§3.
ANXIETY DEFINED DIALECTICALLY AS GUILT

It is usually said that Judaism is the standpoint of the law.
However, this could also be expressed by saying that Judaism
lies in anxiety. But here the nothing of anxiety signifies something other than fate. It is in this sphere that the phrase "to be
anxious-nothing" appears most paradoxical, for guilt is indeed something. Nevertheless, it is true that as long as guilt is
the object of anxiety, it is nothing. The ambiguity lies in the
relation, for as soon as guilt is posited, anxiety is gone, and
repentance is there. The relation, as always with the relation
of anxiety, is sympathetic and antipathetic. This in turn seems
paradoxical, yet such is not the case, because while anxiety
fears, it maintains a subtle communication with its object,
cannot look away from it, indeed will not, for if the individual wills it, repentance is there. That someone or other will
find this statement difficult is something I cannot help. He
who has the required firmness to be, if I dare say so, a divine
prosecutor, not in relation to others but in relation to himself,
will not fmd it difficult. Furthermore, life offers sufficient
phenomena in which the individual in anxiety gazes almost
desirously at guilt and yet fears it. Guilt has for the eye of the
spirit the fascinating power of the serpent's glance. The truth
in the Carpocratian view 49 of attaining perfection through sin
lies at this point. It has its truth in the moment of decision
when the immediate spirit posits itself as spirit by spirit; contrariwise, it is blasphemy to hold that this view is to be
realized in concreto.
It is precisely by the anxiety of guilt that Judaism is further
advanced than Greek culture, and the sympathetic factor in its
anxiety-relation to guilt may be recognized by the fact that it

IV
372

IV
373

104

The Concept of Anxiety

would not at any price forego this relation in order to acquire
the more rash expressions of Greek culture: fate, fortune, misfortune.
The anxiety found in Judaism is anxiety about guilt. Guilt
is a power that spreads itself everywhere, and although it
broods over existence [Tilva!relsen] , no one can understand it
in a deeper sense. Whatever is to explain it must therefore be
of the same nature, just as the oracle corresponds to fate. To
the oracle in paganism corresponds the sacrifice in Judaism.
But for that reason no one can understand the sacrifice. Herein lies the profound tragedy of Judaism, analogous to the
relation of the oracle in paganism. The Jew has his recourse to
the sacrifice, but this does not help him, for that which
properly would help him would be the cancellation of the relation of anxiety to guilt and the positing of an actual relation.
Since this does not come to pass, the sacrifice becomes ambiguous, which is expressed by its repetition, the further consequence of which would be a pure skepticism in the form of
reflection upon the sacrificial act itself.
Thus what held true in the preceding, that only with sin is
providence posited, again holds true here: only with sin is
atonement posited, and its sacrifice is not repeated. The reason for this, ifI may so speak, is not the outward perfection of
the sacrifice; on the contrary, the perfection of the sacrifice
corresponds to the fact that the actual relation of sin is posited. Whenever the actual relation of sin is not posited, the
sacrifice must be repeatedSO (thus the sacrifice is repeated in
Catholicism, although the absolute perfection of the sacrifice
is still recognized).
What has been indicated briefly here about the relation of
the world-historical is repeated within Christianity in the individualities. Here again the genius exhibits most clearly what
in less original men is present in such a way that it cannot easily be categorized. On the whole, the genius differs from
every other man only in that he consciously begins within his
historical presupposition just as primitively as Adam did.
Every time a genius is born, existence is, as it were, put to a
test, because he traverses and experiences all that is past, until

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

105

he catches up with himself. Therefore the knowledge the genius has of the past is entirely different from that offered in
world-historical surveys. 51
It has been indicated already that the genius may remain in
his immediate determination, and the explanation that this is
sin also implies true courtesy toward the genius. Every
human life is religiously designed. To want to deny this confuses everything and cancels the concepts of individuality,
race, and immortality. Herein lie very difficult problems, for
which reason one could wish that more people would exercise
discernment at this point. To say that someone with a mind
for intrigue ought to be a diplomat or a detective, that someone with a mimic talent for the comical ought to be an actor,
and that someone with no talent at all ought to be a stoker in
the courthouse is an altogether meaningless view oflife, or it
is rather no view at all, for it merely states what is obvious.
However, to explain how my religious existence comes into
relation with and expresses itself in my outward existence,
that is the task. But in our time who would trouble himself to
think about such things, although now more than ever the
present life appears as a fleeting, transitory moment? Yet instead oflearning from this how to lay hold of the eternal, we
only learn how to drive ourselves, our neighbors, and the
moment to death-in the pursuit of the moment. If a person
could have a part just once, could lead the waltz of the momentjust once-then he has lived, then he becomes the envy
of the less fortunate, those who are not born but rush headlong into life, and headlong continue to rush forward, never
reaching it. Then one has lived, for what is more valuable in
human life than a young woman's briefloveliness, which indeed already has held up unusually well if for one night it has
enchanted the lives of dancers and faded for the first time in
the early morning. There is no time to consider how a religious existence pervades and interweaves the outward existence. Although one does not rush with the haste of despair,
one still lays hold of what is closest at hand. In that way, a
person may even become something great in the world, and
furthermore, if he also attends church once in awhile, every

IV
374

106

IV
375

IV
374
IV
375

The Concept of Anxiety

thing will be extremely well with him. This seems to indicate
that while for some individuals the religious is the absolute,
for others it is not," and then goodnight to all meaning in life.
Naturally the deliberation becomes more difficult the more
remote the outward task is from the religious as such. What
profound religious reflection would be required to reach such
an outward task, for example, that of becoming a comic actor! That it can be done, I do not deny, for whoever has some
understanding of the religious knows that it is more pliant
than gold, and absolutely commensurable. The fault of the
Middle Ages 53 was not religious reflection, but that it broke
off too soon. Here the question about repetition reappears: to
what extent can an individuality, after having begun religious
reflection, succeed in returning to himself again, whole in
every respect? In the Middle Ages, a break was made. Therefore, when an individuality was to return to himself, having
encountered, for example, the fact that he possessed wit, a
sense for the comic, etc., he annihilated all of this as something imperfect. Nowadays, this is all too readily regarded as
foolishness. For if someone has wit and a sense for the comic,
he is a Pamphilius of fortune. 54 What more can he wish? Naturally such explanations have not the faintest presentiment of
the problem, for although nowadays men are born more
worldly-wise than in the old days, the greater number of
them are born blind in relation to the religious. Nevertheless,
in the Middle Ages there were also examples of carrying this
deliberation further. For example, when a painter apprehended his talent religiously, but this talent could not express itself in achievements that lie closest to the religious,
such an artist might have been seen piously concentrating all
• Among the Greeks the question about the religious could not arise in this
manner. However, it is beautiful to read what Plato recounts S2 in one place
and applies. After Epimetheus had equipped man with all sorts of gifts, he
asked Zeus whether he should distribute the ability to choose between good
and evil in the same way that he had distributed the other gifts, so that one
man received this ability while another got the gift of eloquence, and another
that of poetry, and a third that of art. But Zeus replied that this ability should
be distributed equally among all, because it belongs essentially to every man
alike.

Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin

107

his ability in the painting of a Venus, and apprehending his
artistic calling with all the piety of an artist who came to the
aid of the church and captivated the eyes of the congregation
with a vision of the heavenly beauty. However, in regard to
all this, one has to wait for the appearance of individuals who,
despite outward gifts, do not choose the broad way but rather
the pain, the distress, and the anxiety in which they religiously call to mind what meanwhile they lose, as it were,
namely, what is too seductive to possess. Such a struggle is
indubitably very exhausting, because there will come moments when they almost regret having begun it and recall
with melancholy, at .times possibly unto despair, the smiling
life that would have opened before them had they pursued the
immediate inclination of their talent. Nevertheless, in the extreme terror of distress, when it is as though all were lost because the way along which he would advance is impassable,
and the smiling way of talent is cut off from him by his own
act, the person who is aware will indubitably hear a voice saying: Well done, my son! Just keep on, for he who loses all,
gains all. 55
We will now consider a genius who is religious, that is, one
who does not remain in his immediacy. Whether he at any
time turns himself outward remains for him a subsequent
question. The first thing he does is to turn toward himself.
Just as the immediate genius has fate as the figure that follows
him, so he has guilt. In turning toward himself, he eo ipso
turns toward God, and there is a ceremonial rule that says that
when the finite spirit would see God, it must begin as guilty.
As he turns toward himself, he discovers guilt. The greater
the genius, the more profoundly he discovers guilt. To me it
is a joy and a gratifying sign that to spiritlessness this is
foolishness. The genius is not like most people and would not
be satisfied to be so. This is not because he disdains men, but
because he is primitively concerned with himself, whereas
other men and their explanations are of no help to him.
The fact that he discovers guilt so profoundly indicates that
this concept is present to him sensu eminentiori [in the eminent
sense], just as its opposite, innocence, is also. So it was in the

IV
376

108

IV
377

The Concept of Anxiety

case of the relation of the immediate genius to fate, for every
man has a little relation to fate, but there it ends in talk that
does not notice what TalleyrandS6 (and Young before him
expressed) discovered and expressed, although not as fully as
empty talk does, that the purpose of language is to conceal
thought-namely, to conceal that one has none.
In turning inward, he discovers freedom. He does not fear
fate, for he lays hold of no outward task, and freedom is for
him his bliss, not freedom to do this or that in the world, to
become king and emperor or an abusive street corner orator,
but freedom to know of himself that he is freedom. Yet the
higher an individual rises, the greater is the price he must pay
for everything; and for the sake of order, another figure
comes into being with the Ansich [in-itself] of freedom,
namely, guilt. Guilt in turn is what fate was, the only thing he
fears, and yet his fear is not of what was the maximum in the
former case, namely, fear of being thought guilty, but fear of
being guilty.
To the degree he discovers freedom, to that same degree
the anxiety of sin is upon him in the state of possibility. He
fears only guilt, for guilt alone can deprive him of freedom.
Here it is readily seen that freedom is by no means defiance,
nor is it selfish freedom in a finite sense. By such an assumption, attempts often have been made to explain the origin of
sin, but such efforts are only wasted labor, because the acceptance of such an assumption presents a greater difficulty than
the explanation. When freedom is apprehended in this way, it
has necessity as its opposite, which shows that it has been
conceived as a category of reflection. No, the opposite of
freedom is guilt, and it is the greatness of freedom that it always has to do only with itself, that in its possibility it projects guilt and accordingly posits it by itself. And if guilt is
posited actually, freedom posits it by itself. If this is not kept
in mind, freedom is confused in a clever way with something
entirely different, withforce.
Now when freedom fears guilt, what it fears is not to recognize itself as guilty, if it is, but rather it fears to become

Anxiety as the Conseqllence (?f Sirl

109

guilty, for which reason freedom, as soon as guilt is posited,
returns as repentance. For the time being, freedom's relation
to guilt is a possibility. Here again genius manifests itself by
not side-stepping the primitive decision, by not seeking the
decision outside itself with Tom, Dick, and Harry, and by
not being content with the usual bargaining. Only by itself
can freedom come to know whether it is freedom or whether
guilt is posited. Therefore nothing is more ridiculous than to
assume that the question of whether one is a sinner or guilty
belongs under the rubric: lesson to be memorized.
The relation of freedom to guilt is anxiety, because freedom and guilt are still only possibilities. However, as freedom with all its passion wishfully stares at itself and would
keep guilt at a distance so that not a single particle of it might
be found in freedom, it cannot refrain from staring at guilt,
and this staring is the ambiguous staring of anxiety, just as
renunciation within the possibility is itself a coveting.
Here it clearly appears in what sense there is a more in the
anxiety of the subsequent individual than in Adam's anxiety."
Guilt is a more concrete conception, which becomes more
and more possible in the relation of possibility to freedom. At
last it is as if the guilt of the whole world united to make him
guilty, and, what is the same, as if in becoming guilty he became guilty of the guilt of the whole world. Guilt has the
dialectical character that it does not allow itself to be transferred, but whoever becomes guilty also becomes guilty of
that which occasioned the guilt. For guilt never has an external occasion, and whoever yields to temptation is himself
guilty of the temptation.
In the relation of possibility, this appears as an illusion.
However, as soon as repentance breaks forth with the actual
sin,s7 then it has the actual sin as its object. In freedom's possibility, it holds true that the more profoundly guilt is discovered, the greater the genius, because the greatness of a man
• Yet it must not be forgotten that here the analogy is inaccurate, inasmuch
as we are not dealing with innocence in the subsequent individual but with a
repressed sin-consciousness.

IV
37M

110

The Concept of Anxiety

depends simply and solely on the energy of the God-relation
in him, even though the God-relation finds an altogether
wrong expression as fate.
Just as fate at last captures the immediate genius, and this is
indeed his moment of culmination, not the glittering outward
realization that amazes men and even calls the artisan from his
daily work to stop and take notice, but the moment when by
himself he collapses for himself by fate, guilt likewise captures the genius who is religious,58 and this is the moment of
culmination, the moment when he is greatest, not the moment when the sight of his piety is like the festivity of a special holiday, but when by himself he sinks before himself in
the depth of sin-consciousness.

IV

IV
379

Anxiety of Sin or
Anxiety as the Consequence of Sin in
the Single Individual
By a qualitative leap sin entered into the world, and it continually enters into the world in that way. As soon as the leap
is posited, one would think that anxiety would be canceled,
because anxiety is defmed as freedom's disclosure to itself in
possibility. The qualitative leap is clearly actuality, and so it
would seem that possibility is annulled along with anxiety.
However, this is not the case. First of all, actuality is not one
factor; second, the actuality posited is an unwarranted actuality. So anxiety again comes into relation with what is posited
as well as with the future. Yet this time the object of anxiety is
a determinate something and its nothing is an actual something, because the distinction between good and evil" is pos• The question "What is the good?" is one issue that comes closer and
closer to our age, because it has decisive significance for the question of the
relationship between church, state, and morality. In attempting an answer,
one must be cautious. Hitherto, the true has in a strange way had the priority,
because the trilogy-the beautiful, the good, the true-has been conceived
and represented in the sphere of the true (namely, as knowledge). The good
cannot be defined at all. The good is freedom. The difference between good
and evil is only for freedom and in freedom, and this difference is never in
abstraao but only in concreto. Therefore, for one not experienced in the Socratic method it is disturbing when Socrates instandy draws what is apparendy
infinitely abstract, the good, back to the most concrete. The method is entirely correct, except that he was mistaken (according to Greek thought, he
acted correcdy) in conceiving the good from its external side (the useful, the
finitely teleological). The difference between good and evil is indeed for freedom, but not in abstracto. This misunderstanding arises because freedom is
changed into something else, into an object of thought. But freedom is never
in abstraao. Iffreedom is given a moment to choose between good and evil, a
moment when freedom itself is in neither the one nor the other, then in that

IV
.'SII

112

IV
380

IV
381

The Concept of Anxiety

ited in concreto-and anxiety therefore loses its dialectical ambiguity. This is true of Adam as well as of every subsequent
individual, for in the qualitative leap they are completely
alike.
When sin is posited in the particular individual by the qualitative leap, the difference between good and evil is also posited. We have nowhere been guilty of the foolishness that
holds that man must sin; on the contrary, we have always protested against all merely imaginatively constructed knowledge. We have said what we again repeat, that sin presupposes itself, just as freedom presupposes itself, and sin cannot
be explained by anything antecedent to it, anymore than can
freedom. To maintain that freedom begins as liberum arbitrium
(which is found nowhere, cf. Leibniz)l that can choose good
just as well as evil inevitably makes every explanation impossible. To speak of good and evil as the objects of freedom finitizes both freedom and the concepts of good and evil. Freedom is infinite and arises out of nothing. Therefore, to want
to say that man sins by necessity makes the circle of the leap
into a straight line. Such a procedure seems highly plausible
to many, because to a great many thoughtlessness is the most
natural thing, and in all ages their number is legion who revery moment freedom is not freedom, but a meaningless reflection. So for
what purpose is the imaginary construction except to confuse? If (sit venia
verbo [pardon the expression)) freedom remains in the good, then it knows
nothing at all of evil. In this sense one may say about God (if anyone misunderstands this, it is not my fault) that he knows nothing of evil. By this I by
no means say that evil is merely the negative, das AuJzuhebende [that which is
to be annulled); on the contrary, that God knows nothing of evil, that he
neither can nor will know of it, is the absolute punishment of evil. In this
sense the preposition altO [away from) is used in the New Testament to signify removal from God or, ifI dare put it this way, God's ignoring of evil. If
one conceives of God finitely, it is indeed convenient for evil if God ignores
it, but because God is the infinite, his ignoring is the living annihilation, for
evil cannot dispense with God, even merely in order to be evil. Here I shall
quote a passage from Scripture, II Thessalonians 1:9, where it is said of those
who do not know God and do not obey the gospel: otnvec; liiKT]V ti<JOU<J1V
6A.e6pov alo)V1ov cilto ltpomoltou touKupiou, Kai cilto tf'lc; 1i6~T]C; tf'lc; {<JXl>OC;
autoil [they shall suffer the punishment of eternal destruction and exclusion
from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might).

Anxiety of Sin

113

gard as praiseworthy that way of thinking that through all
centuries has in -vain been labeled A.6yoC; apy6c; [lazy reasoning]2 (Chrysippus), ignava ratio (Cicero), sophisma pigrum,
la raison paresseuse (Leibniz).
Now psychology again has anxiety as its object, but it must
be cautious. The history of the individual life proceeds in a
movement from state to state. Every state is posited by a leap.
As sin entered into the world, so it continues to enter into the
world ifit is not halted. Nevertheless, every such repetition is
not a simple consequence but a new leap. Every such leap is
preceded by a state as the closest psychological approximation. This state is the object of psychology. To the extent that
in every state possibility is present, anxiety is also present.
Such is the case after sin is posited, for only in the good is
there a unity of state and transition.
§J.3
ANXIETY ABOUT EVIL

(a) The posited sin is indeed an annulled possibility, but it is
also an unwarranted actuality, and as such, anxiety can relate
itself to it. Since sin is an unwarranted actuality, it is also to be
negated. This work anxiety will undertake. Here is the playground of the ingenious sophistry of anxiety. While the actuality of sin holds one hand of freedom in its icy right hand
just as the Commandanr' held Don Giovanni, the left hand
gesticulates with delusion, deception, and the eloquence of
illusion."
(b) The posited sin is in itself also a consequence, even
though it is a consequence foreign to freedom. This consequence announces itself, and anxiety relates itself to the future
appearance of this consequence, which is the possibility of a
new state. No matter how deep an individual has sunk, he can
sink still deeper, and this "can" is the object of anxiety. The
more relaxed anxiety becomes at this point, the more it sig» Because of the form of the investigation, I can indicate the particular state
only very briefly, almost algebraically. This is not the place for a thorough
description.

IV
381

IV

382

114

IV
383

IV
382

The Concept of Anxiety

nifies that the consequence of sin has entered the individual in
succum et sanguinem [in flesh and blood] and that sin has obtained a domicile in individuality.
Here sin, of course, signifies the concrete, for one never
sins on the average or in general. s Even that sin of wishing to
go back to the time before the actuality of sin" is not a sin on
the average, for such a sin has never occurred. Whoever has
some understanding of men knows very well that sophistry
always fixes upon one particular point and continually skirts
the point. Anxiety wants to have the actuality of sin removed,
not entirely but to a certain degree, or to put it more exactly,
to a certain degree it wants to have the actuality of sin
continue-but note, only to a certain degree. Therefore anxiety is not disinclined to flirt a little with quantitative determinants. The more developed anxiety is, the further it dares to
pursue the flirtation. But as soon as the jest and the diversion
of quantitative determinants are about to capture the individual in the qualitative leap, which lies in wait like the larva of
the ant-lion6 in the funnel formed in the loose sand, anxiety
cautiously withdraws; then it has a little point that must be
saved and that is without sin, and in the next moment another
point. A consciousness of sin profoundly and seriously
formed in the expression of repentance is a great rarity. However, for my own sake, as well as for the sake of thought and
neighbor, I shall take care not to express it as Schelling 7 probably would, who speaks somewhere of a genius for action in
the same sense as for music etc. Thus, without being aware of
it, one can at times annihilate everything with an explanatory
word. If every man does not participate essentially in the absolute, then everything is over. Therefore, in the sphere of the
religious, genius must not be spoken of as a special gift that is
bestowed only upon a few, for here the gift is that of willing ,
and whoever does not will should at least have the respect of
not being pitied.
Ethically speaking, sin is not a state. 8 The state, however, is
• This is spoken ethically. for ethics does not see the state but sees how the
state in the same moment is a new sin.

Anxiety of Sin

115

always the last psychological approximation to the next state.
Anxiety is at this point always present as the possibility of the
new state. In the state described under (a), anxiety is more
noticeable; whereas in (b), it disappears more and more. But
anxiety is nevertheless outside such an individual, and viewed
from the standpoint of spirit, it is greater than any other anxiety. In (a), the anxiety is about the actuality of sin, out of
which it sophistically brings forth possibility; whereas viewed
ethically, it sins. The movement of anxiety is here the opposite of the anxiety of innocence, in which, psychologically
speaking, it brings forth actuality out of the possibility of sin;
whereas viewed ethically, sin is brought forth by the qualitative leap. In (b), anxiety is directed toward the further possibility of sin. If at this point anxiety decreases, we explain it by
the fact that the consequence of sin conquers.
(c) The posited sin is an unwarranted actuality. It is actuality, and it is posited by the individual as actuality in repentance, but repentance does not become the individual's freedom. Repentance is reduced to a possibility in relation to sin;
in other words, repentance cannot cancel sin, it can only sorrow over it. Sin advances in its consequence; repentance follows it step by step, but always a moment too late. It forces
itself to look at the dreadful, but like the mad King Lear (0 du
zertriimmert Meisterstiick der Schiipfung [0 thou ruined masterpiece of nature])9 it has lost the reins of government, and it
has retained only the power to grieve. At this point, anxiety is
at its highest. Repentance has lost its mind, and anxiety is
potentiated into repentance. The consequence of sin moves
on; it drags the individual along like a woman whom the
executioner drags by the hair while she screams in despair.
Anxiety is ahead; it discovers the consequence before it
comes, as one feels in one's bones that a storm is approaching.
The consequence comes closer; the individual trembles like a
horse that gasps as it comes to a halt at the place where once it
had been frightened. Sin conquers. Anxiety throws itself despairingly into the arms of repentance. Repentance ventures
all. It conceives of the consequence of sin as suffering penalty
and of perdition 10 as the consequence of sin. It is lost. Its

IV
384

116

The Concept of Anxiety

judgment is pronounced, its condemnation is certain, and the
augmented judgment is that the individual shall be dragged
through life to the place of execution. In other words, repentance has gone crazy.
Life offers opportunities to observe what has been suggested here. Such a state is seldom found among altogether
corrupt natures, but generally only among the deeper, for it
requires considerable primitivity and endurance in man if he
is not to fall under (a) or (b). No dialectic is capable of defeating the sophism that crazed repentance is capable of producing at every moment. Such a repentance has a dejection that in
the dialectic and expression of passion is far more powerful
than true repentance. (In another sense it is, of course, more
impotent; yet, as anyone who has observed such cases no
doubt has noticed, it is remarkable what persuasive powers,
what eloquence such repentance possesses to disarm all objections and to convince all who come close to it, only to despair
of itself again when this diversion is over.) To attempt to stop
this horror by words and phrases is wasted effort, and whoever contemplates doing it may always be sure that his sermonizing will be like children's babble when compared with
the elementary eloquence that is at the service of such repentance. The phenomenon may appear in connection with the
sensuous in man (addiction to drink, to opium, or to debauchery, etc.) as well as in connection with the higher
(pride, vanity, wrath, hatred, defiance, cunning, envy, etc.).
The individual may repent of his wrath, and the more profound he is, the more profound is his repentance. But repentance cannot make him free; in that he is mistaken. The occasion comes; anxiety has already discovered it. Every thought
trembles. Anxiety sucks out the strength of repentance and
shakes its head. It is as though wrath had already conquered.
Already he has a presentiment of the prostration of freedom
that is reserved for the next moment. The moment comes;
wrath conquers.
Whatever the consequence of sin, the fact that the phenomenon appears on a considerable scale is always the sign of a
deeper nature. The phenomenon is seldom seen in life, i.e.,

Anxiety of Sin

117

one must be an observer to see it more often, because it can be
concealed or dispelled, and men use one or another prudential
device to abort this embryo of the highest life. All that is
needed in order to become like most people is to seek the advice of Tom, Dick, and Harry, and one can always secur:e the
testimony of a few respectable people to that end. The most
effective means of escaping spiritual trial [Anfa'gtelse 1is to become spiritless, and the sooner the better. If only taken care of
in time, everything takes care of itself. And as for spiritual
trial, it may be explained as nonexistent, or at the most may
be regarded as a piquant poetical fiction. In the old days, the
road to perfection was narrow and solitary. The journey
along it was always disturbed by aberrations, exposed to
predatory attacks by sin, and pursued by the arrow of the
past, which is as dangerous as that of the Scythian hordes.
Now one travels to perfection by railway in good company,
and before he knows it, he has arrived.
The only thing that is truly able to disarm the sophistry of
sin is faith, courage to believe that the state itself is a new sin,
courage to renounce anxiety without anxiety, which only
faith can do; faith does not thereby annihilate anxiety, but, itself eternally young, it extricates itself from anxiety's moment of death. Only faith is able to do this, for only in faith is
the synthesis eternal and at every moment possible.

It is not difficult to see that all that has been presented here
belongs to the realm of psychology. Ethically, the point is to
get the individual rightly placed in relation to sin. As soon as
this is accomplished, the individual stands repentant in sin.
According to the idea, in that very moment he has been
brought to dogmatics. Repentance is the highest ethical contradiction,l1 partly because ethics requires ideality but must
be content to receive repentance, and partly because repentance is dialectically ambiguous with regard to what it is to
remove, an ambiguity that dogmatics for the first time removes in the Atonement, in which the category of hereditary
sin becomes clear. Moreover, repentance delays action, and

IV
385

118

IV
386

IV
386

The Concept of Anxiety

action is precisely what ethics requires. At last, repentance
must become an object to itself, inasmuch as the moment of
repentance becomes a deficit of action. It was, therefore, a
genuine ethical outburst, full of energy and courage,. when
the elder Fichte 12 said there was no time for repentance. By
this statement, however, he did not bring repentance to the
dialectical point where as posited it will annul itself by new
repentance and then collapse.
What has been presented in this paragraph, as elsewhere in
this work, is what psychologically may be called freedom's
psychological attitudes toward sin, or psychologically approximating states. They do not presume to explain sin ethically.
§2.
ANXIETY ABOUT THE GOOD
(THE DEMONIC)

Rarely is anything said in our day about the demonic. The
particular accounts of it in the New Testament are generally
left in abeyance. Insofar as the theologians 13 seek to explain
them, they generally lose themselves in observations upon
one or another unnatural sin, and they find examples where
the ascendancy of the bestial over a man is such that it almost
announces itself by an inarticulate animal sound or by a
mimicry of animals and a brutish glance. The bestial may
have acquired a pronounced form in man (the physiognomic
expression-Lavater), 14 or it may in a flash, like a disappearing express messenger, suggest premonitions of what dwells
within, just as the glance or gesture of the insane in a moment
shorter than the shortest moment parodies, ridicules, and
jeers at the rational, self-possessed, and clever man with
whom he is talking. What theologians say in this respect may
well be true, but the important thing is the point of the matter. Generally the phenomenon is described in such a way that
it is clearly seen that the subject in question is the bondage of
sin, a state that I cannot describe better than by recalling a
game in which two persons are concealed under one cloak as

Anxiety of Sin

119

if there were only one person, and one speaks and the other
gesticulates arbitrarily without any relation to what is said.
Similarly, the beast has taken on human form and now constantly jeers at him by gesticulations and farce. Yet the bondage of sin is not the demonic. As soon as sin is posited and the
individual continues in sin, there are two formations, one of
which is described in the foregoing section. If attention is not
paid to this, the demonic cannot be defined. The individual is
in sin, and his anxiety is about the evil. Viewed from a higher
standpoint, this formation is in the good, and for this reason it
is in anxiety about the evil. The other formation is the demonic. The individual is in the evil and is in anxiety about the
good. The bondage of sin is an unfree relation to the evil, but
the demonic is an unfree relation to the good.
The demonic therefore manifests itself dearly only when it
is in contact with the good, which comes to its boundary
from the outside. For this reason, it is noteworthy that the
demonic in the New Testament first appears when it is
approached by Christ. Whether the demon is legion (cf.
Matthew 8:28-34; Mark 5:1-20; Luke 8:26-39) or is dumb (cf.
Luke 11:14), the phenomenon is the same, namely, anxiety
about the good, for anxiety can just as well express itself by
muteness as by a scream. The good, of course, signifies the
restoration of freedom, redemption, salvation, or whatever
one would call it.
In earlier times, there was often talk about the demonic.
Here it is not important to make studies or to have made
studies that would enable one to recite by rote or quote from
learned and curious books. It is easy to sketch the various
views that are possible and at various times have been actual.
This may be of significance, because the diversity of the views
may lead to a definition of the concept.
The demonic may be viewed as esthetic-metaphysical. The
phenomenon then will come under the rubrics of misfortune,
fate, etc. and can then be viewed as analogous to being mentally deranged at birth. Then the phenomenon is approached
sympathetically. However, just as wishing is the most paltry
of all solo performances, so being sympathetic in the sense in

IV
JH7

120

IV

388

The Concept of Anxiety

which the word is usually used is the most paltry of all social
virtuosities and aptitudes. Sympathy, so far from being a
good to the sufferer, is rather a means of protecting one's own
egotism. Not daring in the deeper sense to think about such
things, one saves oneself by sympathy. Only when the sympathetic person in his compassion relates himself to the sufferer in such a way that he in the strictest sense understands
that it is his own case that is in question, only when he knows
how to identify himself with the sufferer in such a way that
when he fights for an explanation he is fighting for himself,
renouncing all thoughtlessness, softness, and cowardiceonly then does the sympathy acquire significance, and only
then does it perhaps find a meaning, because the sympathetic
person is different from the sufferer in that he suffers under a
higher form. When sympathy relates itself in this way to the
demonic, it will not be a question of a few comforting words,
a mite, or a shrug of the shoulder, for if a person laments, he
has something to lament about. If the demonic is a fate, it
may happen to anyone. This cannot be denied, even though
in our cowardly time everything possible is done to keep
away lonely thoughts by diversions and the Turkish music of
loud enterprises, just as in the American forests wild beasts
are kept away by means of torches, shouting, and beating of
cymbals. For this reason, people in our day learn to know so
little about the highest spiritual trials [Anfa'gtelser 1, and so
much more about the pandering conflicts between men and
between man and woman, which a sophisticated soiree and
society life bring with it. If true human sympathy accepts suffering as a guarantor and surety, then it must first of all make
clear to itself to what extent it is fate or to what extent it is
guilt. And this distinction must be drawn up with the concerned but also energetic passion of freedom, so that a person
may dare to hold fast to it even though the whole world collapses, even though it may seem that by his own firmness he
brings about irreparable harm.
The demonic has been viewed ethically, as something to be
condemned. The terrible severity with which it has been
persecuted, discovered, and punished is well known. In our

Anxiety of Sin

121

day, we shudder at the account of it, and we become sentimental and emotional at the thought that in our enlightened
age we do not act in that manner. This may be true, but is
sentimental sympathy so much more praiseworthy? It is not
for me to judge or condemn that behavior, only to observe it.
That it was so ethically severe shows precisely that its sympathy was of a better quality. In identifying itself in thought
with the phenomenon, it has no further explanation than that
the phenomenon was guilt. Therefore it was convinced that
when all is said and done, the demoniac himself, according to
his better possibility, would in fact desire all the cruelty and
severity that was used against him.* To take an example from
a similar sphere-was it not Augustine 15 who recommended
punishment, even capital punishment, for heretics? Was it because he lacked sympathy? Or was his behavior different from
that of our own time because his sympathy had not made him
cowardly, so that he would have said about himself: God
grant that if it should come to that with me, there would be a
Church that would not abandon me but would use all its
power. Yet in our day one fears what Socrates 16 somewhere
prescribes, to be cut and cauterized by the physician in order
to be healed.
The demonic has been viewed medically-therapeutically.
And it goes without saying, mit Pulver und mit Pillen [with
powder and with pills 1 and then with enemas! Now the
pharmacist and the physician would get together. The patient
would be isolated to prevent others from becoming afraid. In
our courageous age, we dare not tell a patient that he is about
to die, we dare not call the pastor lest he die from shock, and
we dare not tell the patient that a few days ago a man died
from the same disease. The patient would be isolated. Sym• The person who is not developed ethically to the extent that he would
find comfort and relief if, even when he suffered the most, someone had the
courage to say to him, "This is not fate, it is guilt," that he would find comfort and relief when this was told to him sincerely and eamestly-such a person is not in a true sense ethically developed, because the ethical individuality
fears nothing so much as fate and esthetic rigmarole that in the cloak of compassion would trick him out of the jewel, which is freedom.

IV
389

IV
38H

IV
389

122

IV
.190

The Concept of Anxiety

pathy would inquire about his condition. The physician
would promise to issue a report as soon as possible, along
with a tabulated statistical survey17 in order to determine the
average. And when one has arrived at the average, everything
is explained. The medical-therapeutic view regards the phenomenon as purely physical and somatic, and as physicians
often do, especially a physician in one of Hoffman's short
stories,18 takes a pinch of snuff and says: It is a serious case.
That three so different views are possible shows the ambiguity of the phenomenon and indicates that in a sense it belongs in all spheres: the somatic, the psychic, and the pneumatic. This suggests that the demonic covers a much larger
field than is commonly assumed, which can be explained by
the fact that a man is a synthesis of psyche and body sustained
by spirit, and therefore a disorganization in one shows itself in
the others. When one becomes aware of the breadth of the
field of the demonic, then perhaps it will also be clear that
many of those who want to deal with the phenomenon of the
demonic come under the category of the demonic themselves,
and that there are traces of it in every man, as surely as every
man is a sinner.
Because in the course of time the demonic has denoted several different things, and at last has come to mean almost anything, it seems best to define the concept a little. Therefore,
attention should be paid to the place to which we have already
assigned it. In innocence there can be no question of the demonic. On the other hand, every fantastic notion of entering
into a pact with evil etc., whereby a person becomes entirely
evil, must be abandoned. It was because of this that the contradiction arose in the severe treatment of earlier times.
People made this assumption and still wanted to punish.
Nevertheless, the punishment itself was not merely a selfdefense but also a means to save (either those involved by way
of a milder punishment or others by way of capital punishment). But if there could be a question of salvation, the individual was not entirely in the power of evil, and if the individual was entirely in the power of evil, punishment would
be a contradiction. If the question were raised as to what ex-

Anxiety of Sin

123

tent the demonic is a problem for psychology, I must reply,
the demonic is a state. Out of this state, the particular sinful
act can constantly break forth. However, the state is a possibility, although in relation to innocence it is an actuality posited by the qualitative leap.
The demonic is anxiety about the good. In innocence, freedom was not posited as freedom: its possibility was anxiety in
the individual. In the demonic, the relation is reversed. Freedom is posited as unfreedom, because freedom is lost. Here
again freedom's possibility is anxiety. The difference is absolute, because freedom's possibility appears here in relation to
unfreedom, which is the very opposite of innocence , which is
a qualification disposed toward freedom.
The demonic is unfreedom that wants to close itself off.
This, however, is and remains an impossibility. It always retains a relation, and even when this has apparently disappeared altogether, it is nevertheless there, and anxiety at once
manifests itself in the moment of contact [with the good] (see
what is said above of the accounts in the New Testament).
The demonic is inclosing reserve [det lndesluttede )19 and the unfreely disclosed. The two definitions indicate, as intended, the
same thing, because inclosing reserve is precisely the mute,
and when it is to express itself, this must take place contrary
to its will, since freedom, which underlies unfreedom or is its
ground, by entering into communication with freedom from
without, revolts and now betrays unfreedom in such a way
that it is the individual who in anxiety betrays himself against
his will. Therefore, inclosing reserve in this case must be
taken in a very distinct sense, for in the common use of the
term it may signify the highest freedom. Brutus,20 Henry V
of England as Prince of Wales, 21 etc. were in this sense confirmed in their reserve until the time when it became evident
that their inclosing reserve [lndesluttethed] was a pact with the
good. Such an inclosing reserve was therefore identical with
an expansiveness, and there was never an individuality more
beautiful and noble in its expansiveness than one who is inclosed in the womb of a great idea. Freedom is precisely the
expansive. In opposition to this, I maintain that Kat' t;oxiJv

IV
391

124

IV
392

IV
391

The Concept of Anxiety

[in an eminent sense] "inclosing reserve" can be used for unfreedom. Generally, a more metaphysical expression is used
for evil, namely, the negative. The ethical expression for it,
when the effect is observed in the individual, is precisely this
inclosing reserve. The demonic does not close itself up with
something, but it closes itself up within itself, and in this lies
what is profound about existence [Tilv~rselsen], precisely that
unfreedom makes itself a prisoner. Freedom is always communicerende [communicating)22 (it does no harm even to take
into consideration the religious significance of the word); unfreedom becomes more and more inclosed [indesluttet] and
does not want communication. This can be observed in all
spheres. It manifests itself in hypochondria, in capriciousness;
it manifests itself in the highest passions, when in a profound
misunderstanding they introduce the silent treatment." When
freedom comes into contact with inclosing reserve, it becomes anxious. In common speech there is a very suggestive
expression. It is said of a person, "He will not come out with
it." Inclosing reserve is precisely muteness. Language, the
word, is precisely what saves, what saves the individual from
the empty abstraction of inclosing reserve. Let x signify the
demonic, the relation of freedom to it something outside x.
The law for the manifestation of the demonic is that against
its will it "comes out with it." For language does indeed
imply communication. A demoniac in the New Testament
therefore says to Christ when he approaches: ti tj.1oi Kui emt
[What have I to do with you], and he continues by suggesting
that Christ has come to destroy him (anxiety about the good).
Or a demoniac implores Christ to go another way. 23 (When
anxiety is about evil, see §1, the individual has recourse to salvation.)
• It has already been stated that the demonic has a much greater compass
than is generally believed. In the preceding paragraph, the formations pointing in the other direction are indicated; here follows the second series of formations, and as I have presented it, the distinction can be carried out. If anyone can offer a better division, then he should choose that, but he at least
ought to be cautious in this domain, because otherwise everything runs together.

Anxiety of Sin

125

Life offers abundant examples of this in all possible spheres
and in all possible degrees. An obdurate criminal will not
make a confession (the demonic lies precisely in this, that he
will not communicate with the good by suffering the
punishment). There is a rarely used method that can be
applied against such a person, namely, silence and the power
of the eye. If an inquisitor has the required physical strength
and the spiritual elasticity to endure without moving a muscle, to endure even for sixteen hours, he will succeed, and the
confession will burst forth involuntarily. A man with a bad
conscience cannot endure silence. If placed in solitary confinement, he becomes apathetic. But this silence while the
judge is present, while the clerks are ready to inscribe everything in the protocol, this silence is the most penetrating and
acute questioning. It is the most frightful torture and yet
permissible. However, this is not as easy to accomplish as one
might suppose. The only thing that can constrain inclosing
reserve to speak is either a higher demon (for every devil has
his day), or the good, which is absolutely able to keep silent,
and if any cunning tries to embarrass it by the examination of
silence, the inquisitor himself will be brought to shame, and it
will tum out that finally he becomes afraid of himself and
must break the silence. Face to face with a subordinate demon
and subordinate human natures whose consciousness of God
is not strongly developed, inclosing reserve conquers unconditionally, because the former is not able to endure and the
latter in all innocence are accustomed to live from hand to
mouth and wear their hearts on their sleeves. It is incredible
what power the man of inclosing reserve can exercise over
such people, how at last they beg and plead for just a word to
break the silence, but it is also shameful to trample upon the
weak in this manner. It is perhaps thought that such things
occur only among princes and Jesuits, and in order to have a
clear notion of this one must think of Domitian, Cromwell,
Alba, or a general of the Jesuit order who has become almost
a stock name for this. By no means, it occurs much more frequently. However, caution must be used injudging the phenomenon, for although the phenomenon is the same, the rea-

IV
393

126

IV
394

The Concept oj Anxiety

son for it may be the very opposite, because an individuality
who exercises the despotism and torture of inclosing reserve
might himself wish to speak and might wait for a higher
demon who could bring forth the revelation. However, the
tormentor of inclosing reserve may also relate himself
selfishly to his own incloSing reserve. About this I could write
a whole book, although I have not been, according to the custom and the established convention among the observers of
our day, in Paris and London, as if by such visits one could
learn something great, more than chatter and the wisdom of
traveling salesmen. If an observer will only pay attention to
himself, he will have enough with five men, five women, and
ten children for the discovery of all possible states of the
human soul. What I have to say could indeed have significance, especially for everyone who deals with children or has
any relation to them. It is of infinite importance that the child
be elevated by the conception of lofty inclosing reserve and
saved from the misunderstood types. In an outward respect,
it is easy to determine when the moment arrives that one
dares to let the child walk alone; in a spiritual respect, it is not
so easy. In a spiritual respect, the task is very difficult, and one
cannot exempt oneself by employing a nursemaid or by buying a walker. The art is that of constantly being present, and
yet not being present, so that the child may be allowed to develop himself, and at the same time one still has a clear view
of the development. The art is to leave the child to himself in
the very highest degree and on the greatest possible scale, and
to express this apparent relinquishing in such a way that, unnoticed, one is aware of everything. If only one is willing,
time for this can very well be found, even though one is a
royal officeholder. 24 If one is willing, one can do all things.
And the father or the educator who has done everything else
for the child entrusted to him, but has failed to prevent him
from becoming closed up in his reserve, has at all times incurred a great liability.
The demonic is inclosing reserve, the demonic is anxiety
about the good. Let the inclosing reserve be x and its content
x, denoting the most terrible, the most insignificant, the hor-

Anxiety of Sin

127

rible, whose presence in life few probably even dream about,
but also the trifles to which no one pays attention." What then
is the significance of the good as x? It signifies disclosure .....
Disclosure may in tum signify the highest (redemption in an
eminent sense) as well as the most insignificant (an accidental
remark). This must not disturb us, for the category remains
the same; the phenomena have this in common-that they are
demonic-although the difference otherwise is enormous
enough to make one dizzy. Here disclosure is the good, for
disclosure is the first expression of salvation. There is also an
old saying that if one dares to utter "the word," the sorcery's
enchantment is broken, and therefore the somnambulist
wakes up when his name is spoken.
The collisions of inclosing reserve with regard to disclosure
may be infinitely varied with innumerable nuances, because
the exuberant growth of the spiritual life is not inferior to that
of nature, and the varieties of the spiritual states are more
numerous than those of the flowers. Inclosing reserve may
wish for disclosure, wish that this might be brought about
from the outside, that this might happen to it. (This is a misunderstanding, for it is a feminine relation to the freedom posited in disclosure and to the freedom that posits disclosure.
Therefore unfreedom may still remain, though the condition
of the inclosed person may become happier.) It may will disclosure to a certain degree but still retain a little residue in
order to begin the inclosing reserve all over again. (This is the
.. To be able to use one's category is a conditio sine qua non [indispensable
condition) if observation in a deeper sense is to have significance. When the
phenomenon is present to a certain degree, most people become aware of it
but are unable to explain it because they lack the category, and if they had it,
they would have a key that opens up whatever trace ofthe phenomenon there
is, for the phenomena within the category obey it as the spirits of the ring
obey the ring. 25
.... I have deliberately used the word "disclosure." I could also have called
the good "transparency." If I feared that anyone might misunderstand the
word "disclosure" and the development of its relation to the demonic, as if it
were always a matter of something external, something tangible disclosed in
the confessional, but which as something external would be of no help, I certainly would have chosen another word.

128
IV
395

IV
396

IV
395

The Concept of Anxiety

case with subordinate spirits, who can do nothing en gros.) It
may will disclosure, but incognito. (This is the subtle contradiction of inclosing reserve, examples of which are found
in poet-existences.) Disclosure may already have conquered;
however, at the same momemt, inclosing reserve ventures
the last attempt and is ingenious enough to transform the disclosure itself into a mystification, and inclosing reserve has
conquered."
However, I dare not continue further, for how could I
finish even a merely algebraic naming, let alone an attempt to
describe or to break the silence of inclosing reserve in order to
let its monologue become audible, for monologue is precisely
its speech, and therefore we characterize an inclosed person
by saying that he talks to himself. Here I shall endeavor only
to give all "an understanding but no tongue," as the inclosed
Hamlet 27 admonishes his two friends.
Nevertheless, I shall suggest a collision in which the contradiction is as terrible as inclosing reserve itself. What the
inclosed person conceals in his inclosing reserve can be so terrible that he does not dare to utter it, not even to himself, because it is as though by the very utterance he commits a new
sin or as though it would tempt him again. In order that this
phenomenon may occur, the individual must be a mixture of
purity and impurity, something that rarely occurs. It will
most likely occur when the individual, in carrying out the terrible, is not master of himself Similarly, a person in an intoxicated state may have done what he only faintly remembers,
yet he knows that it was such a wild thing that it is almost
impossible for him to recognize himself. The same may also
be the case with someone who was once insane and has
retained a memory of his former state. What determines
whether the phenomenon is demonic is the individual's attitude toward disclosure, whether he will interpenetrate that
• It is readily seen that inclosing reserve eo ipso signifies a lie or, if one prefers, untruth. But untruth is precisely unfreedom, which is anxious about
disclosure. Therefore the devil is called the father of lies. 26 That there is a
great difference between lie and untruth, between lie and lie, and between
untruth and untruth, I have always admitted, hut the category is the same.

Anxiety of Sin

129

fact with freedom and accept it in freedom. Whenever he will
not do this, the phenomenon is demonic. This must be kept
clearly in mind, for even he who wishes it is essentially demonic. He has, that is to say, two wills, one subordinate and
impotent that wills revelation and one stronger that wills inclosing reserve, but the fact that this will is the stronger indicates that he is essentially demonic.
Inclosing reserve is involuntary disclosure. The weaker the
individuality is originally, or the more the elasticity of freedom is consumed in the service of inclosing reserve, the more
likely the secret will break out at last. The slightest touch, a
passing glance, etc. is sufficient for that appalling or, in relation to the content of the inclosing reserve, that comic ventriloquism to make its beginning. The ventriloquism itself
may be forthrightly declarative or indirect, as when an insane
man betrays his insanity by pointing to another, saying: He is
most disagreeable to me; he is no doubt insane. The disclosure may declare itself in words, as when the unhappy man
ends by thrusting his concealed secret upon everyone. It may
declare itselfin facial expression, in a glance, because there is a
glance by which one involuntarily reveals what is concealed.
There is an accusing glance that reveals what one is almost
afraid to understand, a dejected, imploring glance that does
not exactly tempt curiosity to gaze into the involuntary telegraphy. With respect to the content of inclosing reserve, all of
this may in turn be almost comic, as when ridiculous things,
trifles, vanities, puerilities, expressions of petty envy, petty
medical follies, etc. in this way reveal themselves in involuntary anxiety.
The demonic is the sudden. The sudden is a new expression
for another aspect of inclosing reserve. When the content is
reflected upon, the demonic is defmed as inclosing reserve;
when time is reflected upon, it is defined as the sudden. Inclosing reserve is the effect of the negative self-relation in the
individuality. Inclosing reserve closes itself off more and
more from communication. But communication is in turn the
expression for continuity, and the negation of continuity is
the sudden. It might be thought that inclosing reserve would

130

IV
397

The Concept of Anxiety

have an extraordinary continuity; yet the very opposite is the
case, although when compared with the vapid, enervating
dissolution of oneself continually absorbed in the impression,
it has the appearance of continuity. The continuity that inclosing reserve has can best be compared with the dizziness a
spinning top must have, which constantly revolves upon its
own pivot. In case the inclosing reserve does not drive the individuality to complete insanity, which is the sad perpetuum
mobile of monotonous sameness, the individuality will still retain a certain continuity with the rest of human life. In relation to this continuity, the pseudo continuity of the inclosing
reserve will show itself precisely as the sudden. At one moment it is there, in the next moment it is gone, and no sooner
is it gone than it is there again, wholly and completely. It cannot be incorporated into or worked into any continuity, but
whatever expresses itself in this manner is precisely the
sudden.
If the demonic were something somatic, it could never be
the sudden. When the fever or the insanity etc. recurs, a law is
finally discovered, and this law annuls the sudden to a certain
degree. But the sudden knows no law. It does not belong
among natural phenomena but is a psychical phenomenon-it
is an expression of unfreedom.
The sudden, like the demonic, is anxiety about the good.
The good signifies continuity, for the first expression of salvation is continuity. Thus, while the life of an individuality
goes on to a certain degree in continuity with the rest of
human life, inclosing reserve maintains itself in the person as
an abracadabra of continuity that communicates only with itself and therefore is always the sudden.
In relation to the content of inclosing reserve, the sudden
may signify the terrible, but the effect of the sudden may also
appear to the observer as the comical. In this respect, every
individuality has a little of this "suddenness," just as every individuality has something of a fixed idea.
I shall not pursue this any further, but in support of my category I call attention to the fact that the sudden is always due
to anxiety about the good, because there is something that

Anxiety of Sin

131

freedom is unwilling to pervade. Among the formations that
lie in anxiety about evil, the sudden corresponds to weakness.
If one wants to clarify in a different way how the demonic
is the sudden, the question of how the demonic can best be
presented may be considered from a purely esthetic point of
view. If a Mephistopheles is to be presented, he might well be
furnished with speech if he is to be used as a force in the dramatic action rather than to be grasped in his essence. But in
that case Mephistopheles himself is not really represented but
is reduced to an evil, witty, intriguing mind. This is a vaporization, whereas a legend has already represented him correctly. It relates that the devil for 3,000 years sat and speculated on how to destroy man-finally he did discover it. Here
the emphasis is upon the 3,000 years, and the idea that this
brings forth is precisely that of the brooding, inclosing reserve of the demonic. If one were to vaporize Mephistopheles
in the way suggested above, another form of representation
might be chosen. In this case, it will appear that Mephistopheles is essentially mime. II- The most terrible words that
sound from the abyss of evil would not be able to produce an
effect like that of the suddenness of the leap that lies within the
confines of the mimical. Even though the word were terrible,
even though it were a Shakespeare, a Byron, or a Shelley who
breaks the silence, the word always retains its redeeming
power, because all the despair and all the horror of evil expressed in a word are not as terrible as silence. Without being
the sudden as such, the mimical may express the sudden. In
this respect the ballet master, Bournonville, deserves great
credit for his representation of Mephistopheles. The horror
that seizes one upon seeing Mephistopheles leap in through
the window and remain stationary in the position of the leap!
• The author ofEitherlOr28 has pointed out that Don Giovanni is essentially
musical. Precisely in the same sense it is true that Mephistopheles is essentially mimical. What has happened to the mimical has happened to the musical. It has been supposed that everything could become mimical and everything become musical. There is a ballet called Faust. 29 Had its composer really understood what is implied in conceiving Mephistopheles as mimical, it
could never have occurred to him to make a ballet of Faust.

IV
398

132

IV
399

The Concept of Anxiety

This spring in the leap, reminding one of the leap of the bird
of prey and of the wild beast, which doubly terrify because
they commonly leap from a completely motionless position,
has an infinite effect. Therefore Mephistopheles must walk as
little as possible, because walking itself is a kind of transition
to the leap and involves a presentiment of the possibility of
the leap. The first appearance of Mephistopheles in the ballet
Faust is therefore not a theatrical coup, but a very profound
thought. The words and the speaking, no matter how short
when regarded in abstracto, always have a certain continuity
for the reason that they are heard in time. But the sudden is a
complete abstraction from continuity, from the past and from
the future. So it is with Mephistopheles. He is not yet
visible-then he stands there, large as life, hale and hearty,
and the swiftness cannot be described more strongly than by
saying that he stands there in a leap. If the leap turns into a
walk, the effect is weakened. Since Mephistopheles is represented in this manner, his entrance gives the effect of the demonic, which comes more suddenly than a thiefin the night,
for one thinks of a thief as coming stealthily. But Mephistopheles reveals his essence as well, which as the demonic is
precisely the sudden. Thus in the movement forward the demonic is the sudden, thus it arises in a man, thus he himself is,
insofar as he is demonic, whether the demonic has possessed
him wholly or whether only an infinitesimal part of it is present in him. Thus the demonic always is, and thus unfreedom
becomes anxious, and thus its anxiety moves. Hence, the
tendency of the demonic toward mime, not in the sense of the
beautiful but in the sense of the sudden, the abrupt, which life
itself often gives opportunity to observe.
The demonic is the contentless, the boring.
In the case of the sudden, I have called attention to the
esthetic problem of how the demonic may be represented. To
elucidate what already has been said, I shall again raise the
same question. As soon as one wants to have a demoniac
speak and to have him represented, the artist who is to solve
this problem must be clear about the categories. He knows
that the demonic is essentially mimical; the sudden, however,

Anxiety of Sin

133

he cannot achieve, because it interferes with his lines. He will
not cheat, as if he were able to bring about the true effect by
blurting out the words etc. Therefore, he correctly chooses
the very opposite, namely, the boring. The continuity that
corresponds to the sudden is what might be called extinction.
Boredom, extinction, is precisely a continuity in nothingness.
Now the number in the legend can be understood somewhat
differently. The 3,000 years are not accentuated to emphasize
the sudden; instead, the prodigious span of time evokes the
notion of the dreadful emptiness and contentlessness of evil.
Freedom is tranquil in continuity. Its opposite is the sudden,
but also the quietness that comes to mind when one sees a
man who looks as if he were long since dead and buried. An
artist who understands this will see that in discovering how
the demonic can be represented he has also found an expression for the comic. The comic effect can be produced in
exactly the same way. When all ethical determinants of evil
are excluded, and only metaphysical determinants of emptiness are used, the result is the trivial, which can easily have a
comic aspect ....
The contentless and the boring again signify inclosing r~­
serve. In relation to the sudden, the determination "inclosing
reserve" reflects upon the content. When I now include the
determinations "contentless" and "boring," these reflect
upon the content, and inclosing reserve reflects upon the form
that corresponds to the content. Thus the whole conceptual
determination is completed, for the form of the contentless is
precisely inclosing reserve. It should be kept in mind constantly that, according to my terminology, one cannot be in-

• Therefore little Winsl0v'sJO representation of Klister in The Inseparables
was so profound, because he had correctly understood the comical as the boring. That a love affair, which when it is true has the nature of continuity, is
exactly the opposite, namely, an infmite emptiness (not because Klister is an
evil man, faithless, etc., since on the contrary he is sincerely in love, but because in his love affair he is a supernumerary volunteer, just as he is in the
customhouse) has great comic effect when the accent is placed on the boring.
Klister's position in the customhouse can have a comic aspect only unjustifiably, because, after all, how could Klister help it that there is no promotion?
But in relation to his love, he is indeed his own master.

IV
4(K)

134

IV
401

The Concept of Anxiety

closed [indesluttet] in God or in the good, because this kind of
inclosure signifies the greatest expansion. Thus the more
definitely conscience is developed in a person the more expanded he is, even though in other respects he closes himself
off from the whole world.
If I were now to call attention to the terminologie~ of the
most recent philosophy, I might say that the demonic is the
negative and is a nothing, like the elf maid who is hollow
when seen from the back. However, I do not prefer to do
this, because the terminology in and by its social intercourse
has become so amiable and pliant that it may signify anything
whatsoever. The negative, ifI were to use this word, signifies
the form of nothing, just as the contentless corresponds to inclosed reserve. But the negative has the defect that it is more
externally oriented; it defines the relation to something else,
which is negated, while inclosed reserve defines the state itself.
When the negative is understood in this manner, I have no
objection to its use as a designation for the demonic, provided
that the negative can otherwise rid itself of all the bees that the
most recent philosophy has put in its bonnet. The negative
has gradually become a vaudeville character, and this word
always makes me smile, just as a person smiles when in real
life or in the songs ofBellmann 31 he meets one of those amusing characters who was first a trumpeter, then a minor customhouse officer, then an innkeeper, then again a mail carrier.
Thus irony has been explained as the negative. Hegel was the
first to discover this explanation, but strangely enough, he
did not know much about irony. That it was Socrates32 who
first introduced irony into the world and gave a name to the
child, that his irony was precisely inclosing reserve, which he
began by closing himself off from men, by closing himself in
with himself in order to be expanded in the divine, who also
began by closing his door33 and making a jest to those outside
in order to talk in secret-this is something no one is concerned with. On the occasion of one or another accidental
phenomena, this word "irony" is brought up, and so it is
irony. Then come the parrots, who despite their survey of

Anxiety of Sin

135

world history unfortunately lack all contemplation, and who
know as much about the concepts as that noble youth knew
about raisins, who, when asked in the test for a grocer's licence where raisins come from, answered: We get ours from
the professor 34 on Cross Street.
We now return to the definition of the demonic as anxiety
about the good. 3s If on the one hand unfreedom were able to
close itself off completely and hypostatize itself, but if on the
other hand it did not constantly will to do so" (in this lies the
contradiction that unfreedom wills something, when in fact it
has lost its will), the demonic would not be anxious about the
good. Therefore anxiety manifests itself most clearly in the
moment of contact. Whether the demonic in the single individuality signifies the terrible or whether the demonic is present only like a spot on the sun or like the little white dot in the
corn, the totality of the demonic and the partly demonic have
the same qualification, and the tiniest part of the demonic is
anxiety about the good in the same sense as that which is totally embraced by it. The bondage of sin is, of course, also
unfreedom, but as shown above, its direction is different, and
its anxiety is about evil. If this is not held fast, nothing can be
explained.
Unfreedom, the demonic, is therefore a state, and psychology regards it as a state. Ethics, on the other hand, sees how
out of this state the new sin constantly breaks forth, for only
the good is the unity of state and movement.
Freedom, however, may be lost in different ways, and so
there may also be a difference in the demonic. This difference
I shall now consider under the following rubrics: Freedom
• This must constantly be maintained despite the illusion of the demonic
and that oflanguage usage, which by employing such expressions in describing this state almost tempts one to forget that unfreedom is a phenomenon of
freedom and thus cannot be explained by naturalistic categories. Even when
unfreedom uses the strongest possible expressions to affIrm that it does not
will itself, it is untrue, and it always possesses a will that is stronger than the
wish. This state can be extremely deceptive, for one can bring a human being
to despair by holding back and keeping the category pure over against his
sophisms. One should not be afraid of this, but neither should youthful
imaginative constructors try themselves in these spheres.

IV
-f02

IV
401

IV
402

136

The Concept of Anxiety

lost somatically-psychically and freedom lost pneumatically.36 The reader will already be familiar with my extensive
use of the concept of the demonic, but it is not more extensive
than the concept will allow. It is of no use to make an ogre out
of the demonic, at which one first shudders but afterwards
ignores, since, after all, it is several hundred years since it was
found in the world. Such an assumption is a great stupidity,
but it probably has never been as widespread as in our times,
except that nowadays it manifests itself especially in the
spiritual spheres.
IV
402

IV
403

I. Freedom Lost Somatically-Psychically

It is not my purpose to present a pretentious and bombastic
philosophical deliberation on the relation between psyche and
body and to discuss in which sense the psyche itself produces
its body (whether this be understood in the Greek way or in
the German way) or, to recall an expression of Schelling, in
what sense the psyche itself, by an act of "corporization,"37
posits its body. Here I have no need of such things. For my
purpose, I shall express myself to the best of my ability: The
body is the organ of the psyche and in tum the organ of the
spirit. As soon as the serving relation comes to an end, as
soon as the body revolts, and as soon as freedom conspires
with the body against itself, unfreedom is present as the demonic. If there should be someone who has not as yet sharply
apprehended the difference between what I have developed in
this section and what was developed in the former section, I
shall state it again. As long as freedom does not defect to the
party of the rebels, the anxiety of revolution will still be present, not as anxiety about the good, but as anxiety about evil.
It will be easy to see what a multiplicity of innumerable
nuances the demonic in this sphere comprises, some of which
are so imperceptible that they are apparent only to microscopic observation, and some so dialectical that the category
must be used with great flexibility in order to recognize that
the nuances belong under it. A hypersensibility and a hyperirritability, neurasthenia, hysteria, hypochondria, etc.-all of

Anxiety of Sin

137

these are or could be nuances of it. This makes it so difficult to
talk about these things in abstracto, since speech itself becomes
algebraic. More than this I cannot do here.
The utmost extreme in this sphere is what is commonly
called bestial perdition. In this state, the demonic manifests itself in saying, as did the demoniac in the New Testament
with regard to salvation: ti eJ,loi Kai (JOt [What have I to do
with you]? Therefore it shuns every contact [with the good],
whether this actually threatens it by wanting to help it to
freedom or only touches it casually. But this is also enough,
for anxiety is extraordinarily swift. Therefore, from such a
demoniac is quite commonly heard a reply that expresses all
the horror of this state: Leave me alone in my wretchedness.
Or such a man says in referring to a particular time in his past
life: At that time I could probably have been saved-the most
dreadful reply imaginable. Neither punishment nor thunderous tirades make him anxious, yet every word that is related
to the freedom scuttled and sunk in unfreedom will do so. In
this phenomenon, anxiety expresses itself also in another
way. Among such demoniacs there is a cohesion in which
they cling to one another so inseparably and anxiously that no
friendship has an inwardness that can be compared with it.
The French physician Duchatelet38 gives examples of it in his
work. This sociability of anxiety will manifest itself everywhere in this sphere. The sociability in itself furnishes an assurance that the demonic is present, but insofar as there is the
analogous condition as an expression of the bondage of sin,
the sociability is not present, because the anxiety is that about
evil.
I shall not pursue this any farther. For me the principal
thing is to have my schema in order.

II. Freedom Lost Pneumatically

(a) GENERAL REMARKS. This form of the demonic is very
widespread, and here we encounter the most diverse phenomena. The demonic is, of course, not dependent upon the
variety of the intellectual content but upon the relation of

IV
404

IV
A404

138

IV
-105

IV
404

The Concept of Anxiety

freedom to the given content'" and to the possible content
commensurate with the intellectuality, because the demonic is
able to express itself as indolence that postpones thinking, as
curiosity that never becomes more than curiosity, as dishonest self-deception, as effeminate weakness that constantly relies on others, as superior negligence, as stupid busyness, etc.
Viewed intellectually, the content of freedom is truth, and
truth makes man free. 39 For this reason, truth is the work of
freedom, and in such a way that freedom constantly brings
forth truth. Obviously, I am not thinking of the cleverness of
the most recent philosophy, which maintains that the necessity of thought is also its freedom,40 and which therefore,
when it speaks about the freedom of thought, speaks only of
the immanent movement of eternal thought. Such cleverness
can only serve to confuse and to make the communication between men more difficult. On the other hand, what I am
speaking about is very plain and simple, namely, that truth is
for the particular individual only as he himself produces it in
action. If the truth is for the individual in any other way, or if
he prevents the truth from being for him in that way, we have
a phenomenon of the demonic. Truth has always had many
loud proclaimers, but the question is whether a person will in
the deepest sense acknowledge the truth, will allow it to permeate his whole being, will accept all its consequences, and
not have an emergency hiding place for himself and a Judas
kiss for the consequence.
In modem times, there has been enough talk about truth;
now it is high time to vindicate certitude and inwardness, not
in the abstract sense in which Fichte41 uses the word, but in an
entirely concrete sense.
Certitude and inwardness, which can be attained only by
and in action, determine whether or not the individual is de• In the New Testament there is the expression crOlpia oalllOVlOOOTl~
[demonic wisdom) (James 3:15). As it is described there, the category does
not become clear. However, if the passage in 2:19, Kai ta oalll6vla ltlcrt&uoucrt Kai IIlpicrcroucrt [Even the demons believe and shudder), is referred
to, it is clear that in demonic knowledge there is the relation of un freedom to
the given knowledge.

Anxiety of Sin

139

monic. If only the category is held fast, everything gives way,
and it will become clear, for example, that arbitrariness, unbelief, mockery of religion, etc. are not, as commonly believed, lack of content, but lack of certitude, exactly in the
same sense as are superstition, servility, and sanctimoniousness. The negative phenomena lack certitude precisely because they are in anxiety about the content.
It is not my desire to use big words in speaking about the
age as a whole, but he who has observed the present generation can hardly deny that the discrepancy in it and the reason
for its anxiety and unrest is this, that in one direction truth
increases in scope and in quantity, and partly also in abstract
clarity, while in the opposite direction certainty constantly
declines. What extraordinary metaphysical and logical efforts
have been put forth in our time to produce a new, exhaustive,
and absolutely correct proof, combining all earlier proofs, of
the immortality of the soul;42 and strangely enough, while
this is taking place, certitude declines. The thought of immortality possesses a power and weightiness in its consequences, a
responsibility in the acceptance of it, which perhaps will recreate the whole of life in a way that is feared. And so one
saves and soothes one's soul by straining one's mind to produce a new proof. Yet, what is such a proof but a "good
work" in a purely Catholic sense! Every such individuality (to
stay with the example) who knows how to set forth the proof
for the immortality of the soul but who is not himself convinced will always be anxious about every phenomenon that
affects him in such a way that he is forced to seek a further
understanding of what it means to say that a man is immortal.
This will disturb him. He will be depressingly affected when a
perfectly simple man talks quite simply of immortality. In the
opposite direction, inwardness may be lacking. An adherent
of the most rigid orthodoxy may be demonic. He knows it
all. He genuflects before the holy. Truth is for him the aggregate of ceremonies. He talks of meeting before the throne of
God and knows how many times one should bow. He knows
everything, like the man who can prove a mathematical
proposition when the letters are ABC, but not when the let-

IV
406

140

IV
407

The Concept of Anxiety

ters are DEF. So he becomes anxious whenever he hears
something that is not literally the same. And yet, how he resembles a modem speculator who has discovered a new proof
for the immortality of the soul and then, in peril of his life,
cannot produce the proof because he does not have his
notebooks with him! And what is it that both of them lack? It
is certitude.-Both superstition and unbelief are forms of unfreedom. In superstition, objectivity is conceded to be a
power-like that of Medusa's head-which can petrify subjectivity, and unfreedom does not will that the spell be broken. Mockery is the highest and apparently the freest expression of unbelief. However, what mockery lacks is precisely
certitude, and therefore it mocks. Yet how many a mocker's
existence, if only we could look into it, would recall the anxiety in which the demonic calls out: 'tl t~oi Kai 0'01 [What
have I to do with you]? It is therefore a remarkable phenomenon that there are perhaps few who are as vain and touchy
about the applause of the moment as the mocker.
With what industrious zeal, with what sacrifice of time, of
diligence, of writing materials the speculators in our time
have wanted to produce a complete proof of God's existence
[Tilvcerelse]! Yet to the same degree that the excellence of the
proof increases, certitude seems to decline. The thought of
God's existence [Tilvcerelse], when it is posited as such for the
individual's freedom, has an omnipresence that for the prudent individuality has something embarrassing about it, even
though he does not wish to do anything evil. To live in a
beautiful and intimate companionship with this conception
truly requires inwardness, and it is a much greater feat than
that of being a model husband. How depressed such an individuality may feel when he hears a naive and simple man talk
about the existence of God. The demonstration of the existence of God is something with which one learnedly and
metaphysically occupies oneself only on occasion, but the
thought of God forces itself upon a man on every occasion.
What is it that such an individuality lacks? Inwardness. Inwardness may also be lacking in an opposite direction. The
so-called pious are often the objects of the world's mockery.

Anxiety

~f Sin

141

They themselves explain this by saying that the world is evil.
But this is not entirely true. If such a "pious" man is in an
unfree relation to his piety, i.e., ifhe lacks inwardness, he is,
from a purely esthetic point of view, simply comical. To that
extent, the world is justified in laughing at him. If a bowlegged man wants to act as a dancing master but is unable to execute a single step, he is comical. So it is also with the religious. Sometimes one may hear such a pious person beating
time, as it were, exactly like one who cannot dance but nevertheless knows enough to beat time, although he is never fortunate enough to get in step. Thus the "pious" person knows
that the religious is absolutely commensurable, that it is not
something that belongs only to certain occasions and moments in life, but that a man can always have it with him.
However, just when he is about to make it commensurable,
he is not free. It is apparent that he is softly beating time by
himself and that in spite of everything he blunders and comes
off badly with his heavenward glance and folded hands etc.
For this reason, such an individuality is anxious about everyone who does not have this training, and in order to reassure
himself, such an individuality must seize upon these grandiose observations that the world hates the pious.
Certitude and inwardness are indeed subjectivity,43 but not
in an entirely abstract sense. It really is the misfortune of the
most recent knowledge that everything has become so terribly magnificent. Abstract subjectivity is just as uncertain and
lacks inwardness to the same degree as abstract objectivity.
When it is spoken about in abstracto, this cannot be seen, and
so it is correct to say that abstract subjectivity lacks content.
When it is spoken about in concreto, the content clearly appears, because the individuality who wants to make himself
into an abstraction precisely lacks inwardness, as does the individuality who makes himself into a mere master of ceremomes.
(b) THE SCHEMA FOR THE EXCLUSION OR THE ABSENCE OF

The absence of inwardness is always a category of reflection, and consequently every form will have a
double form. Because the qualifications of the spirit are usuINWARDNESS.

IV

408

142

The Concept of Anxiety

ally considered altogether abstractly, the tendency is to overlook this. Usually immediacy is posited in opposition to reflection (inwardness) and then the synthesis (or substantiality,
subjectivity, identity, that in which this identity is said to
consist: reason, idea, spirit). But in the sphere of actuality this
is not the case. There immediacy is also the immediacy of inwardness. For this reason, the absence of inwardness is due in
the first place to reflection.
Every fonn of the absence of inwardness is therefore either
activity-passivity or passivity-activity, and whether it is the one or
the other, it is in the sphere of self-reflection. The form itself runs
through a considerable series of nuances in proportion to the
degree of the concretion of the inwardness. There is an old
saying that to understand and to understand are two things,
and so they are. Inwardness is an understanding, but in concreto the important thing is how this understanding is to be
understood. To understand a speech is one thing, and to understand what it refers to, namely, the personal, is something
else; for a man to understand what he himself says is one
thing, and to understand himself in what is said is something
else. The more concrete the content of consciousness is, the
more concrete the understanding becomes, and when this understanding is absent to consciousness, we have a phenomenon of unfreedom that wants to close itself off against freedom. Thus if we take a more concrete religious consciousness
that at the same time also contains a historical factor, the understanding must stand in relation to it. Here we have an
example of the two analogous forms of the demonic in this
respect. When a man of rigid orthodoxy applies all his diligence and learning to prove that every word in the New Testament derives from the respective apostle, inwardness will
gradually disappear, and he finally comes to understand
something quite different from what he wished to understand. When a freethinker4 4 applies all his acumen to prove
that the New Testament was not written until the second century, it is precisely inwardness he is afraid of, and therefore he
must have the New Testament placed in the same class with

Anxiety of Sin

143

other books." The most concrete content that consciousness
can have is consciousness of itself, of the individual himself-not the pure self-consciousness, but the self-consciousness that is so concrete that no author, not even the one
with the greatest power of description, has ever been able to
describe a single such self-consciousness, although every
single human being is such a one. This self-consciousness is
not contemplation, for he who believes this has not understood himself, because he sees that meanwhile he himself is in
the process of becoming and consequently cannot be something completed for contemplation. This self-consciousness,
therefore, is action, and this action is in tum inwardness, and
whenever inwardness does not correspond to this consciousness, there is a form of the demonic as soon as the absence of
inwardness expresses itself as anxiety about its acquisition.

IV
409

• Moreover, in the religious sphere the demonic may have a deceptive resemblance to a spiritual trial [Anf4'gtelse). Which it is can never be determined
in abstracto. Thus a pious, believing Christian may fall into anxiety. He may
become anxious about going to Communion. This is a spiritual trial, that is,
whether or not it is a spiritual trial will show itself in his relation to anxiety.
On the other hand, a demonic nature can have gone so far, his religious consciousness become so concrete, that the inwardness about which he is anxious
and which in his anxiety he seeks to escape is a purely personal understanding
of the sacramental understanding. He is willing to go along with this, but
only up to a certain point; then he breaks off and wants to relate himself only
as a knower. He desires in one way or another to be more than the empirical,
historically qualified, fmite individuality that he is. Whoever is in a religious
spiritual trial wants to go on to that from which the spiritual trial would keep
him away, while the demonic, according to his stronger will (the will of unfreedom), wants to get away from it, while the weaker will in him wants to
go on to it. This distinction must be maintained; otherwise one goes on and
conceives of the demonic so abstractly that no such thing could ever have
occurred, as thoug!l the will of unfreedom were constituted as such and the
will of freedom were not always present, however weak, in the selfcontradiction. Should anyone desire material dealing with the religious
spiritual trial, he can fmd a superfluity of it in Gorres'sMystidsm. 45 However,
I sincerely admit that I never had the courage to read the work completely
and thoroughly, because there is such anxiety in it. But this much I have discovered, that Garres does not always know how to distinguish between the
demonic and thi: spiritual trial. Therefore the work should be used with care.

IV
-108
IV
409

144

IV
~IO

The Concept of Anxiety

If the absence of inwardness were brought about mechanically, all consideration of it would be wasted effort.
However, this is not the case, for in every phenomenon of the
absence of inwardness there is an activity, even though this
begins in a passivity. The phenomena that begin with activity
are more conspicuous and therefore more easily apprehended,
as a result of which it is forgotten that in this activity there
appears in tum a passivity, and therefore in a consideration of
the demonic this contrasting phenomenon is not taken into
account.
In order to show that the schema is correct, I shall now consider a few examples:
Unbelitf--Superstition. These correspond completely to
each other: both lack inwardness, but unbelief is passive
through an activity, and superstition is active through a passivity. The one is, in a sense, the more masculine, the other
the more feminine form; the content of both forms is selfreflection. Viewed essentially, both are completely identical.
Unbelief and superstition are both anxiety about faith, but
unbelief begins in the activity of un freedom, and superstition
begins in the passivity of un freedom. Usually only the passivity of superstition is observed, and therefore it appears less
important or more excusable, all depending upon whether
esthetic-ethical or· ethical categories are applied. In superstition there is a weakness that is deceptive; nevertheless, there
must always be enough activity in it to preserve its passivity.
Superstition is unbelieving about itself. Unbelief is superstitious about itself. The content of both is self-reflection. The
comfortableness, cowardice, and pusillanimity of superstition
find it better to remain in self-reflection than to relinquish it.
The defiance, pride, and arrogance of unbelief find it more
daring to remain in self-reflection than to relinquish it. The
most refmed form of such self-reflection is always the one that
becomes interesting to itself by wishing itself out of this state
while it nevertheless remains complacently in it.
Hypocrisy-Offense. These correspond to each other. Hypocrisy begins through an activity, offense through a passiv-

Anxiety of Sin

145

ity. Generally offense is judged more mildly, but if the individual remains in it, there must still be enough activity so that
it sustains the suffering of offense and does not want to relinquish it. There is a receptivity in offense (for a tree or a stone
is not offended) that is also taken into account in the annulling
of offense. On the other hand, the passivity of offense finds it
more enervating just to sit and, as it were, to continue letting
the consequences of the offense mount up at compound interest. Therefore hypocrisy is offense at oneself, while offense is
hypocrisy to oneself. Both lack inwardness and dare not come
to themselves. For this reason, all hypocrisy ends by being
hypocritical to oneself, because the hypocrite is offended at
himself or is an offense to himself. All offense, if it is not removed, ends in hypocrisy toward others, because the offended man, through the profound activity by which he remains in offense, has turned that receptivity into something
else and therefore must now be hypocritical toward others. It
has also been the case in life that an offended individuality
finally used this offense as a fig leaf to cover what otherwise
might have required a hypocritical cloak.
Pride-Cowardice. Pride begins through an activity, cowardice through a passivity; in all other respects they are identical, because in cowardice there is just enough activity to
maintain anxiety about the good. Pride is a profound cowardice, for it is cowardly enough not to be willing to understand
what pride truly is. As soon as this understanding is forced
upon it, it is cowardly, disintegrates with a bang, and bursts
like a bubble. Cowardice is a profound pride, because it is
cowardly enough not to be willing to understand even the
claims of a misunderstood pride, and it manifests its pride by
shrinking, as well as by taking into account the fact that it has
never suffered a defeat. Therefore it is proud of pride's negative expression, namely, that it has never suffered a loss. It has
also been the case in life that a very proud individuality was so
cowardly as never to venture anything, cowardly enough to
be as insignificant as possible, precisely in order to save his
own pride. If an active-proud and a passive-proud individ-

IV
411

146

IV
~12

The Concept

(~r

Anxiety

uality were brought together precisely in the moment when
the former fell, there would be an opportunity to be convinced as to how proud the cowardly one really was."
(c) WHAT IS CERTITUDE AND INWARDNESS? It is no doubt
difficult to give a definition of inwardness. In the meantime, I
shall at this point say that it is earnestness. This is a word that
everyone understands. But strangely enough, few words
have less frequently been the object of deliberation. When
Macbeth murdered the king, he exclaimed:
Vonjetzt giebt es nicht Ernstes mehr im Leben:
Alles ist Tand, gestorben Ruhm und Gnade!
Oer Lebenswein ist ausgeschenkt. 46
Macbeth was a murderer; therefore the words in his mouth
were a dreadful and shocking truth. Yet every individual who
has lost inwardness can truly say "The wine oflife is drawn,"
and also "There's nothing serious in mortality; all is but
toys," for inwardness is precisely the fountain that springs up
unto eternal life, and what issues from this fountain is precisely earnestness. When in Ecclesiastes 47 the preacher says
that "all is vanity," it is precisely earnestness that he has in
mente [in mind]. On the other hand, when after earnestness is
lost it is said that all is vanity, then this is only an activepassive expression for the same (the defiance of melancholy),
or a passive-active expression (the defiance of frivolity and

IV
~II

IV
412

• In his treatise De affectionibus, Descartes 48 calls attention to the fact that
every passion has a corresponding passion; only with wonder this is not the
case. The detailed exposition is rather weak, but it has been of interest to me
that he makes an exception of wonder, because, as is well known, according
to Plato's and Aristotle's views precisely this constitutes the passion of philosophy and the passion with which all philosophizing began. Moreover,
envy corresponds to wonder, and recent philosophy would also speak of
doubt. Precisely in this lies the fundamental error of recent philosophy, that it
wants to begin with the negative instead of with the positive, which always is
the first, in the same sense as ajJinnatio is plac:;ed first in the dedaration omnis
ajJirmatio est negatio [every affirmation is a negation). The question of whether
the positive or the negative comes first is exceedingly important, and the only
modem philosopher who has dedared himself for the positive is presumably
Herbart. 49

Anxiety of Sin

147

witticism), and so there is occasion either to weep or to laugh,
but earnestness is lost. 50
To the extent of my knowledge, I am not aware that there
exists a single definition of earnestness. 51 If this were true, it
would please me, not because I love the modern fluent and
confluent thinking that has abolished the defmition, but because in relation to existential concepts it always indicates a
greater discretion to abstain from definitions, because a person can hardly be inclined to apprehend essentially in the
form of definition what must be understood differently, what
he himself has understood differently, what he has loved in an
entirely different way, and which in the form of definition
easily becomes something else, something foreign to him. 52
Whoever loves can hardly find joy and satisfaction, not to
mention growth, in preoccupation with a definition of what
love properly is. Whoever lives in daily and festive communion with the thought that there is a God could hardly wish to
spoil this for himself, or see it spoiled, by piecing together a
definition of what God is. So also with earnestness, which is
so earnest a matter that even a defmition of it becomes a
frivolity. I do not say this because my thought is vague or because I fear that some supershrewd speculator might become
suspicious of me, as if I did not quite know whereof I
speak-the kind of a speculator who is as obstinate about the
development of the concepts as the mathematician is about
the proof, and who would say about everything else what a
certain mathematician said: What does this prove? To my
mind, what I say here proves much better than any conceptual development that I do know in earnest what the discussion is about.
Although I am not inclined to give a definition of earnestness or to talk about it in the jest of abstraction, nevertheless I
will make a few remarks for orientation. In Rosenkranz's Psychology53 there is a defmition* of disposition [Cernyt]. On
• It is always a joy to assume that my reader has read as much as I. This
assumption is very economical for the reader as well as for the writer. 54 So I
assume that my reader is familiar with the book to which I have referred. If
this is not so, I urge him to familiarize himself with it, for it is actually a com-

IV
413

IV
413

148
IV
414

IV
413

The Concept of Anxiety

page 322 he says that disposition is the unity of feeling and
self-consciousness. In the preceding presentation he superbly
explains "dasz das Gefuhl zum Selbstbewusztsein sich aufschliesse, und umgekehrt, dasz der Inhalt des Selbstbewusztseins von dem Subjekt als der seinige gefuhlt wird. Erst
diese Einheit kann man Gemiith nennen. Denn fehlt die
Klarheit der Erkenntniss, das Wissen vom GefUhl, so existiert
nur der Drang des Naturgeistes, der Turgor der Un mittelbarkeit. Fehlt aber das GefUhl, so existiert nur ein abstrakter
Begriff, der nicht die letzte Innigheit des geistigen Dascins erreicht hat, der nicht mit dem Selbst des Geistes Eines geworden ist" [that the feeling unfolds itself to self-consciousness,
and vice versa, that the content of the self-consciousness is felt
by the subject as his own. It is only this unity that can be
called disposition. If the clarity of cognition is lacking, knowledge of the feeling, there exists only the urge of the spirit of
nature, the turgidity of immediacy. On the other hand, iffeeling is lacking, there remains only the abstract concept that has
not reached the last inwardness of the spiritual existence, that
has not become one with the self of the spirit] (cf. pp. 320,
321). If a person now turns back and pursues his defmition of
"feeling" as the spirit's unmittelbare Einheit seiner Seelenhaftjgkeit und seines Bewusstseins [immediate unity of its sentience
and its consciousness] (p. 242) and recalls that in the defmition
of Seelenhaftjgkeit [sentience] account has been taken of the
unity with the immediate determinants of nature, then by taking all of this together he has the conception of a concrete personality.
Earnestness and disposition correspond to each other in
such a way that earnestness is a higher as well as the deepest
expression for what disposition is. Disposition is a determipetent book, and if the author. who otherwise distinguishes himself by his
common sense and his humane interest in human life, had been able to renounce his fanatical superstitious belief in an empty schema, he could have
avoided being ridiculous at times. What he says in this passage is for the most
part very good. The only thing that at times is difficult to understand is the
grandiose schema and how the altogether concrete discussion can correspond
to it. (As an example, I refer to pp. 209-11. Das Selbst-flruJ das Selbst: 1. De,
Tod; 2. De, Gegensatz von Hemchtift und Knechtschaft .)

Anxiety of Sin

149

nant of immediacy, while earnestness, on the other hand, is
the acquired originality of disposition,55 its originality preserved in the responsibility of freedom and its originality
affirmed in the enjoyment of blessedness. In its historical development, the originality of disposition marks precisely the
eternal in earnestness, for which reason earnestness can never
become habit. Rosenkranz deals with habit only in the
"Phenomenology," not in the "Pneumatology"-however,
habit belongs in the latter as well, and habit arises as soon as
the eternal disappears from repetition. When the originality in
earnestness is acquired and preserved, then there is succession
and repetition, but as soon as originality is lacking in repetition, there is habit. The earnest person is earnest precisely
through the originality with which he returns in repetition. It
is said that a living and inward feeling preserves this originality, but the inwardness of the feeling is a fire that may cool as
soon as earnestness no longer attends to it. On the other hand,
the inwardness of feeling is uncertain in its mood, i.e., at one
time it is more inward than at another. To make everything as
concrete as possible, I shall use an example. Every Sunday, a
clergyman must recite the prescribed common prayer, and
every Sunday he baptizes several children. Now let him be
enthusiastic etc. The fire bums out, he will stir and move
people etc., but at one time more and at another time less.
Earnestness alone is capable of returning regularly every Sunday with the same originality to the same thing. IIBut this same thing to which earnestness is to return with
the same earnestness can only be earnestness itself; otherwise
it becomes pedantry. Earnestness in this sense means the personality itself, and only an earnest personality is an actual personality, and only an earnest personality can do anything with
earnestness, for to do anything with earnestness requires, first
and foremost, knowledge of what the object of earnestness is.
In life there is not infrequently talk about earnestness.
Someone is in earnest about the national debt, another about

• It was in this sense that Constantin Constantius said (in Repetition), "Repetition is the earnestness of existence [Tilv~relsen]" (p. 6),56 and that the earnestness oflife is not to be like a royal riding master, even if such a man every
time he mounted his horse did so with all possible earnestness.

IV
415

150

IV
416

The Concept oj Anxiety

the categories, and a third about a performance at the theater,
etc. Irony discovers that this is the case, and with that it has
enough to occupy itself, because everyone who becomes earnest at the wrong place is eo ipso comical, even though an
equally comical, travestied contemporary age and the opinion
of the age may be exceedingly earnest about it. Therefore,
there is no measuring rod more accurate for determining the
essential worth of an individuality than what is learned
through the individual's own loquacity or by cunningly extracting from him the secret: What has made him earnest in
life? For one may be born with disposition, but no one is born
with earnestness. The phrase "What has made him earnest in
life" must of course be understood, in a pregnant sense, as
that from which the individuality in the deepest sense dates
his earnestness. Having become truly earnest about that
which is the object of earnestness, a person may very well, if
he so wishes, treat various things earnestly, but the question
is whether he first became earnest about the object of earnestness. This object every human being has, because it is himself,
and whoever has not become earnest about this, but about
something else, something great and noisy, is despite all his
earnestness a joker, and though he may deceive irony for
some time, he will, volente deo [God willing], still become
comical because irony is jealous of earnestness. On the other
hand, whoever has become earnest at the right place will
prove the soundness of his spirit precisely by his ability to
treat all other things sentimentally as well as jokingly, although it makes a cold shiver run down the spines of the
dupes of earnestness when they see him joke about whatever
made them frightfully earnest. But in regard to earnestness he
will know how not to tolerate any joking, for if he forgets
this, it may go with him as with Albert Magnus when he arrogantly boasted of his speculation before the deity and suddenly became stupid, or as it went with Bellerophon, who sat
calmly on his Pegasus in the service of the idea but fell when
he wanted to misuse Pegasus by riding the horse to a rendezvous with a mortal woman. It
• Cf. Marbach,57 Geschichte der Philosophie, Pt. 2, p. 302, note: Albertus re-

Anxiety of Sin

15t

Inwardness, certitude, is earnestness. This seems a little paltry. If at least I had said, it is subjectivity, the pure subjectivity, the iibergreifende [encompassing] subjectivity, I would
have said something, something that no doubt would have
made many earnest. However, I can also express earnestness
in another way. Whenever inwardness is lacking, the spirit is
fmitized. Inwardness is therefore eternity or the constituent of
the eternal in man.
To study the demonic properly, one needs only to observe
how the eternal is conceived in the individuality, and immediately one will be informed. In this respect, the modern age
offers a great field for observation. In our times, the eternal is
discussed often enough; it is accepted and rejected, and (considering the way in which this is done) the first as well as the
second shows lack of inwardness. But whoever has not understood the eternal correctly, understood it altogether concretely," lacks inwardness and earnestness.
Here I do not wish to be more explicit; nevertheless, I shall
indicate a number of points.
(a) Some deny the eternal in man. At the same moment, der

pente ex asino faaus philosophus et ex philosopho asinus [Albert was suddenly
transformed from an ass into a philosopher and from a philosopher into an
ass). Cf. Tennemann,58 VIII, Pt. 2, p. 485, note. There is a more defmite
account of another scholastic, Simon Tornacensis, who thought that God
must be obliged to him for having furnished a proof of the Trinity, because if
he wanted, then---profecto si malignando et adversando vel/em JOrlioribus argumentis scirem iIIam infirmare et deprimendo improbare [if out of malice and enmity I
wished to do so, I could weaken it with stronger arguments, and disprove it
by reducing it). As a reward for his efforts, the good man was turned into a
fool who had to spend two years learning the alphabet. See Tennemann, Geschichte der Philosophie, VIII, p. 314, note. Let this be as it may. Whether he
actually said this or even uttered what has been ascribed to him-the famous
blasphemy of the Middle Ages about the three great deceivers--certainly
what he lacked was not strenuous earnestness in dialectics and speculation but
an understanding of himself. This story has numerous analogies, and in our
time speculation has assumed such authority that it has practically tried to
make God feel uncertain ofhimse1f, like a monarch who is anxiously waiting
to learn whether the general assembly will make him an absolute or a limited
monarch.
• It was doubtless in this sense that Constantin Constantius59 said of the
eternal that it is the true repetition.

IV
417

IV
416

IV
417

152

IV
418

The Concept of Anxiety

Lebenswein list 1ausgeschenkt [the wine of life is drawn 1, and
every such individuality is demonic. If the eternal is posited,
the present becomes something different from what a person
wants it to be. He fears this, and thus he is in anxiety about
the good. He may continue to deny the eternal as long as he
wants, but in so doing he will not be able to kill the eternal
entirely. Even if to a certain degree and in a certain sense he is
willing to admit the eternal, he fears it in another sense and to
a higher degree. Nevertheless, no matter how much he denies
it, he cannot get rid of it entirely. In our day, men fear the
eternal far too much, even when they recognize it in abstract
words and in words flattering to the eternal. Nowadays, the
various governments live in fear of restless disturbers; there
are altogether too many individualities who live in fear of one
restless disturber that nevertheless is the true rest-eternity.
So they preach the moment, and just as the road to hell is
paved with good intentions, so eternity is best annihilated by
mere moments. But why do people rush around in such a terrible haste? If there is no eternity, the moment is just as long
as if there were. But anxiety about the eternal turns the moment into an abstraction. Furthermore, this denial of the eternal may express itself directly or indirectly in many various
ways, as mockery, as prosaic intoxication with common
sense, as busyness, as enthusiasm for the temporal, etc.
(b) Some conceive of the eternal altogether abstractly. Like
the blue mountains, the eternal is the boundary of the temporal, but he who lives energetically in temporality never
reaches the boundary. The single individual who is on the
lookout for it is a frontier guard standing outside of time.
(c) Some bend eternity into time for the imagination. Conceived in this way, eternity produces an enchanting effect.
One does not know whether it is dream or actuality. As the
beams of the moon glimmer in an illuminated forest or a hall,
so the eternal peeps wistfully, dreamily, and roguishly into
the moment. Thought of the eternal becomes a fanciful pottering around, and the mood is always the same: Am I dreaming, or is it eternity that is dreaming of me?60
Or some conceive of eternity purely and simply for the

Anxiety

of Sin

153

imagination without this coquettish duplicity. This conception has found definite expression in the statement: Art is an
anticipation of eternal life,61 because poetry and art are the
reconciliation only of the imagination, and they may well
have the Sinnigkeit [thoughtfulness] of intuition but by no
means the Innigkeit [inwardness] of earnestness. Some paint
eternity elaborately with the tinsel of the imagination and
yearn for it. Some envision eternity apocalyptically, 62 pretend
to be Dante, while Dante, no matter how much he conceded
to the view of imagination, did not suspend the effect of
ethical judgment.
(d) Or eternity is conceived metaphysically. A person says
Ich Ich [1-1]63 so long that he becomes the most ridiculous of
all things: the pure I, the eternal self-consciousness. He talks
about immortality until at last he himself becomes not immortal but immortality. Despite all this, he suddenly discovers that he has not succeeded in having immortality included in the system, and now he is intent on assigning it a
place in a supplement to the system. Considering the ridiculousness of this, what Poul Meller64 said is true, that immortality must be present everywhere. But if this be so, the
temporal becomes something quite different from what is
desired. Or eternity is conceived metaphysically6S in such a way
that the temporal becomes comically preserved in it. From a
purely esthetic-metaphysical standpoint, the temporal is comical because it is a contradiction, and the comical always lies in
this category. If eternity is conceived purely metaphysically
and for some reason one wants to have the temporal included
in it, then it certainly becomes quite comical that an eternal
spirit retains the recollection that on several occasions he had
been in fmancial difficulties etc. Yet all the effort expended to
support eternity is wasted, is a false alarm, for no human
being becomes immortal or becomes convinced of his immortality in a purely metaphysical way. However, if he becomes convinced of his immortality in quite another way, the
comic will not foist itself upon him. Even though Christianity teaches that a person must render an account66 for
every idle word he has spoken, and we understand this simply

IV
419

154

IV
420

The Concept of Anxiety

as that total recollection of which unmistakable symptoms
occasionally appear already in this life, even though the teaching of Christianity cannot be more sharply illuminated by any
opposite than that of the Greek conception 67 that the immortals first drank of Lethe in order to forget, yet it by no means
follows that the recollection must become directly or indirectly comical-directly by recollecting ridiculous things or
indirectly by transforming ridiculous things into essential decisions. Precisely because the accounting and the judgment
are essential, what is essential will have the effect of a Lethe on
whatever is unessential, while it also is certain that many
things will prove to be essential that one had not expected to
be so. The soul has not been essentially present in the drolleries of life, in its accidental circumstances, its nooks and
crannies; hence all this vanishes, except for the soul that was
essentially in this, yet for him it will scarcely have comical
significance. If one has reflected thoroughly upon the
comic,68 studying it as an expert, constantly keeping one's
category clear, one will easily understand that the comic belongs to the temporal, for it is in the temporal that the contradiction is found. Metaphysically and esthetically it cannot
be stopped and prevented from finally swallowing up all of
the temporal, which will happen to the person who is developed enough to use the comic but not mature enough to distinguish inter et inter [between one and the other]. In eternity,
on the other hand, all contradiction is canceled, the temporal
is permeated by and preserved in the eternal, but in this there
is no trace of the comical.
However, men are not willing to think eternity earnestly
but are anxious about it, and anxiety can contrive a hundred
evasions. And this is precisely the demonic.

v

IV
421

Anxiety as Savirtg through Faith
In one ofGrimm'sl fairy tales there is a story of a young man
who goes in search of advehture in order to learn what it is to
be in anxiety. We will let the adventurer pursue his journey
without concerning ourselves about whether he encountered
the terrible on his way. However, I will say that this is an adventure that every human being must go through-to learn to
be anxious in order that he may not perish either by never
having been in anxiety or by succumbing in anxiety. Whoever has learned to be anxious in the right way has learned the
ultimate.
If a human being were a beast or an angel, he could not be
in anxiety. Because he is a synthesis, he can be in anxiety; and
the more profoundly he is in anxiety, the greater is the
man-yet not in the sense usually understood, in which anxiety is about something external, about something outside a
person, but in the sense that he himself produces the anxiety.
Only in this sense can the words be understood when it is said
of Christ2 that he was anxious unto death, as well as the
words spoken by Christ to Judas: What you are going to do,
do quickly. Not even the terrifying verse that made even
Luther anxious when preaching on it-"My God, my God,
why hast thou forsaken me"3-not even these words express
suffering so profoundly. For the latter signify a condition in
which Christ finds himself. And the former signify the relation to a condition that is not.
Anxiety is freedom's possibility, and only such anxiety is
through faith absolutely educative, because it consumes all
finite ends and discovers all their deceptiveness. And no
Grand Inquisitor has such dreadful torments in readiness as
anxiety has, and no secret agent knows as cunningly as anxiety how to attack his suspect in his weakest moment or to

IV
422

156

IV

423

The Concept of Anxiety

make alluring the trap in which he will be caught, and no discerning judge understands how to interrogate and examine
the accused as does anxiety, which never lets the accused escape, neither through amusement, nor by noise, nor during
work, neither by day nor by night.
Whoever is educated by anxiety is educated by possibility,
and only he who is educated by possibility is educated according to his infinitude. Therefore possibility is the weightiest of
all categories. It is true that we often hear the opposite stated,
that possibility is so light, whereas actuality is so heavy. But
from whom does one hear such words? From wretched men
who never knew what possibility is, and who, when actuality
had shown that they were not good for anything and never
would be, mendaciously revived a possibility that was very
beautiful and very enchanting, while the foundation of this
possibility was at the most a little youthful giddiness, of
which they ought rather to be ashamed. Therefore this possibility that is said to be so light is commonly regarded as the
possibility of happiness, fortune, etc. But this is not possibility. It is rather a mendacious invention that human depravity
has dressed up so as to have a reason for complaining of life
and Governance and a pretext for becoming self-important.
No, in possibility all things are equally possible, and whoever
has truly been brought up by possibility has grasped the terrible as well as the joyful. So when such a person graduates
from the school of possibility, and he knows better than a
child knows his ABC's that he can demand absolutely nothing oflife and that the terrible, perdition, and annihilation live
next door to every man, and when he has thoroughly learned
that every anxiety about which he was anxious came upon
him in the next moment-he will give actuality another explanation, he will praise actuality, and even when it rests
heavily upon him, he will remember that it nevertheless is far,
far lighter than possibility was. Only in this way can possibility be educative, because finiteness and the fmite relations in
which every individual is assigned a place, whether they be
small, or everyday, or world-historical, educate only finitely,
and a person can always persuade them, always coax some-

Anxiety as Saving through Faith

157

thing else out of them, always bargain, always escape from
them tolerably well, always keep himself a little on the outside, always prevent himself from absolutely learning something from them; and if he does this, the individual must
again have possibility in himself and himself develop that
from which he is to learn, even though in the next moment
that from which he is to learn does not at all acknowledge that
it is formed by him but absolutely deprives him of the power.
However, in order that an individual may thus be educated
absolutely and infinitely by the possibility, he must be honest
toward possibility and have faith. By faith I understand here
what Hegel 4 somewhere in his way correctly calls the inner
certainty that anticipates infmity. When the discoveries of
possibility are honestly administered, possibility will discover
all the finitudes, but it will idealize them in the form of infmity and in anxiety overwhelm the individual until he again
overcomes them in the anticipation of faith.
What I am saying here probably strikes many as obscure
and foolish talk, because they pride themselves on never having been in anxiety. To this I would reply that one certainly
should not be in anxiety about men and about finitudes, but
only he who passes through the anxiety of the possible is educated to have no anxiety, not because he can escape the terrible things of life but because these always become weak by
comparison with those of possibility. If, on the other hand,
the speaker maintains that the great thing about him is that he
has never been in anxiety, I will gladly provide him with my
explanation: that it is because he is very spiritless.
If an individual defrauds possibility, by which he is to be
educated, he never arrives at faith; then his faith will be the
sagacity of finitude , just as his school was that offinitude. But
men defraud possibility in every way, because otherwise
every man, ifhe had merely put his head out of the window,
would have seen enough for possibility to use in beginning its
exercises. There is an engraving by Chodowieckis that represents the surrender of Calais as viewed by four persons of
different temperaments, and the task of the artist was to mirror the various impressions in the facial expressions of the

158

IV
424

The Concept of Anxiety

four. The most commonplace life no doubt has experiences
enough, but the question is that of the possibility in the individuality who is honest with himself. It is told of one -Indian
hermit who for two years lived on dew that he once came to
the city, tasted wine, and became addicted to drink. This
story, like similar stories, can be understood in different
ways. It may be regarded as comic, it may be regarded as
tragic. But the individuality who is educated by possibility
needs but one such story. In that very moment, he is absolutely identified with the unfortunate man; he knows no finite
evasion by which he may escape. Now the anxiety ofpossibility holds him as its prey until, saved, it must hand him over to
faith. In no other place can he find rest, for every other place
of rest is mere chatter, although in the eyes of men it is sagacity. Therefore possibility is absolutely educative. In actuality,
no man ever became so unhappy that he did not retain a little
remnant, and common sense says quite correctly that if one is
cunning, one knows how to make the best of things. But
whoever took possibility's course in misfortune lost all, all, as
no one in actuality ever lost it. Now, if he did not defraud the
possibility that wanted to teach him and did not wheedle the
anxiety that wanted to save him, then he would also receive
everything back, as no one in actuality ever did, even though
he received all things tenfold, for the disciple of possibility received infmity, and the soul of the other expired in the finite.
In actuality, no one ever sank so deep that he could not sink
deeper, and there may be one or many who sank deeper. But
he who sank in possibility-his eye became dizzy, his eye became confused, so he could not grasp the measuring stick that
Tom, Dick, and Harry hold out as a saving straw to one sinking; his ear was closed so he could not hear what the market
price of men was in his own day, did not hear that he was just
as good as the majority. He sank absolutely, but then in tum
he emerged from the depth of the abyss lighter than all the
troublesome and terrible things in life. However, I will not
deny that whoever is educated by possibility is exposed to
danger, not that of getting into bad company and going
astray in various ways as are those educated by the fmite, but

Anxiety as Saving through Faith

159

the danger of a fall, namely, suicide. If at the beginning of his
education he misunderstands the anxiety, so that it does not
lead him to faith but away from faith, then he is lost. On the
other hand, whoever is educated [by possibility] remains
with anxiety; he does not permit himself to be deceived by its
countless falsifications and accurately remembers the past.
Then the assaults of anxiety, even though they be terrifying,
will not be such that he flees from them. For him, anxiety becomes a serving spirit that against its will leads him where he
wishes to go. Then, when it announces itself, when it cunningly pretends to have invented a new instrument of torture,
far more terrible than anything before, he does not shrink
back, and still less does he attempt to hold it off with noise
and confusion; but he bids it welcome, greets it festively, and
like Socrates 6 who raised the poisoned cup, he shuts himself
up with it and says as a patient would say to the surgeon when
the painful operation is about to begin: Now I am ready.
Then anxiety enters into his soul and searches out everything
and anxiously torments everything finite and petty out of
him, and then it leads him where he wants to go.
When one or another extraordinary event occurs in life,
when a world-historical hero gathers heroes about him and
performs deeds of valor, when a crisis occurs and everything
gains significance, then men want to have a part in it, because
all of this is educative. Possibly so. But there is a simpler way
in which one may become more thoroughly educated. Take
the pupil of possibility, place him in the middle of the Jutland
heath,7 where no event takes place or where the greatest event
is a grouse flying up noisily, and he will experience everything more perfectly, more accurately, more thoroughly than
the man who received the applause on the stage of worldhistory if that man was not educated by possibility.
So when the individual through anxiety is educated unto
faith, anxiety will eradicate precisely what it brings forth itself. Anxiety discovers fate, but just when the individual
wants to put his trust in fate, anxiety turns around and takes
fate away, because fate is like anxiety, and anxiety, like possibility, is a "magic" picture. 8 When the individuality is not

IV
425

160

IV
426

The Concept of Anxiety

thus transformed by himself in relation to fate, he will always
retain a dialectical remnant that no finitude can remove, just
as no man will lose faith in the lottery ifhe does not lose it by
himself but is supposed to lose it by continually losing when
he gambles. Even in relation to the most insignificant things,
anxiety is promptly at hand as soon as the individuality wants
to sneak away from something or stumble upon something
by chance. In itself, it is of no significance; from the outside,
from the finite, the individual can learn nothing about it. But
anxiety takes swift action, 9 instantly plays the trump card of
infinity, of the category, and the individuality cannot take the
trick. Such an individuality cannot in an outward way fear
fate, its vicissitudes and defeats, because the anxiety within
him has already fashioned fate and has taken away from him
absolutely all that any fate could take away. In the dialogue
Cratylus ,10 Socrates says that it is terrible to be deceived by
oneself, because one always has the deceiver present; similarly, one may say that it is fortunate to have present such a
deceiver who piously deceives and always weans the child before finitude begins to bungle him. Even if in our time an individuality is not educated by possibility in this manner, our
age nevertheless has an excellent characteristic for each one in
whom there is a deeper nature and who desires to learn the
good. The more peaceful and quiet an age is and the more accurately everything follows its regular course, so that the
good has its reward, the easier it is for an individuality to deceive himself about whether in all his striving he has a beautiful but nevertheless finite goal. In these times, one does not
need to be more than sixteen years old in order to recognize
that whoever performs on the stage of the theater oflife is like
the man who traveled fromJericho l l and fell among robbers.
Whoever does not wish to sink in the wretchedness of the
finite is constrained in the most profound sense to struggle
with the infmite. Such a preliminary orientation is analogous
to the education by possibility, and such an orientation cannot
take place except through possibility. So when shrewdness
has completed its innumerable calculations, when the game is
won-then anxiety comes, even before the game in actuality

Anxiety as Saving through Faith

161

has been lost or won, and anxiety makes the sign of the cross
against the devil, and shrewdness becomes helpless and its
most clever combinations vanish like a witticism compared
with the case that anxiety forms with the omnipotence of possibility. Even in the most trifling matters, as soon as the individuality wants to make a cunning tum that is merely cunning, wants to sneak away from something, and the probability is that he will succeed-because actuality is not as sharp an
examiner as anxiety-then anxiety is there at once. If it is
dismissed because it is merely a trifle, then anxiety makes this
trifle as prominent as the little place Marengo became in the
history of Europe, because there the great battle of Marengo
was fought. If an individuality is not weaned away from
shrewdness by himself, it will never be thoroughly accomplished, because finitude always explains in parts, never
totally, and he whose shrewdness always fails (and even this is
inconceivable in actuality) may seek the reason for this in his
shrewdness and then strive to become still more shrewd.
With the help of faith, anxiety brings up the individuality to
rest in providence. So it is also in relation to guilt, which is
the second thing anxiety discovers. Whoever learns to know
his guilt only from the finite is lost in the finite, and finitely
the question of whether a man is guilty cannot be determined
except in an external, juridical, and most imperfect sense.
Whoever learns to know his guilt only by analogy to judgments of the police court and the supreme court never really
understands that he is guilty, for if a man is guilty, he is infinitely guilty. Therefore, if such an individuality who is educated only by finitude does not get a verdict from the police
or a verdict by public opinion to the effect that he is guilty, he
becomes of all men the most ridiculous and pitiful, a model of
virtue who is a little better than most people but not quite so
good as the parson. What help would such a man need in life?
Why, almost before he dies he may retire to a collection of
models. From finitude one can learn much, but not how to be
anxious, except in a very mediocre and depraved sense. On
the other hand, whoever has truly learned how to be anxious
will dance when the anxieties of finitude strike up the music

IV
427

162

IV
428

IV
427

IV
428

The Concept of Anxiety

and when the apprentices of fmitude lose their minds and
courage. One is often deceived this way in life. The
hypochondriac is anxious about every insignificant thing, but
when the significant appears he begins to breathe more easily.
And why? Because the significant actuality is after all not so
terrible as the possibility he himself had fashioned, and which
he used his strength to fashion, whereas he can now use all his
strength against actuality . Yet the hypochondriac is only an
imperfect autodidact when compared with the person who is
educated by possibility, because hypochondria is partly dependent upon the somatic and is consequently accidental."
The true autodidact is precisely in the same degree a theodidact,12 as another author has said, .... or to use an expression less reminiscent of the intellectual, he is au'tollpy6C; 'tlC;
'tt;C; qHAo(JQ(piac; [one who on his own cultivates philosophy]t and in the same degree 9EOllpy6C; [one who tends the
things of God]. Therefore he who in relation to guilt is educated by anxiety will rest only in the Atonement.
Here this deliberation ends, where it began. As soon as
psychology has finished with anxiety, it is to be delivered to
dogmatics.
• It is therefore with a higher meaning that Hamann13 employs the word
"hypochondria" when he says: "Diese Angst in der Welt ist aber der einzige
Beweis unserer Heterogeneitat. Denn fehlte uns nichts, so wiirden wir es
nicht besser machen als die Heiden und Transcendental-Philosophen, die von
Gott nichts wissen und in die liebe Natur sich wie die Narren vergatren; kein
Heimweh wiirde uns anwandeln. Diese impertinente Unruhe. diese heilige
Hypochondrie ist vielleicht das Feuer. womit wir Opferthiere gesalzen und
vor der Faulnisz des laufenden secu/i bewahrt werden miissen" [However,
this anxiety in the world is the only proof of our heterogeneity. If we lacked
nothing, we should do no better than the pagans and the transcendental philosophers, who know nothing of God and like fools fall in love with lovely
nature, and no homesickness would come over us. This impertinent disquiet,
this holy hypochondria is perhaps the fire with which we season sacrificial
animals in order to preserve us from the putrefaction of the current seculi
(century) 1(vol. 6, p. 194) .
.. See EitherlOr.
t Xenophon's Symposium [1:51, where Socrates uses this expression about
himself.

SUPPLEMENT

Key to References

164

Original Title Page

166

Selected Entries from Kierkegaard's
Journals and Papers Pertaining to
The Concept of Anxiety

169

KEY TO REFERENCES

Marginal references alongside the text are to volume and page
[IV 300] in Sgren Kierkegaards Samlede V~rker, I-XIV, 1 ed.,
edited by A. B. Drachman, J. L. Heiberg, and H. O. Lange
(Copenhagen: Gyldendal, 1901-06). The same marginal references are used in Soren Kierkegaard, Gesammelte Werke, Abt.
1-36 (Dusseldorf: Diederichs Verlag, 1952-69). References
to Kierkegaard's works in English are to Kierkegaard's Writi!lgs [KW]. I-XXVI (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1976-). Specific references to the Writings are given by English
title and the standard Danish pagination referred to above
[Either/Or, I, KW III (SV 11(0)].
References to Kierkegaard's Papirer [Pap. I A 100; note the
differentiating letter A, B, or C, used only in references to the
Papirer] 'are to volume and entry in Sgren Kierkegaards Papirer,
I-XP, 1 ed., edited by P. A. Heiberg, V. Kuhr, and E. Torsting (Copenhagen: Gyldendal, 1909-48), and 2 ed., photooffset with two supplemental volumes, I-XIII, edited by N.
Thulstrup (Copenhagen: Gyldendal, 1968-70). References to
the Papirer in English UP II 1500] are to volume and serial
number in Sgren Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers, I-VII, edited
and translated by Howard V. Hong and Edna H. Hong
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1967-78).
References to correspondence are to the serial numbers in
Breve og Aktstykker Vedrgrende Sgren Kierkegaard, I-II, edited
by N. Thulstrup (Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 1953-54), and
to the corresponding serial numbers in Kierkegaard: Letters and
Documents, Translated by Henrik Rosenmeier, Kierkegaard's
Writings, XXV [Letters, KW XXV, Letter 100].
References to books in Kierkegaard's own library [ASKB
100] are based on the serial numbering system of Auktionsprotokol over Sgren Kierkegaards Bogsamling (Auctioncatalog ofSeren Kierkegaard's Book-collection), edited by H.
P. Rohde (Copenhagen: Royal Library, 1967).

Key to

R~ferences

165

References in the Supplement to page and lines in the text
are given as: see 100:1-10.
Internal references in the notes to the present work are
given as: see p. 100.
Three periods indicate an omission by the editor-translator;
five periods indicate omissions or fragmentariness in the
Danish text.

THE CONCEPT OF ANXIETY.

A Simple Psychologically Orienting Deliberation
on the Dogmatic Issue
of Hereditary Sin

by
Vigilius Haufniensis.

Copenhagen.
Available at University Bookseller C. A. Reitzel.
Printed by Bianco Luno Press.
1844.

SELECTED ENTRIES FROM
KIERKEGAARD'S JOURNALS AND PAPERS
PERTAINING TO
THE CONCEPT OF ANXIETY
See xii:28:

A certain presentiment" seems to precede everything that is
to happen (cf. a loose sheet [i.e., Pap. II A 584]); but just as it
can have a deterring effect, it can also tempt a person to think
that he is, as it were, predestined; he sees himself carried on to
something as though by consequences beyond his control.
Therefore one ought to be very careful with children, never
believe the worst and by untimely suspicion or by a chance
remark (a flame of hell which ignites the tinder which is in
every soul) occasion an anxious consciousness in which innocent but fragile souls can easily be tempted to believe themselves guilty, to despair, and thereby to make the first step
toward the goal foreshadowed by the unsettling presentiment-a remark which gives the kingdom of evil, with its
stupefying, snakelike eye, an occasion for reducing them to a
kind of spiritual paralysis. Of this too it may be said: Woe
unto him by whom the offense comes.
In margin: "The significance of typology with reference to a
theory of presentiments.-JP I 91 (Pap. II A 18) n.d., 1837
See xii:28:

Frequently the reading of medical case histories can produce an effect related to presentiment-yet two factors are already present here: in a way the makings of sickness are present in the fear-for it is difficult to say which produces the
other-there is a certain receptivity so strong that it is almost
productive-

170

Supplement

Also the effect which executions, for example, produce.The many phenomena which are evoked by the doctrine of
the sin against the Holy Spirit.All sin begins with fear (just as fear of a sickness is a disposition toward it-see Schubert, Symbolik); however, the first
human beings did not begin with it-there was no hereditary
sin.-JP IV 3992 (Pap. II A 19) n.d., 1837

See xiii: 1:

All existence [Tilvcerelsen] makes me anxious, from the
smallest fly to the mysteries of the Incarnation; the whole
thing is inexplicable to me, I myself most of all; to me all existence is infected, I myself most of all. My distress is enormous, boundless; no one knows it except God in heaven, and
he will not console me; no one can console me except God in
heaven, and he will not take compassion on me. -Young
man, you who still stand at the beginning of your goal, if you
have gone astray, turn back to God, and from his upbringing
you will take along with you a youthfulness strengthened for
manly tasks. You will never know the suffering of one who,
having wasted the courage and energy of youth in insubordination against him, must begin to retreat, weak and
exhausted, through devastated countries and ravaged provinces, everywhere surrounded by the abomination of desolation, by burned-out cities and the smoking ruins of frustrated
hopes, by trampled prosperity and toppled success-a retreat
as slow as a bad year, as long as eternity, monotonously broken by the daily repeated sigh: These days-I find no satisfaction in them.-JP V 5383 (Pap. II A 420) May 12, 1839

See xiii:8-9:
May 17
IfI had had faith, I would have stayed with Regine. Thanks
"to God I now see that. I have been on the point oflosing my
mind these days. Humanly speaking, I was fair to her;
perhaps I should never have become engaged, but from that
moment I treated her honesdy. . . . If I had not honored her

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

171

higher than myself as my future wife, if I had not been
prouder of her honor than of my own, then I would have remained silent and fulfilled her wish and mine-I would have
married her-there are so many marriages which conceal little
stories. That I did not want, then she would have become my
concubine; I would rather have murdered her. -But if! were
to explain myself, I would have had to initiate her into terrible
things, my relationship to my father, his melancholy, the
eternal night brooding within me, my going astray, my lusts
and debauchery, which, however, in the eyes of God are
perhaps not so glaring; for it was, after all, anxiety that made
me go astray, and where was I to seek a safe stronghold when
I knew or suspected that the only man I had admired for his
strength was tottering.-JP V 5664 (Pap. IV A 107) May 17,
1843
See xiii:8-9:

I cannot extricate myself from this relationship, for I cannot
write about it, inasmuch as the instant I want to do that I am
invaded by anxiety, an impatience which wants to act.-JP V
5519 (Pap. III A 164) n.d., 1841
See xiii:4:

Deep within every human being there still lives the anxiety
over the possibility of being alone in the world, forgotten by
God, overlooked among the millions and millions in this
enormous household. A person keeps this anxiety at a distance by looking at the many round about who are related to
him as kin and friends, but the anxiety is still there, nevertheless, and he hardly dares think of how he would feel if all this
were taken away.-JP I 100 (Pap. VHF A 363) n.d., 1837
See xiii:7:

It is appalling to think even for one single moment about
the dark background of my life right from its earliest beginning. The anxiety with which my father filled my soul, his

172

Supplement

own frightful depression, a lot which I cannot even write
down. I acquired an anxiety about Christianity and yet felt
powerfully attracted to it. And then what I suffered later from
Peter when he became morbidly religious.
As I mentioned, it is frightful to think for a single moment
of the kind of life I have led in my most hidden inwardness,
literally never a word about it spoken to a single human being, of course, not even daring to write down the least thing
about it-and then that I have been able to encase that life in
an exterior existence ofzest for life and cheerfulness ... .-JP
VI 6274 (Pap. IX A 411) n.d., 1848

See xiii: 12:

The thought that God tests [prl'ver], yes, tempts [{rister] a
man ("lead us not into temptation") must not horrify us. The
way one looks upon it makes the crucial difference. Disbelief,
melancholy, etc., immediately become anxious [angest] and
afraid and really impute to God the intention of doing it in
order that man shall fail. However remote it may be that the
melancholy anxiety in a man would think of having such
thoughts about God, yet in the profoundest sense he really
does think in this way, but without knowing it or becoming
aware of it, just like the hot-headed person who is said not to
know what he is doing. The believer, however, immediately
interprets the matter inversely; he believes that God does it in
order that he shall meet the test [P".ven]. Alas, in a certain
sense this is why disbelief, melancholy, anxiety, etc., so often
fail in the test, because they enervate themselves in advanceit is punishment for thinking ill of God; whereas faith usually
conquers.
But this is rigorous upbringing-this going from inborn
anxiety to faith. Anxiety is the most terrible kind of spiritual
trial [Anfa-gtelse ]-before the point is reached where the same
man is disciplined in faith, that is, to regard everything inversely, to remain full of hope and confidence when something happens which previously almost made him faint and
expire with anxiety, to plunge fearlessly into something

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

173

against which he previously knew only one means of safety,
to flee, and so on.
The person with inborn anxiety can very often have even a
visionary idea of God's love. But he cannot concretize his relationship to God. If his idea of God's love has a deeper
ground in him and he is devoutly concerned, abov~ all else, to
nourish and preserve it, then in many ways and for a long,
long time his life can go on in the agonizing suffering of getting no impression in concreto that God is love (for anxiety
continues to be too overpowering for him and prevents him
from seeing the danger, the test, the temptation, etc., in the
right way, that they are for him to meet), while he still all the
more firmly attaches himself to and clings to the thought:
Yes, but God is love just the same.
This is a sign that he is being educated or brought up to
faith. To hold fast this way to the thought that God is love
just the same is the abstract form of faith, faith in abstracto.
Then the time will come when he will succeed in concretizing
his God-relationship.-JP II 1401 (Pap. X 2 A 493) n.d., 1850

See 117:7:

The most terrible punishment for sin is the new sin. This
does not mean that the hardened, confident sinner will understand it this way. But if a man shudders at the thought of his
sin, ifhe would gladly endure anything in order to avoid falling into the old sin in the future, then the new sin is the most
terrible punishment for sin.
There are collisions here (especially in the sphere of sinful
thoughts) in which anxiety over the sin can almost call forth
the sin.
When this is the case, a desperate wrong turn may be made.
Vigilius Haufniensis has described it thus: Repentance loses its
mind. As long as repentance keeps its head, what should
stand eternally fast does stand fast-namely, that the sin must
be overcome. But in his despair it may not enter the unhappy
man's head that since the new sin is in fact the most terrible
punishment of sin he perhaps ought to put up with it.

174

Supplement

No doubt this is how to understand what quietism has
taught, that a man may be saved and yet continue in sin. In
deadly anxiety he trembles before the new sin-but since it is
in fact the punishment, despair takes him prisoner, as if there
were nothing to do.
Here we see the difference in the ways temptation [Fristelse]
and spiritual trial [Anftrgtelse] should be fought: in the case of
temptation the right thing may be to contend by avoiding. In
the case of spiritual trial one must go through it. Temptation
should be avoided; try not to see or hear what tempts you. If
it is spiritual trial, go straight toward it, trusting in God and
Christ.
Since in our time people have no idea at all of spiritual trial,
anyone who suffers from it in our time would also be regarded as a very extraordinary sinner.-JP IV 4023 (Pap. Xl
A 637) n.d., 1849

See 117:7:

May 5,1847
The difference between sin and spiritual trial [Anftrgtelse]
(for the conditions in both can be deceptively similar) is that
the temptation [Fristelse] to sin is in accord with inclination,
[the temptation] of spiritual trial [is] contrary to inclination.
Therefore the opposite tactic must be employed. The person
tempted by inclination to sin does well to shun the danger,
but in relation to spiritual trial this is the very danger, for
every time he thinks he is saving himself by shunning the
danger, the danger becomes greater the next time. The sensate person is wise to flee from the sight or the enticement,
but the one for whom inclination is not the temptation at all
but rather an anxiety about coming in contact with it (he is
under spiritual trial) is not wise to shun the sight or the enticement; for spiritual trial wants nothing else than to strike
terror into his life and hold him in anxiety .-JP IV 4367 (Pap.
VIIP A 93) May 5, 1847

See 107:7:

EntriesIrom Kierkegaard'sJoumals and Papers

175

. . . . . It is a very special spiritual trial [AnfCl'gtelse] when a
person in the strictest sense sins against his will, plagued by
the anxiety of sin, when he has, for example, sinful thoughts
which he would rather flee, does everything to avoid, but
they still come-it is a special kind of spiritual trial to believe
that this is something he must submit to, that Christ is given
to him to console him as he bears this cross plagued as he is by
a thorn in the flesh ... .-JP IV 4368 (Pap. IX A 331) n.d.,
1848

See 107:7:

The above-mentioned spiritual trial [AnfCl'gtelse] is very
painful and excruciating and, in addition, dialectically complicated almost to the point of madness; if it may be thought
of in this way, it is, to define it teleologically, an educational
torture which, whatever else, is intended to break all selfcentered willfulness.
It is in fact a kind of obsession. Humanly speaking, the sufferer is completely without guilt. He himself does not, as in
sin, deliberately provoke these thoughts; it is just the opposite, these thoughts plague him. In his anxiety he flees from
them in every way; he perhaps strains to the point of despair
all his powers of ingenuity and concentration in order to
avoid not only them but even the remotest contact with anything that could be related to them. It does not help; the anxiety becomes the greater. Neither does the usual advice
help-to forget, to escape, for that is just what he is doing,
but it merely nourishes the anxiety ... .-JP IV 4370 (Pap. IX
A 333) n.d., 1858

See 146:25:

Descartes (in his essay, De passionibus) observes correctly
that admiratio has no opposite (see Article LXXX). Similarly,

176

Supplement

that cupiditas ought not to have its opposite in aversio but
ought to have no opposite (see Article LXXXVII). This is
important for my theory of anxiety. See 11, p. 3 from back
[i.e., Pap. III A 233].-JP V 5588 (Pap. IV C 10) n.d., 184243

See 146:29:
Aristotle's view· that philosophy begins with wonder, not
as in our day with doubt, is a positive point of departure for
philosophy. Indeed, the world will no doubt learn that it does
not do to begin with the negative, and the reason for success
up to the present is that philosophers have never quite surrendered to the negative and thus have never earnestly done what
they have said. They merely flirt with doubt.
In margin:· aui yap to
9au~a.~£lV ot av9pC01tOl
Kat vUV Kat to 1tpilrtov
i1~avto CP1A.ocrO(pEiV.
[For it is owing to their wonder that men both now and at
first began to philosophize .... Aristotle, Metaphysics, Bk A
2, 9826 12f.]
Also Plato in Theaetetus. ~aAa yap cpu..ocrocpov
toutO to 1ta.9oC;, to 9au~£lv.
ou yap liAA.ll cipx'li
cplA.ocrocpiac; ft aut".
[For this feeling of wonder shows that you are a philosopher, since wonder is the only beginning of philosophy.
Plato, Theaetetus, 155 d.]
See [Karl F.] Hermann, Geschichte und System der Platonische
Ph ilosophie , I, p. 275, note 5.-JP III 3284 (Pap. III A 107)
n.d., 1841

From draft to" 'Guilty?'I'Notguilty?' "in Stages on Life's Way;
see xiv: 1 and 250, note 19:

All of us have a little psychological insight, some powers of
observation, but when this science or art manifests itself in its

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

177

infinitude, when it abandons minor transactions on the street
and in dwellings in order to scurry after its favorite: the
person shut up within himself [the person of inclosing reserve]-then men grow weary.-JP V 5721 (Pap. V B 147)
n.d., 1844

Draft of title:

Concerning
The Concept of Anxiety

A plain and simple psychological deliberation on the

dogmatic issue of hereditary sin
by
S. Kierkegaard
M.A.
[magister artium ]I
-Pap. V B 42 n.d., 1844
Addition to Pap. VB 42:

Socrates- - - - - -Hamann

+

+

400 b.Chr.
1758 after Chr.
Sokrates meine Herren war kein [Socrates was, gentlemen,
no] etc.
(in Socratic Memorabilia).-JP II 1553 (Pap. VB 43) n.d., 1844
Draft of Epigraph:

Motto

Is it not remarkable that the greatest master of irony and the
greatest humorist, separated by 2,000 years, may join together in doing and admiring what we should suppose
everyone had done, if this fact did not testify to the contrary.
Hamann says of Socrates: "He was great because he distinguished between what he understood and what he did not
understand." If only Socrates could have had an epitaph!
Many an innocent person has drained the poisoned cup, many
a one has sacrificed his life for the idea, but this epitaph be-

178

Supplement

longs to Socrates alone: Here rests Socrates, he distinguished
between what he understood and what he did not understand.
Or perhaps better simply to quote Hamann's words.-JP II
1554 (Pap. VB 44) n.d., 1844
Another draft of Epigraph:

The age of distinction is long past, because the system abrogates it. He who loves it must be regarded as an oddity, a
lover of something that vanished long ago. This may well be;
yet my soul clings to Socrates, its first love, and rejoices in the
one who understood him, Hamann; for he has said the best
that has been said about Socrates, something far more remarkable and rare than that he taught young people and made
fun of the Sophists and drained the poisoned cup: Socrates
was great because he distinguished between what he understood and what he did not understand.-JP II 1555 (Pap. VB
45) n.d., 1844
Draft of Dedication: see 5:

To the late
Professor Poul Martin M(llier
the happy lover of Greek culture, the admirer of Homer, the
confidant of Socrates, the interpreter of Aristotle-Denmark's joy in ''Joy over Denmark""-the enthusiasm of my
youth;.... the confidant of my beginnings; my lost friend; my
sadly missed reader
.. though "widely traveled yet always remembered in the
Danish summer."
.... the mighty trumpet of my awakening; the desired object
of my feelings;
this work
is dedicated.
-Pap. VB 46 n.d., 1844

See 7:1:

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

179

Preface
to write a book etc .. [The original Preface, now No. VII in
Prefaces, KW IX (SV V), was replaced with the present
Preface.]-Pap. VB 47 n.d., 1844

See 25:2-5:

..... has taken and is taking only an inland journey from
his own consciousness to the presupposition of hereditary sin
in his own consciousness.-JP V 5726 (Pap. VB 47:13) n.d.,
1844

Deleted from final copy; see 8:3-20:
Concerning my own humble person, I frankly confess-no
matter how my confession is understood-that I am fully
aware that as an author I am a king without a country, and
have endeavored to cut my coat from my own cloth and to be
an author without any claims. If in the best sense of the word
it seems too much to zealous envy that I bear a Latin name, it
may serve as pleasant news that if anyone desires and I can be
of service, I shall gladly assume the name Christen Madsen.
Most of all I wish to be regarded as an alehouse keeper, innkeeper, or as a plain layman who walks the floor and speculates without wishing that his speculative result should be regarded as speculation. I would not for anything in the world
want to be an authority, not even for the most insignificant
man, because I regard oeing authority as the most boring of
all things. But in relation to everyone else, I apply myself to
be as devout in my belief in authority as the Roman was tolerant in his worship of God. When it comes to human authority, I profess to fetishism and worship anyone whomsoever
with equal piety, provided it is made sufficiently clear by a
proper beating of drums that he has become the authority and
the imprimatur for the current year, whether this is decided by

180

Supplement

lottery or whether the honor is passed around, just as one of
the 36 representatives takes his turn on the board of arbitration.-Pap. V B 72:5 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 9:27:

[Thus when an author entitles the last section of the Logic]
"actuality" which Hegel has done and the Hegelian school did
again and again [the advantage is gained that it seems as if
through logic the highest were already reached, or, if one prefers, the lowest].-JP III 3653 (Pap. VB 49:1) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 10: 10:

[when in dogmaticsfaith is called the immediate]*
In margin: *(and this happens every day before our eyes).
-Pap. VB 49:2 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 12:31-37:

..... Even in our little Denmark men have come to the
rescue oflogical movement. In his "logical system," which,
despite all movement, does not come further than to §23 (the
beginning of the doctrine of quantity) and, despite its proud
title, was not able to emancipate itself from a very subordinate existence in a periodical, Professor Heiberg nevertheless
succeeded in making everything move-except the system,
which comes to a halt at §23, although one might have believed that the system would have moved by itself through an
immanent movement, and the more so because the author indicated in the "Preface" the course of development, namely,
that the published essay was "the first contribution to a longcherished plan of setting forth the logical system." This he
wished to do, not merely for its own sake, but as a means by
which he also "intended to pave the way for an esthetics,
which for some time he had hoped to present." Just an example: the professor explains to us that in order to form the transition from quality to quantity "it is not enough to define

Entriesfrom Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

181

quantity as unqualified being in general; it is the annulled quality; that is to say: quantity is not the first presuppositionless
being but is the being which, after the quality has been presupposed and then annulled, returns to the same indeterminateness." Now this may be quite correct, but the difficulty
lies in the fact that both being and quality are treated as identical. But being is no quality; logically speaking, it is rather the
empty, the contentless, whereas even according to Hegel's
definition, quantity is einJache Bestimmtheit [simple determinateness], and therefore it is not essentially being but essentially determinateness. Thus when one proceeds from being
and annuls this in order to return to it again, one will never
arrive at quality, and much less a new quality. -Magister
Alder (in his popular lecture on Hegel's objective logic,
Copenhagen 1842) makes the movement even better. He says
(p. 48), "when the quality is indifferent, quantity appears as
the qualifying factor." One would be tempted to answer him
with an emphasis even greater than that of the Lacedemonians: when?-Pap. V B 49:5 n.d., 1844

From drtift; see 13:21:

Note. Should anyone want further explication of the unwarranted use of the negative in logic, I simply refer him to
AdolfTrendelenburg, Die logische Frage in Hegels System, zwei
Streitsschriften, Berlin 1843. Trendelenburg is well-schooled in
Greek philosophy and is unimpressed by humbug.-Pap. VB
49:6 n.d., 1844

From drtift; see 16:1-20:

Sin belongs in ethics, and the mood that corresponds to its
conception is ethical earnestness or, more correctly, earnestness (for it is also a confusion oflanguage to speak of esthetical, psychological, or metaphysical earnestness). Ethics does
not overcome sin metaphysically, for it knows in all earnestness that sin has endurance; it does not flee sin esthetically or
mourn over it esthetically, for it abrogates sin; it does not be-

182

Supplement

come psychologically absorbed in it, for it knows that sin is
not a state.
But there is also a difficulty about sin having a place in
ethics.-Pap. VB 49:7 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 20:3-7:

Dogmatics does not prove hereditary sin, but explains it by
presupposing it.
In a scientific sense one may say about sin what the
Greeks-before their consciousness matured, and as far as it
was possible for paganism to rise to the conception of
Providence-said of the vortex that was the origin of all
things: It is present everywhere as something no one can lay
hold of. No science can deal with sin satisfactorily, yet the
simplest man can grasp it. Finally, dogmatics takes hold of
hereditary sin and explains it by presupposing it.-Pap. V B
49:11 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 20:18-19:

From what has been said, it may seem that sin has no place
in any science, since metaphysics cannot lay hold of it, psychology cannot overcome it, ethics must ignore it, and dogmatics explains it by means of hereditary sin, which, in tum,
it must explain by presupposing it. This is quite correct, but it
is also correct that sin finds a place within the totality of the
new science that is prefigured in the immanent science and
that begins with dogmatics in the same sense that the first science begins with metaphysics.-Pap. V B 49:12 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 22:19:

Here again we see an example of how far immanence
reaches, and that with exclusive validity one succeeds only in
confusing everything.·
·Note. On this point compare with Fear and Trembling [KW
VI (S V III 93)], where the necessity of "the leap" is emphasized numerous times with respect both to the dialectical

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

183

and to pathos, which is the substance of the leap.-JP III 2343
(Pap. VB 49:14) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 23:8-19:

This possibility, like every possibility, cannot have the particularity of any empirical actuality. Therefore, it is important
to maintain with profound psychological decisiveness: unum
noris,omnes [if you know one, you know all]. When the possibility of sin appears in one man, it has appeared in all, and
only the arena of ideal observation is left for the deliberation
of the more and the less. In life, the possibility of sin occurs
no more than other possibilities.-Pap. V B 49:15 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 23:33:

In margin: and its mood should be that of contemplative, interested attention with a touch of the esthetic and the sharp
contours of observation.-Pap. V B 49:16 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 23:34-37:

If this is held fast somewhat accurately, it will become apparent that it relates to the doctrine of absolute spirit, which is
dogmatics; whereas ethics is the doctrine of objective spirit,
which factually and empirically has actuality as its sphere.Pap. VB 49:17 n.d., 1844

Deletedfrom draft; see 25:27:

Chapter 1.
Anxiety as the presupposition for hereditary sin and as explaining hereditary sin retrogressively in terms of its origin

§1.
Hereditary sin defined historically within dogmatics
Simple attention to the use of language convinces a person
that the term "hereditary sin" is used in a double sense. By

184

Supplement

pursuing this distinction, he may clear the way for the most
accurate scientific definitions. Besides, he may have the joy,
satisfaction, and assurance that he has not come down like a
tower watchman from distant and unknown realms, therefore always getting into conflict with common language and,
without being aware of it or wanting to do so, offending the
genius of language and the rightful partners in the common
ownership of language-something that at times indeed happens to a scientist. For a scientist, who always needs to be reconciled to and be in reconciliation with language, tensions of
this kind are most unfavorable and depressing.-Pap. V B 50
n.d., 1844

From draft; see 33:23-24:

· .... for that first sin is sinfulness, and by that sin sinfulness entered into Adam, and in the same way it enters every
man. By Adam's first sin, sinfulness entered into Adam and
gave birth to actual sins in him. By the second man's sin, sinfulness entered into the second man and gave birth to his
sins.-Pap. V B 53:4 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 38:25-33:

· . . . . for it is a contradiction to sorrow esthetically over
sinfulness. The only one who sorrowed innocently over sinfulness was Christ, and so it might seem that he sorrowed
esthetically over it. But then he also carried all the sins of the
world, and therefore he sorrowed ethically over sinfulness.-Pap. VB 53:5 n.d., 1844

From drqft; see 40:15-18:

· .. How many a learned theologian has not known how to
explain the teachings of the Bible, the Church, the Fathers,
the Symbols of the Church, as well as those of the philosophers, on hereditary sin, without having occupied himself at
any time in tracing the effect of hereditary sin in his own or

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

185

another man's consciousness? Nevertheless, this is the first
thing that every man is assigned to do, and every man, ifhe
carefully examines himself, possesses within himself a more
complete expression for everything human than the summa
summamm of all the knowledge that he gains in the above
manner.-Pap. V B 53:6 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 40:27:

pagan (Seneca is especially quoted)-Pap. V B 53:7 n.d.,
1844

From draft; see 41:9-12:
Even with regard to the guilt of a subsequent man, this
statement seems to presume that ethics makes an unethical
about-face and permits guilt to appear through a merely
quantitative determination, or permits it to appear as a deus ex
machina, although the individual was never innocent. But it
would be more pretentious to apply the statement to Adam's
innocence, making it the secret agent paid to overthrow
him.-Pap. V B 53:8 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 42:9-11:

As far as I know, natural scientists agree that animals do not
have anxiety simply because by nature they are not qualified
as spirit. They fear the present, tremble, etc., but are not anxious. They have no more anxiety than they can be said to have
presentiment.-JP III 3557 (Pap. V B 53:9) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 48:6:

If anyone wishing to instruct me should say, "consistent
with the preceding you of course, could say, 'It [the serpent]
is language,' " I would reply, "I did not say that, "-Pap. VB
53:11 n.d., 1844

186

From draft; see 47:36-40:

Supplement

..... but this much is certain, it will not do to assume that
man himself invented language or, as Professor Madvig has
expressed" so superbly in a prospectus, that men reached an
agreement on what language they would speak.
In margin: "with profound irony.-JP III 2321 (Pap. V B
53:12) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 50:3:

. . ... and who are indifferent to the fact that the explanation is so inhuman that no person who has lived or who
wishes to live can understand it, because it also proposes to
explain him. If the explanation of Adam and his fall does not
concern me as afabula, quae de me narratur [story that speaks to
me], one might as well forget both Adam and the explanation.-Pap. VB 53:13 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 57:10-13:

This is again a proof that our investigation is not guilty of
the Pelagian irresponsibility that is incapable of weaving the
individual into the cloth of the race but instead lets each individual stick out like the end of a thread. It is easily seen that
this investigation protects the concept of race in such a way
that it will not deprive individuals of their power and confuse
the concept of individual as well as that of race. If the sinfulness of the race is posited by Adam's sin (t<p& 1tav'tE~ ilj.1ap'tov
Rom. 5:12) in the same sense as a species of web-footed birds
have webbed feet, the concept of the individual is canceled,
and also the concept of the race. For precisely here lies the difference between the concept of the human race and that of
animal species ... .-Pap. VB 53:15 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 57:26-33:

Herein lies the great significance of Adam above that of
every other individual in the race, a distinction that is not

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

187

qualitative but quantitative, and herein lies the truth of the
saying that sinfulness entered the world by Adam. The expression may seem to say too much, but just as the previous
chapter reduced the meaning of the expression to the point
where sin entered Adam, so there is an orthodoxy that principally stresses that sin entered the human race. If the statement
that "sin entered the human race" is to be understood in the
same sense as "sin entered Adam," everything becomes confused. The most comprehensive expression, sin entered the
world, is obviously true, since it suggests that sin entered the
world in the same sense that it entered man. For sin cannot
qualitatively [but only quantitatively] enter lifeless or animal
nature, and it is in this [quantitative] sense that sin entered the
race by Adam.-Pap. VB 53:16 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 58:39:

... It ought, on the other hand, to begin with the Atonement, and by explaining the Atonement it indirectly explains
sinfulness.-Pap. VB 53:17 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 59: 10:

Some men, particularly of the Schelling school, like
Schubert, Eschenmayer, Garres, Steffens,
In margin: Jacob Bahme, Schelling." "Anxiety, anger,
hunger, suffering." These things should always be eyed with
caution; now it is the consequence of sin, now the negative in
God-td €tepov [the other].
"even melancholy, in his essay on freedom, quoted by
Rosenkranz in his last work, p. 309 [Karl Rosenkranz, Schelling, Vorelesungen (Danzig: 1843; ASKB 766), pp. 260 ff.].Pap. V B 53:18 n.d., 1844

From draft; see footnote 59:36-39:

In Latin the word alterare is not used in this sense. As a matter of fact, the word is not used at all. According to Scheller

188

Supplement

[Ausfohrliches ... lateinisch-deutsches Lexicon] the word occurs
once in Ovid, where another reading, adulterare, is now
commonly used (it is rather strange that the term adulterare
should be used in Latin to mean "distort").-Pap. VB 53:19
n.d., 1844

From draft; see 60:27:

So it happens at times that a person believes that he has a
world-view, but that there is yet one particular phenomenon
that is of such a nature that it bafHes the understanding, and
that he explains differently and attempts to ignore in order not
to harbor the thought that this phenomenon might overthrow the whole view, or that his reflection does not possess
enough courage and resolution to penetrate the phenomenon
with his world-view.-Pap. VB 53:20 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 61:18:

. . . . . and psychologically speaking, the first sin always
takes place in impotence; therefore, it apparently lacks, in a
certain sense, accountability .-Pap. V B 53:21 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 61 :24:

In every concrete expresson of freedom, all or a part of
existence [Tilv~relsen] collaborates.-Pap. V B 53:22 n.d.,
1844

From draft; see 64:13-16:

To assume this only betrays a narrow-minded cowardice,
for, on the contrary, the magnitude of anxiety is a prophecy
of how wonderful perfection is; and the inability to become
anxious is proof that a person is either a beast or an angel,
both of whom, also according to the teaching of the Scriptures, are less perfect than man [I Cor. 6:3; Heb. 1:14]. The
"more" in the sensuousness of woman is only a matter of in-

Entriesfrom Kierkegaard'sJournals and Papers

189

difference in itself, and in relation to the idea it is an expression of perfection, because when seen ideally, it is always seen
as something overcome and appropriated in freedom.-Pap.
V B 53:23 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 66:20-35:
. . . . . she is more sensate than man; for were she more
spiritual she could never have her culmination point in
another. Spirit is the true independent.
Of course every religious view, like every more profound
philosophical view, sees woman, despite this difference, as essentially identical with man; but it is not foolish enough to
forget for that reason the truth of the difference, esthetically
and ethically understood.-JP IV 4989 (Pap. V B 53:25) n.d.,
1844

From draft; see 66:28-35:
In a way it has always seemed remarkable to me that the
story of Eve has been completely opposed to all later analogy,
for the expression "to seduce" used for her generally refers in
ordinary language to the man, and the other related expressions all point to the woman as weaker (easier to infatuate,
lure to bed, etc.) .... This, however, is easy to explain, for in
Genesis it is a third power that seduced the woman, whereas
in ordinary language the reference is always only to the relationship between man and woman and thus it must be the
man who seduces the woman.
"'Note. If anyone has any psychological interest in observations related to this, I refer him to "The Seducer's Diary" in
Either/Or. Ifhe looks at it closely, he will see that this is something quite different from a novel, that it has completely
different categories up its sleeve, and, if one knows how to
use it, it can serve as a preliminary study for a very serious
and not merely superficial research. The Seducer's secret is
simply that he knows that woman is anxious.-JP V 5730
(Pap. VB 53:26) n.d., 1844

190

From draft; see 67:14:

Supplement

Only the animal can remain naive in the sexual relationship;
man is unable to because he is spirit, and sexuality, as the extreme point of the synthesis, promptly rebels against
spirit.-JP III 3962 (Pap. VB 53:27) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 67: 17:
..... for a moral marriage is by no means naive, and yet it
is by no means immoral. This is why I always say that it is sin
which makes sensuality sinfulness.-JP III 3963 (Pap. V B
53:28) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 67:18-68:14:
What I shall now briefly develop I also want to present in
the right mood. To offer witticisms about the sexual is a paltry art, to warn against it is not difficult, and to preach about
it in the usual way is an easy task, provided the difficulty is
omitted; but to speak humanly about it and say everything,
and also say it morally, is very difficult. Yet it is true that as
many a young person became depraved because witticism
made life frivolous and turned the sexual into a joke, and just
as many a young person became depraved because rigorism
made life melancholy and made sexuality into sinfulness, so
many a young life was ruined becal~se no mention was made
of the sexual at all. It is also true that it is ill-conceived
prudishness to refrain from speaking about the sexual when
all discussion about it is left to pro claimers as heterogeneous
as the theater and the pulpit, each of which is embarrassed by
what the other says. Psychology, on the other hand, need not
be embarrassed; nevertheless, I obligate myself forthwith to
draw up a number of sketches that will exhibit the prodigious
conflicts that may arise in this area. Mere knowledge of the
sexual is not sin, and genuine naivete is reserved for childhood. Therefore it is high time to close the mouth of the immorality that permits itself to speak naively about the sexual.

Entries from K ierkegaard 's Journals and Papers

191

Either one must express the immorality in sensual desire
loudly and clearly, as does the Seducer in Either/Or-therefore
his diary has a moral value--or one must penetrate all discussion of the sexual with morality and, above all, renounce
naivete. If there were poets in our day, they would have recognized the admirable opportunities found in this field. Nothing is more base, and at the same time more certain to allure a
young girl, than looking at her in a way that instills in her the
certainty that she has knowledge, and thus entangles her in
the anxiety that this knowledge is sin. A collision as strange as
this is rarely found. What entraps her is obviously her purity.
She finds a place of concealment only in the person who
looked at her, for he alone shares her knowledge. Her anxiety
is not anxiety about sin, but anxiety about being in sin, about
having already sinned. As long as the lifeless twaddle about
naivete is maintained, every innocent girl, and first of all the
purest among them, will be abandoned to this art of seduction. Let our systematicians discover that such an observation
is poor, since it cannot be reduced to a paragraph [in the
system ]-1 am nevertheless convinced that whoever is interested in human beings has chosen the better part, and I am
also convinced that one thing is needful above everything
else, namely, to become a little more Greek in the good sense
of the term, i.e., more human, and not fantastically inordinate with systematic galimatias, something that no human
being cares about." Psychology is what we need, and, above
all, thorough knowledge of human life as well as sympathy
for its interests. Herein lies the task, and until this is resolved
there can be no question of completing a Christian view of
life. In what sense is sensuousness sinfulness? Or, more precisely, in what sense is sexuality sinfulness? If a person every
Sunday hears the proclamation of a love that is in spirit and in
truth and permits the erotic to vanish as a nothing, so that the
marriage relation becomes so spiritual that the sexual is entirely forgotten, then the cloister and abstinence are much

In margin: ·Even though no one pays attention to this in these days. I know
nevertheless that if Socrates lived now. he would have reflected [essentially
the same as p. 68:6-14).

192

Supplement

truer. If a person attends the theater in the evening, with the
permission of the Church, and listens to the praise of the
erotic-what can be made of all this! A person is not to enter
the cloister but is to marry. Quite correct! Nevertheless, it is
rather stupid to do so if the highes t expression of married love
is indifferent to the sexual relation. But this is where things
stand, and I would like to know what has been provided in
this respect in our age, which presumably has explained almost everything by means of the system but has been unable
to explain the simplest of things, namely, that which almost
every person is interested in, whether he has lived as a pagan
or as a Christian in his marriage. Is a person to be told every
Sunday in church that he is born in sin and that his mother
conceived him in iniquity, and thereupon learn from the poets
that their heroines had a naivete the like of which not even
Eve possessed? To my way of thinking this is nonsense, and
when for a long time no alarm was raised, this must have
been because our time has acquired a remarkable thoughtlessness in relation to what it means to live, and a concern for everything else, especially that which is loudly proclaimed;
whereas each person should be concerned about himself and
about transforming his life into a beautiful, artistically finished whole. I believed that this was the meaning of life and
the meaning of the life of the single individual, with an increase of meaning in proportion to what a person could include in his life, and with a greater concreteness of this task
from age to age in the historical progression. I believed that
every science should direct itself to this task and that all idle
knowledge debases a man and essentially wastes his time, although he may be more deeply debased and waste his time in
a worse way. It is said that he who sleeps does not sin, but a
man whose whole life has been absorbed in idle knowledge
has nevertheless in a profound sense slept away his life. I believed that in order to grasp and to express this meaning oflife
it is also appropriate that the single individual who is capable
of it should apply himself to studies of a scientific nature, but
in such a way that such study would have its validation in an
education whose ultimate expression is to impress the idea

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

193

upon his own life. This is something that is not seen in our
time. Instead, one sees too often a person who slovenly passes
through life, performing all the common tasks of life as if
they hardly concerned him; otherwise he is easily aroused
when the talk turns to some stupendous idea, like an association of human talents that is supposed to accomplish the
extraordinary, as if an association of men who separately are
unable to accomplish something simple would be able to accomplish something difficult, a performance similar to that of
the alehouse keeper who thought he would become rich by
selling his beer for a penny less than he paid for it and still
make a profit on the grounds that it is the quantity that does
it.-Pap. VB 53:29 n.d., 1844

i::om draft; see 68:38-69:3:

..... merely by gazing at oneself. Psychology can easily
enumerate examples of such cases, but care must be taken that
it [such gazing] is not the consequence of desire.-Pap. V B
53:30 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 70:1-8 and note:

What Socrates meant is that the erotic has been reduced to
indifference and that it has become comic, and consequently
onecanlovetheugly.-Pap. VB 53:31 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 70:9-71:5 and note:

In Christianity, the religious has again suspended the
erotic, but it is not as if this were done through an ascetic
misunderstanding, as the sinful, but rather as the indifferent,
because in spirit there is no difference between man and
woman. Here it is not comically undifferentiated, because the
tendency of Christianity is the further development of spirit,
and there is therefore no time to dwell on the erotic. In
paganism, however, the ultimate is not brought to completion in the deepening of the spirit, but in a positing of spirit as

194

Supplement

spirit, while nevertheless relating itself to the erotic but regarding it as comical.-Pap. V B 53:32 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 72:3:

If the erotic is not pure, anxiety becomes anger, and if anxiety is not present at all, the erotic becomes bestiality.-Pap. V
B 53:33 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 75:6-14:

· .... sinfulness. [It] Especially among women there are
instances of an individual who in anxiety conceives of most
trivial bodily functions as sinfulness. A person may smile at
this, but no one knows whether the smile will save or destroy, for if the smile contributes not to the opening of the
individuality but to the closing of it, such a smile can cause
irreparable harm.
[It] In margin: and ifhe now is bereft of everything that can
support him in a more common view (as in the Middle Ages).
In margin: Confusion of de te narratur fabula [the story is told
about you ]-if you do likewise-if?-Pap. V B 53:34 n.d.,
1844

From draft; see 78: 14-22:
· . . . . just as when certain geniuses abrogate the whole
meaning of mythology in their zeal to bring every myth before their "eagle eye," to make it a capriccioso for their
"mouth organ." This is the way concepts and myths are frequently prostituted in the world.-JP III 2802 (Pap. V B
53:35) n.d., 1844

From drcift; see 80:29-31:

· . . . . for they win neither Greek serenity nor the bold
confidence of the spirit.
The sexual is not sin; when I first posit sin, I also posit the

Entriesfrom Kierkegaard'sJoumals and Papers

195

sexual as sinfulness. It does not follow as a matter of course
that I sin by marrying, since on the contrary I strive to eliminate the contradiction. [.. ] The individual for whose arrival I
am responsible does not become sinful through me but becomes that by positing sin himself and then himself positing
the sexual as sinfulness.
[.. ] In margin: to transform a drive into the moral; for the
sexual is the sinful only to the extent that the drive at some
moment manifests itself simply as drive in all its nakedness,
for this can occur only through an arbitrary abstraction from
spirit.-JP IV 3964 (Pap. V B 53:38) n.d., 1844

Deletedfromfinal copy; see 82:17:

Aristotle himself defines ldVll<Jlt; more precisely: It belongs
neither to possibility nor to actuality. In relation to quantity it
is all/;l1<Jlt; [growth]-q>9i<Jlt; [decay]; in relation to quality it
is iU..M>iCJ)<Jlt; [alteration] (from this the New Testament has
[sic)); in relation
formed words about the Atonement
to time, q>6pa [locomotion]. (C£ Tennemann, Geschichte der
Philosoph ie, pp. 127-28.}-Pap. VB 72:12 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 83:5-84:3,8:

This is the way a philosopher acted with whom I once had
the honor of speaking. When I ventured to point out to him
one or another minor difficulty which needed consideration
before it would be possible to bring ofT dogmatic speculation,
he replied: "You may very well be right, but one should not
think about it, because then he will never get around to
speculating."-JP III 3302 (Pap. V B 55:3) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 85:12:

If men had pursued further the ancient idea that man is a
synthesis of soul and body, which is constituted by spirit,
men would long since have thought more precisely with regard to sin and hereditary sin, its origin and its consequence.

196

Supplement

Though it can be said that the spirit takes lodging in a defiled
body," and this is the most extreme expression one can
employ, yet it does not follow that the spirit itself is defiled,
unless this defilement is again a consequence of that relationship. But even here there is the likeness and unlikeness to
Adam, together with the more detailed consideration of the
possibility of freedom in the individual.
In margin: "Is this not found in Ecclesiastes or in the
Psalms?-JP I 52 (Pap. VB 55:4) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 86:6-8:

· .... for representation it is indeed something present, and
nevertheless is not; something completely present, which
nevertheless is not, which at this point could be expressed in
this manner: they ruled India for 70,000 years.-Pap. V B
55:5 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 88:25-26:

· .... for the moment is really time's atom, but not until
eternity is posited, and this is why one may properly say that
eternity is always in tv at6~q> [the moment].-JP III 2740
(Pap. V B 55:6) n.d., 1844

From drcift; see 90:4-5:

· .... more philosophically, as among the Greeks, or more
historically, as when God was named the Ancient of Days
[Daniel 7:9,13,22]. The eternal is indeed just as much the
future.-Pap. V B 55:7 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 90:33-91:23:

The individual is sensuously qualified, and as such he is also
qualified by time in time; but he is also spirit, i.e., he is to
become spirit, and as such, the eternal. Whenever the eternal
touches the temporal, the future is there, for, as stated, this is

Entriesfrom Kierkegaard'sJoumals and Papers

197

the first expression of the eternal. Just as in the preceding,
spirit-since it was established in the synthesis, or, rather,
since it was about to be established-appeared as freedom's
possibility, expressed in the individual's anxiety, so the future
is now the eternal's possibility and is expressed in the individuality as anxiety."
"Note. When I speak here of the eternal in determinants of
time, it is dear that I am correct in a different sense than when
logic does so, for the secret of the individual life is that the
fluctuation of the movement is a state.-Pap. V B 55:9 n.d.,
1844

From drqft; see 91 :27-32:
It may no doubt be possible to demonstrate that a more
precise and correct linguistic use links anxiety with the future.
Commonly a person is not very careful in his use oflanguage,
especially because speculation has little by little formed its
own language, which is used by no one but philosophers. But
the art is to be able to use the same word everyone else uses.
The warrant of a thinker is adequately demonstrated when
the word in his mouth expresses a dear thought. Hitherto the
word "anxiety" has been a kind of booty; I will now try to
give the word a definite meaning, or more correctly, to affirm
the word in its definite meaning.
To use a new expression for what has been said, anxiety is
really the discrimen (ambiguity) of subjectivity. It is therefore
very dear that "future" and "possibility" correspond to this;
but if one speaks of b.eing anxious about the past, this seems
to invalidate my use oflanguage, for the ambiguity of subjectivity has nothing that is past. If I were now to suggest that
subjectivity is not completed all at once, and that insofar as
one might speak of a reappearance of this ambiguity, then this
would not be favorable to my position, assuming that it actually is justifiable to speak of anxiety about the past. But if
we ask more particularly in what sense it is possible to speak
of anxiety about the past, everything becomes dear.-Pap. V
B 55:10 n.d., 1844

19H

From draft; see 93:9:

Supplement

What has been developed here could also have been dealt
with in Chapter I, but I have assigned it a place here because
time first comes into existence [bliver til] with sin (just as, on
the other hand, time first becomes full with the Atonement).
For innocence does not really exist . . . .-Pap. V B 55:12·
n.d., 1844

From draft; see 93:28-94: 1:

It is easy to show that this is the case in paganism, and that
its great sin seems to be that it never arrives at the great break
that constitutes sin. But the same can just as easily be shown
within Christianity. To do so, a person does not need to
travel to Paris and London, or to any Sodom and Gomorrah,
but only to walk along the streets, and he will not have to
walk far before he meets enough individuals who fit the
description.-Pap. V B 55:13 n.d., 1844

From drtift; see 95:6-14:

I will cite an example and do it in a way that will exhibit its
epigrammatical force, for I sincerely admit that it appears to
me to be a profound epigram in which are joined two of
perhaps the most brilliant minds of all time. The greatest
humorist (Hamann) said of the only ironist (Socrates) that
Socrates was great in that he distinguished between what he
knew and what he did not know. Socrates himself has said
this, and therein lies the irony. The humor lies in the reproduction as well as in the evaluating solemnity and the apparently fortuitous character of the remark. What could prevent
a trivial head from repeating the same? For Socrates, this saying was the whole meaning of his life, and I know of no
epitaph more fitting for him than this. There were no doubt
many in the world who drained the poison-filled cup or sacrificed their lives in other ways, but there was only one who
distinguished between what he understood and what he did

Entries/rom Kierkegaard'sJoumals and Papers

199

not understand. That the best men become victims is already
a terrible judgment upon the world, but this epitaph is a
judgment far more terrible.-Pap. VB 55:14 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 95:35-96:18:

It [spiritlessness] worships sometimes a dunce and sometimes a hero. But nothing impresses it more than a charlatan.
However, one fetish is soon replaced by another, and while
he is the fetish-man he is treated as savages treat their gods.
With paganism, as well as with all spheres of existence that
correspond to it within Christianity, it is different. These lie
as approximations to the qualitative leap of sin but do not
reach the leap. Neverthdess, they are not innocence. We shall
now consider these, and remind the reader that because they
cannot be dealt with under innocence they are best dealt with
here, although the present chapter treats of anxiety as the consequence of sin in the single individual.-Pap. V B 55:15
n.d.,1844

From draft; see 97:21:

Anxiety."
"Note. It is quite clear that Spinoza's substance signifies
something else, for his substance is an inner necessity in
which the fortuitous (the accidental) always disappears. Indeed, his substance is only a metaphysical expression for
Christian providence, which again corresponds to fate in such
a way that it is the unity of necessity and the accidental, so
that for providence the accidental is, and yet in such a way
that for providence nothing is accidental.-Pap. V B 55:17
n.d., 1844

From draft; see 99:33-100:9:

The law in this story is something that no man can discover, for no one can understand fate but the man himself.-Pap. VB 55:18 n.d., 1844

200

Supplement

From margin of draft; see 106:3-107:5:

and the more remote the outward task is from the religious,
the deeper is the deliberationMedieval artists who painted Venus but apprehended their
task religiously.
Thus nothing outward is incommensurate with the religious. This was the misunderstanding of the Middle Ages.
-Pap. VB 55:24 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 109:32-110:13:

In freedom's possibility, it holds true that the more profoundly this is grasped, the more profoundly and definitely
the possibility of guilt appears within it, just as it holds true of
immediate genius that the greater the genius the more profound the relationship to fate.
In freedom's possibility, freedom collapses. This is, as
mentioned, the closest psychical approximation to the qualitative leap which posits sin. To say that the Church teaches
hereditary sin, that the Catholic Church teaches it thus and
the Protestant Church thus, to erect a speculative concept
which explains hereditary sin and sin at all-this is indeed the
task of the learned and wise in our time. The more concrete
understanding of it in the specific individual, that is to say, the
way I have to understand it, is a simpler, less complicated
task, which I have chosen.
What is developed in these two paragraphs had no place in
the previous chapter, because the position here described is
not a state of innocence and yet does not come after the qualitative leap.-JP 111248 (Pap. V B 55:26) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 112:13-15:

Liberum arbitrium, which can equally well choose the good
or the evil, is basically an abrogation of the concept of freedom and a despair of any explanation of it. Freedom means to

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

201

be capable. Good and evil exist nowhere outside freedom,
since this very distinction comes into existence through
freedom.-JP II 1249 (Pap. V B 56:2) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 113:16-114:3:

After sin has been posited, the object of anxiety is sin. The
posited sin is a canceled possibility, but although posited, it is
also unwarranted. Here the two forms of sin immediately appear. Sin looks back to a time before its actuality, to an imaginary possibility, and although it announces itself as posited
by the individual, he will not recognize it but instead haunts
like a specter, fantasylike, in nebulous regions, groping for
the possibility of sin; or sin is posited, and the individual allows it to proceed in its own consequences. Both ways are
forms of sin, because both exclude repentance ....
In margin: In the next place, the consequence of sin may lead
further, and no man has sinned so much that he cannot sink
still deeper.-Pap. V B 56:4 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 114:5:

In margin: This is something that I cannot explain, unless I
were to explain it as the philosophers explain the concept of
"soul"-an explanation no one can understand or understand
any better than if they said, soul is a 2 + 2ab + b2 .-Pap. VB
56:5 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 114:30-34:

This is something that Plato already has expressed beautifully in a passage where he lets Epimetheus inquire of Jupiter
whether he should distribute the ability of good and evil in
the same way as poetic talent, musical talent, etc., in such a
way that one becomes a poet, another an orator, etc. And Jupiter replied, No, for this ability belongs essentially to every
man alike."
"Note. The reader must pardon me for quoting in this

202

Supplement

manner. To me, the thought has always been the important
thing, and since I never use any excerpt apart from memory, I
cannot without some effort recall where the passage is found,
which is not worth the trouble.-Pap. VB 56:7 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 114:35:

The two forms of sin mentioned-wanting to carry the actuality of sin back to an illusory possibility or permitting sin
to pursue its course and obtain what Paul [Rom. 6:20] speaks
of as freedom from righteousness-constitute the basis of all
sin.
But sin is not a state.-Pap. V B 56:8 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 122:4-8:

. . . . . an average number, so that for every generation
there are so and so many measures of the demonic, and if our
time has an average number, then everything is explained.
Therefore it becomes so difficult to understand Christianity,
for it happened only once and for all time that a human being
was God. On the other hand, if an estimate can be formed of
how many portions of divine gilding are assigned to each
generation, perhaps durch die Bank [through the bank], then
everything would be explained.
The medical-therapeutic view regards the phenomenon as
purely physical and somatic.-Pap. V B 56:9 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 135:2-5:

Some people are as well informed about the concept of
irony as the noble youth who, when asked in a test for a
grocer's licence where raisins come from, answered, "We get
ours from the professor on Cross Street"-thus they get the
concept from one or another professor on Cross Street.-Pap.
VB 59 n.d., 1844

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

From draft; see 135:6-136:10:

203

Now I return to the definition, anxiety about the good.
The loss of freedom may, however, be only a state from
which the new sin breaks forth quantitatively, for only the
good can be a unity of state and movement.
When I also use here the concepts of good and evil, then
these must be regarded quite abstractly. When freedom's possibility is anxiety about guilt, then this is anxiety about the
annulment of freedom. When the demonic is anxiety about
evil [the editors of the Papirer suggest that this should read
"anxiety about the good"], we have the annulled freedom
that is anxious about becoming freedom.
Perhaps this may seem strange talk to some people, for
who does not want to be free? However, the way in which a
person speaks about such things indicates that he has no conception of the crisis that arises when freedom is to be brought
into unfreedom. Wishing to be free is an easy matter, because
wishing is the most paltry and unfree of all performances.
Meanwhile, freedom may be lost in various ways, all in relation to the parts of the synthesis. It may be lost bestially, intellectually, and religiously; but no matter the way in which it is
lost or being lost, it is always lost ethically or being lost ethically.

See 136-37:

(a) Freedom lost bestially. This is in a sense the most dreadful
phenomenon and also the most conspicuous. [.] Whenever a
person loses freedom bestially, he stands below the level of
the beast, for originally he was designed to be above the
beast.
Life presents numerous examples of this form of the demonic. An ethical observation sees how sin always breaks

[.] In margin: I always speak both of the most pregnant phenomenon and of
the numerous lesser and lesser phenomena, and finally, even of the apparendy insignificant approximations.

V B60
133

204

V B60
134

V B60
135

Supplement

forth qualitatively out of this form as new sin, while psychological observation deals with the state. The essential nature
of this state is anxiety about the good. Thus a demoniac in the
New Testament says to Christ when he is approached by
him, 'ti sJloi Kui (JOt ["What have I to do with you"]. This is
the formula. Another demoniac begs Christ to depart and go
another way. [.. ]
Similarly, one may hear a drunkard say, "Let me be the
filth that I am. " This may explain the solidarity of accessories
in guilt[.... ] brought about by unnatural excesses, of which
Duchatelet2 gives examples. Anxiety is so great that they are
able to arm themselves against it only by this mutual clinging
together, which, even though false, is an expression of something good with respect to love. [t]
Such beastly lostness-which may also be found in higher
spheres of life, where there is a greater mental strength to preserve it-can ruin the body, and this in turn becomes the object of medical treatment. But although medicine may be of
great help, it can never know whether it helps only to bring
about new sin.
I shall not pursue this form of the demonic further. It always has been in the world and cannot deceive, so~ething
that other forms may do easily.
(b) Freedom lost intellectually. This form [essentially the same
as 137:33-138:6] stupid busyness that does not have the time,
such as mockery etc. tt
Regarded intellectually, the content of freedom is truth, and
truth makes man free (John 8:32). On the other hand, truth is
the work of freedom. Truth is continually brought forth.
Obviously [essentially the same as 138:10-26] for the consequence, or does not in one way or another transform the acIn margin: or the demoniac asks Christ to send him away to another
place.
[•• ] In margin: Hence the strange solidarity between demoniacsDuchatelet on public prostitutes, especially those with unnatural desires.
[t] In margin: hypochondria.
[ttl In margin: Even knowing that I am in an unfree relation to the truth,
yet not knowing its significance for me. A demonic knowledge-the expression occurs in the Episde ofJames.

r·]

Entriesfrom Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

205

tuality of truth into a possibility for himself, for this naturally
alleviates anxiety.
All of the recent science offers frequent examples of this
form of the demonic. A person develops the truth but is indifferent to certitude. He proves the immortality of the soul
by means of a combination of all previous proofs but shrinks
from the truth of immortality. He deceives both himself and
others by pretending that the proof is so tremendously important and that this is what is needed, and for the sake of the
proof he readily forgets immortality; for immortality itself, in
all its consequences, has a power to recreate all oflife, and this
perhaps is what he fears. A person saves his soul by straining
his mind in demonstration of the proof, and when the proof is
completed, he has in a truly catholic sense made satisfaction
for everything else.
Whenever inwardness, appropriation, is lacking, the individual is in an unfree relation to the truth, even though he
otherwise possesses the whole truth. There is something that
makes him anxious, namely, the good.
This cannot be explained often enough. Unlike the preceding form of the demonic, the intellectual form does not carry
its own punishment. In the eyes of the world it is quite pleasing; nevertheless, it is anxiety about the good.
Otherwise truth may be anything whatever, but whenever
inwardness is lacking, there is a qualification of the demonic.
An adherent to the most rigid orthodoxy [essentially the same
as 139:32-140:7].

See 140:7-18:

To use a simplified expression for this form of the demonic, it can be said that it is either superstition or unbelief,
for in either case the individual is in untruth (unfreedom), and
therefore in an unfree relation to the truth, for only faith is
free in its relation to the truth. Superstition always has the
truth outside itself, and therefore it does not dare to think it.
Otherwise superstition is by nature entirely indifferent. While
one person believes he will be saved by eating carrots, another

V B60
\36

206

Supplement

by genuflecting before the holy, and another by his ability to
repeat the categories-all of these forms are unfree, and in relation to freedom they dare not think the truth in which they
would rest. The highest form of unbelief is mockery, and
here the New Testament formula, ti t~Ot Kat (Joi ["What
have I to do with you"], cannot be applied often enough.
Therefore anxiety resounds in the mockery of unbelief; the
more anxious it is, the more it mocks. To the extent that
mockery brings into consciousness its relation to the truth, it
is ideally to be preferred to superstition. In other respects it is
usually more cowardly than superstition.
Yet superstition and unbelief are such common terms: besides, our age is so sagacious that it will be neither one nor the
other, but this by no means exempts it from the demonic.

V B60
136

VB 60
137

See 151:7-153:11:

In order to present the most common forms of the intellectual demonic of our age, I shall approach the subject somewhat differently. Like freedom, truth is the eternal. [*] If the
eternal is not, there is neither truth nor freedom. The demonic can easily be recognized by an examination of the
various ways in which our age deals with the eternal. Every
consciousness that does not possess within itself the consciousness of the eternal is eo ipso demonic; it has an anxiety
about the eternal, i.e., about the good.
But eternity is a very radical thought. Whenever it is posited, the present becomes something entirely different from
what it was apart from it. This is something that men fear.
Often enough, talk is heard about particular governments in
Europe that are in fear of restless elements. I prefer to say that
the entire present generation is a tyrant who lives in fear of
one restless element: the thought of eternity. This thought is
always suppressed; nevertheless, it is still impossible not to be
in contact with it: a person will think it, and he does not dare
to think it.
Here the mockers meet who believe they can scare away
[')In margin: Inwardness is eternity. Therefore all things can be referred to it.

Entriesfrom Kierkegaard'sJournals and Papers

207

the thought of eternity. They proclaim the moment but are in
a frightful hurry. Why? Because they are in fear of something,
and that something is eternity.
Here we find the most fantasylike conceptions. Eternity is
bent into temporality, or it is left to fantasy, and now the
thought of eternity becomes a fantasylike occupation" (Bettina's letters). 3
Some teach that eternity is comic, or more correctly, that in
eternity a person will preserve a comic consciousness about
the temporal. This wisdom we owe especially to the last three
or four paragraphs of Hegel's Esthetics. Here [in Denmark] it
has been presented in one of the newspapers by Professor
Martensen. Although the professor, after his return [from
Germany], and since his first appearance in Monthly Journalfor
Literature [Maanedsskrift for Literatur], has invariably assured
us that he has gone beyond Hegel, he certainly did not go
farther in this case. After all, Martensen differs from the philosophers of promise only in that he reassures. The comic is a
category that belongs specifically to the temporal. The comic
always lies in Wiederspruch [contradiction]. But in eternity all
contradictions are canceled, and the comic [.... ] is consequently excluded. Eternity is indeed the true repetitiont in which
history comes to an end and all things are explained.
(c) Freedom lost religiously [tt]
An active form (masculine)
e.g., hypocrisy
pride
A passive form (feminine)
e.g., offense-He who remains in offense is
just as demonic as the other.
cowardice

Vertically in margin: that art is an anticipation of etemallife. The apocalyptic,
in which, not as in Dante, judgment ethically conceived is suspended. In
every case merely a fantasy-view.
In margin: "Eternity is permitted to peep into the moment, like the glimpse
of the moon in an illuminated forest or hall.
[.... )In margin: Perhaps no one knows better what the times want than I do.
t Note. See Repetition, p. 142 [KW VI (8 V III 254»).
[+t)In margin: Whenever I am not free in the religious there is something
demonic in it.-Pap. V B 60 n.d., 1844.

V B60
138

208

From draft; see 142:21-25:

Supplement

The more concrete the religious (consequently, the good)
is, the greater is the range ofnuances.-Pap. VB 61 n.d.,1844

From draft; see 143:18-20:

There are examples of persons in anxiety about going to
Communion; this, however, is not demonic but spiritual
trial.-Pap. V B 62 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 143:35-40:

There are doubtless examples in Garres, Mystik, but this
work is so uncanny that I have never dared to read it carefully.-Pap. VB 63 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 142:34-143: 1:

Relationship to the Historical
Something demonic in wanting to attack the historical in
the New Testament, as if this were the main thing.Yet no one has freely and openly posed the problem of
doubt in relation to Christianity-Lessing might be the only
one.-JP II 1637 (Pap. VB 64) n.d., 1844

From dr4t; see 146:4;151:1:

Inwardness is earnestness ....-the remarkable words of
Macbeth. [...... ]
When inwardness is missing, the spirit is finitized-inwardness is the eternal.-JP II 2112 (Pap. VB 65) n.d., 1844

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

Addition to Pap. VB 65; see 147:31-34:

209

*The definition of disposition [Gemyt] in Rosenkranz's
Psychologie 4 may be used as the foundation for earnestness,
provided freedom is definitely included.-Pap. V B 67 n.d.,
1844

Addition to Pap. VB 65; see 149:34-151:8:
[**]Therefore nothing can be said about earnestness in general. It is not pure subjectivity or any similar stupidity. Earnestness is present only in the very finest concretions (the empirical self) and as a qualification of freedom. To speak of
freedom in any other sense is a misunderstanding. There is no
measuring rod more accurate for the determination of the essential worth of an individuality than that of learning what in
a pregnant sense made him earnest in life, for with a certain
kind of earnestness one can deal with various things, except
that from which an individual dates his life. Earnestness about
the national debt, about one's own debt, or about astronomy,
etc. A healthy spirit manifests itself precisely in being able to
deal with everything else just as sentimentally as jocularly,
and just as well. But in relation to earnestness, it tolerates no
sentimentality and no joking. If it does that, it will happen to
such a person as with Albertus* Magnus, who boasted of his
speculation and suddenly became stupid.
*See somewhere in journal [i.e., JP V 5700 (Pap. IV A
174) ].-Pap. V B 68 n.d., 1844

From draft; see 152:30-154:28, also V B 61, 65:

(a) Outline
(b) What is inwardness
1. Earnestness
2. The eternal
-the various conceptions of the eternal in our
age

210

SI4ppiement

a. A voidance of the eternal
b. Conceived imaginatively
c. Conceived comically
metaphysically
(c) The more concrete the religious is (consequently the
good), the greater the range of nuances
Positive religion
The historical
(d) It is treated as an appendix to the system. Therefore,
Poul M0ller was right, that immortality must be present throughout and not brought in as an appendix to
the systemto drink of Lethe is true to a certain degree.
-JP II 2113 (Pap. V B 66) n.d., 1844

From draft; see 147:31-148:28:

Earnestness is acquired originality
Different from habit-it is the disappearance of selfconsciousness.
(cf. Rosenkranz, Psychologie)
Therefore repetition is really-earnestness.-Pap. V B 69
n.d., 1844

From draft; see 7:

[A note, scratched out with ink, next to the heading of what
first was intended as the preface to The Concept of Anxiety and
which afterwards was included in Kierkegaard's Prefaces.]
N.B. This is not to be used because it would distract from
the subject. Therefore I have written a little preface to be
printed in the book.-Pap. V B 71 n.d., 1844

Deletedfromfinal copy; see 126:31:

As far as I am concerned, I am safeguarded in this respect
by my own experience in another direction, for although I
have never been accustomed to making little summaries in

Entriesfrom Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

211

order to carryall my scholarly learning in my head, although
I always read widely and then turn this over to my memory,
although I can be totally engrossed in my own production,
and although together with all this I am doing seventeen other
things and talk every day with about fifty people of all ages, I
swear, nevertheless, that I am able to relate what each person
with whom I have spoken said the last time, next-to-the-last
time, not to mention someone who is the object of particular
attention-his remarks, his emotions are immediately vivid
to me as soon as I see him, even though it is a long time since I
saw him.-JP V 5731 (Pap. VB 72:22) n.d., 1844

Deletedfromfmal copy; see 147:2:

In the sixth letter of The Centaur not Fabulous, Young says a
few words about Ecclesiastes, a work he ascribes to Solomon.
Because I do not understand English, and also because no
doubt there are more who understand German than English, I
quote from a German translation (cf. Einige Werke v. Dr. Edvard Young iibersetzt v. J. A. Ebert, Braunschweig and Hildesheim: 1777 [I-III, 1767-72; ASKB 1911], 2d D. p. 398) [the
English text reads]: "I believe that wise and experienced
prince, whose wisdom and experience was designed to spare
future ages their own fatal experience in folly, and, closing
with his last sentiment, the sum of his divine philosophy, * I
affirm that many a philosopher may justly be reputed a fool;
that as there is but one God, one trial, one great tribunal, one
salvation, so there is but one wisdom; that all which, devoid
of that assumes the name, is but folly of different colours and
degrees-gay, grey, wealthy, lettered, domestic, political,
civil, military, recluse, ostentatious, humble, or triumphant;
and is so called in the language of angels, in the sole-authentic
and unalterable style of eternity. ** [Edward Young, The Complete Works, Poetry and Prose, ed. James Nichols, I-II (London:
1854), II, p. 521.]
*Note. The author [Young] refers to the closing words of
Ecclesiastes: "Fear God and keep his commandments; for this
is the whole duty of man. For God will bring every deed into

212

Supplement

judgment, with every secret thing, whether good or evil"
[Ecclesiastes 11:13-14] .
...... Note. This is a rather lengthy quotation; but if 1 have the
patience to copy it the reader will no doubt also have the patience to read it.-Pap. V B 72:28 n.d., 1844
Deletedfromfinal copy; see 147:13:

The preponderant and prevailing interest in explication of
and occupation with concepts in our age is something that indicates that our age is demoralized or demonized.-Pap. V B
72:29 n.d., 1844

Deletedfromfinal copy; see 147:36:

..... and also saves the writer from the temptation of becoming important in his own eyes by writing about philosophical subjects in the same way as one would publish a
book that was not intended for schoolchildren, saying that the
main forms of the conjugation of amo [I love] are amavi,
amatum, amare.-Pap. VB 72:30 n.d., 1844
Deletedfromfinal copy; see 151 note:

What a shame that Professor Heiberg has the obsession that
he is the man to correct things. How fortunate that the professor now has taken up astronomy; now anyone writing
about religious issues may hope to be spared his corrections.
This is the happiest thought that his gilded New Year gift has
brought to me, who am neither theoretical nor practical nor
an also-astronomer.-Pap. VB 72:31 n.d.,1844

Deleted from final copy; see 152:37:

Bettina's letters s may be cited as an example ofthis.-Pap.
V B 72:32 n.d., 1844

Entries from Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers

Deleted from final copy; see 154: 17:

213

The whole wisdom of the superiority of the comic we owe
to the three or four last paragraphs in Hegel's Esthetics, although it has also been presented with bravura by one who
long since has gone beyond Hegel; and while he astonished
women and children with his discourse, he would not as
much as intimate that it was Hegel's.-Pap. V B 72:33 n.d.,
1844

EDITORIAL APPENDIX

Acknowledgments

217

Collation of The Concept of Anxiety
in the Danish Editions of
Kierkegaard's Collected Works

219

Notes

221

Bibliographical Note

257

Index

259

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The present volume is included in a general grant from the
National Endowment for the Humanities. The grant includes
a gift from the Danish Ministry of Cultural Affairs. A grant
for special research expenses has been received from the A. P.
M0ller og Hustru Chastine McKinney M0llers Fond.
Acknowledgment is made to Gyldendals Forlag for permission to absorb notes to S0ren Kierkegaard, Begrebet Angest,
Samlede Vcerker, I-XIV, ed. A. B. Drachman, J. L. Heiberg,
and H. O. Lange (Copenhagen: 1901-06), IV; to Eugen
Diederichs Verlag for permission to absorb notes to S0ren
Kierkegaard, Der BegrijJ Angst, Gesammelte Werke, I-XXXVI,
ed. Emanuel Hirsch (Dusseldorf: 1956-69), XI-XII; to
Jacob Hegner Verlag for permission to absorb notes to S0ren
Kierkegaard, Der BegrijJ der Angst, Ph ilosophisch- Theologische
Schriften, ed. Hermann Diem and Walter Rest, commentary
by Niels Thulstrup (Cologne and Olten: 1956).
The book collection and the microfilm collection of the
Kierkegaard Library, St. Olaf College, have been used in
preparation of the text and of the supplement and appendix.
Robert L. Perkins, Niels Thulstrup, John Elrod, Gregor
Malantschuk, and Per L0nning, members of the International
Advisory Board for Kierkegaard's Writings, have given helpful
criticism of the manuscript on the whole and in detail.
The translator-editor is indebted to Howard V. Hong for
valuable suggestions and criticisms of the manuscript.
Thanks are expressed to Ruth Storvick for typing the manuscript, to Olin Storvick for checking Greek and Latin quotations, and to Sanford G. Thatcher and Gretchen Oberfranc
for guiding the manuscript through the press.
Reidar Thomte

Concordia College
Moorhead, Minnesota

COLLATION OF THE CONCEPT OF ANXIETY

IN THE DANISH EDITIONS OF KIERKEGAARD'S
COLLECTED WORKS
Vol. IV
Ed. 1
Pg.

276
277
279
280
281
282
283
284
285
286

287
288
289
290

291
292
293
294
295
296

297
298
299
300

301
302
303
304

305
306

307
308
309

Vol. IV
Ed. 2
Pg.
306

307
309
309

313
313
314
316
317
317
318
320
321
322
322
323
325
326
327
328
329
329
330
331
332
333
334
335
336
338
339
340

341

Vol. 6
Ed.J

Pg.

102
103
105
105
109
109
110
111
112
113
113
114
115
116
117
118
118
119
120
121
122
122
123
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132

Vol. IV
Ed. 1
Pg.

Vol. IV
Ed. 2
Pg.

Vol. 6

310
311
312
313
314
315
316
317
318
319
320
321
322
323
324
325
326
327
328
329
330
331
332
333
334
335
336
337
338
339

342
343

133
134
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
160
161
162

340

341
342

344

345
346

348
349
350
351
352
353
355
356
357
358
359
360

361
362
364

365
365
367
368

369
370
371
373
374
375
376
377
378

Ed.J

Pg.

220

Vol. IV
Ed. 1
Pg.

Vol. IV

343

Ed. 2
Pg.

345

379
381
382

346

383

347

384
385

344

348

349
350
351
352
353
354
355
356
357
358
359
360

361
362

386

387
387
388
389
390
391
392
393
394
395
396
397
398

363
364

399
400

365

402

366

403
404

367
368

369
370
371
372
373
374
375
376
377
378
379
380

381
382
383
384

385

405
406
407
408

410
411
412
413
414
415
417
419
420
420
421
422
424
425

Editorial Appendix
Vol. 6

Ed.J

Vol. IV

Vol. 6

Pg.

Vol. IV
Ed. 1
Pg.

Pg.

Pg.

163

386

164

387
388

426
427
428
430
430
431
433
434
435
436
437
439

165
166
167
168
169
170
170
171
172
173
173
174
175
176
177
178
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
196
197
197
198
199
200

201

389

390
391
392
393
394

395
396
397
398
399
400
401

Ed. 2

440

441
442
443

402

444

403

445
447
447
449
450
451
452
453
455
456
457
458
459
460
461

404

405
406
407
408
409

410
411
412
413
414
415
416
417
418
419
420
421
422
423
424
425
426
427
428

Ed.J
202
203
204
205
205
206

207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
217
218
219
220

221
222

223
224
224
226

226
227

228
229
230

465

231
231
232
233
234

465

234

467

235

462
463
464

468

236

469
470
471
473

237
238

239
240

NOTES

TlTI..E PAGE, EPIGRAPH, DEDICATION
TITLE PAGE.
The subtitle presents the subject as "hereditary sin." The deliberation is "simple," not speculative. The argument deals with the "dogmatic
issue," not with metaphysics. The emphasis is not upon the actuality of sin,
but on sin as a possibility, i.e., on how a human being must be qualified if sin
is to be a psychological possibility. The Biblical background is Genesis 3.
The term "hereditary sin" (Danish, Arvesynd; German, Erbsiinde), as used
here, is analogous to the English term "original sin." Something is lost from
the Danish, and from The Concept of Anxiety in particular, if "original sin" is
used rather than a literal translation of the Danish arvesynd. Documentation
for the term "hereditary sin" is found in The Sma/ca/d Articles: "Hoc peccatum hereditarium tam profunda et tetra est corruptio naturae, ut nullius
hominis ratione intelligi possit, sed ex Scripturae patefactione agnoscenda et
credenda sit [This hereditary sin is so deep and horrible a corruption of nature
that no reason can understand it, but it must be learned and believed from the
revelation of Scriptures I, Ps. 51:5; Rom. 5:12 ff.; Ex. 33:3; Gen. 3:7 ff." (The
Sma/cald Articles, The Third Part of the Articles, l. Of Sin, Trig/ot Concordia,
The Symbolical Books of the Ev. Lutheran Church 1St. Louis: Concordia
Publishing House, 19211, pp. 476-77).
The name Vigilius Haufniensis means "watchman of Copenhagen." The
original draft has S. Kierkegaard as the author; see Supplement, p. 177 (Pap.
V B 42). Concluding Unscientific Postscript states:

The Concept of Anxiety differs essentially from the other pseudonymous
works in that its form is direct and even somewhat didactic [docerende I.
Perhaps the author thought that at this point a communication of knowledge might be needful before a transition could be made to the development of inwardness. The latter task pertains to someone who is presumed
essentially to possess knowledge and who does not merely need to know
something but rather needs to be influenced. The somewhat didactic form
of the book was undoubtedly the reason it found a little favor in the eyes of
the docents as compared with the other pseudonymous works. I cannot
deny that I regard this favor as a misunderstanding, wherefore it pleased
me that a merry little book was published simultaneously by Nicolaus
Notabene. The pseudonymous books are generally ascribed to one writer,
and now everyone who had hoped for a didactic author suddenly gave up
hope upon seeing light literature from the same hand. (KW XII; SV VII
229, ed. tr.)
The pseudonymity of The Concept of Anxiety is weak, not formal as in

222

Notes to Pages 1-5

Philosophical Fragments. In such pseudonymous works as Philosophical Fragments, Concluding Unscientific Postscript, The Sickness unto Death, and Practice in
Christianity, Kierkegaard's name appears on the tide page as the person responsible only for publication. This is not the case with The Concept r1 Anxiety. A journal entry of 1844 refers to the pseudonym: "Some people may be
disturbed by my sketch of an observer in The Concept of Anxiety. It does,
however, belong there and is like a watermark in the work. After all, I always
have a poetic relationship to my works, and therefore I am pseudonymous.
At the same time as the book develops some theme, the corresponding individuality is delineated. For example, Vigilius Haufniensis delineates several,
but I have also made a sketch of him in the book" UP V 5732; Pap. V A 34,
n.d., 1844). See pp. 54-56.
Johann Georg Hamann (1730-1788), a German philosopher,
theologian, and literary critic from Konigsberg, was known by the epithet
"Magus in Norden." His originality was recognized by Kant and Hegel, and
he influenced such men as Johann Gottfried von Herder, Friedrich Heinrich
Jacobi, Jean Paul Richter, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, and Seren Kierkegaard, who owned his Schriften, l-VIIIl-2 (Berlin: 1821-43; ASKB 536-44).
The quotation is from Sokratische Denkwiirdigkeiten, Schriften, II, p. 12. In an
age of unbelief, Hamann was a fervent believer in Christianity. He maintained that the Enlightenment had both misunderstood and misrepresented
Socrates, whom he regarded as a forerunner and prophet of, rather than as a
rational alternative to, Christ. Like Socrates, Hamann believed that man is the
crucial problem in philosophy. Of his works, Socratische Denkwiirdjgkeiten
(Amsterdam: 1759) is probably the best known. Hamann's relevance for contemporary thought is found in his views on language and sexuality, both of
which he treats within a supernaturalistic context. He maintained that language and cognition, no less than the body, arise from a sexual act.
In the final manuscript Kierkegaard's initials appeared under the epigraph,
but they were scratched out with pencil before the book went to press (Pap. V
B 72:2). Two other sketches were made for an epigraph but were discarded.
See Supplement. pp. 1n-78 (Pap. VB 44, 45). C£ Plato, Apology, 20 d-e, 21
d.
EPIGRAPH.

DEDICATION. Poul Martin Meller (1794-1836) had been a professor of philosophy at the University of Copenhagen. Kierkegaard attended his lectures
on the history of ancient philosophy and had probably read the chapter on
Aristotle that was published in the first edition of the posthumous works of
Meller, Efterladte Skrifter, I-III (Copenhagen: 1839-43; ASKB 1574-76). The
second edition (1848) contains an uncompleted translation into Danish of
Aristode's m:pi .uxflc; (De Anima). Meller had understood and helped the
young Kierkegaard, whose admiration and friendship for his teacher is expressed in the dedication and much more personally in the draft to the dedication. See Supplement, p. 178 (Pap. VB 46).
"Joy over Denmark" ["GI4'de over Danmark"] is a poem by Meller, writ-

Notes to Pages 5-7

223

ten when he was a ship's chaplain, a period during which he visited the Far
East. A few weeks after Meller's death, Kierkegaard heard a recitation of
''Joy over Denmark" in the Royal Theater; returning home, he wrote in his
journal: "I went over to hear Nielsen [an actor] give a reading of 'Joy over
Denmark' and was strangely moved by the words:
Remember the traveler far away.
UP V 5305; Pap. II A 216, April 2, 1838).

Yes, now he has gone far away-but I at least will surely remember him"

The dedication to Meller is in itself evidence that The Concept of Anxiety is
not stricdy pseudonymous. By means of the pseudonym and the abbreviations in the dedication, Kierkegaard concealed the privacy of his relationship
to Meller. Meller's greatest literary contribution was an essay on the possibility of proofs of the immortality of the soul (Efterladte Skrifter, II, pp. 158-272),
an essay that Kierkegaard read thoroughly. Kierkegaard later developed some
of its suggestions and ideas in The Concept of Anxiety, and therefore this particular work is dedicated to Meller, the reader "sadly missed," who would
have recognized the actualization of his most important ideas in The Concept

of Anxiety.

PREFACE AND INTRODUCTION

1. Kierkegaard discarded the first preface he wrote for The Concept of Anxiety. See Supplement, p. 210 (Pap. VB 71). It was later included as No. VII in
a book called Prefaces, KW IX (S V V).

2. See John 3:29.
3. Possibly an allusion to Goethe's ballad "Der Siinger": "I sing as birds are
wont to sing,/That live in woodland bowers" [lch singe wie d"r Vogel
singt],! [Der in den Zweigen wohnet]. "The Minstrel," in E. H. Zeydel,
Goethe the Lyrist (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1955),
pp.97-98.
4. See Genesis 12:3.
5. See Matthew 6:34.
6. A reference to H. L. Martensen's dissertation, De autonomia conscientiae
sui humanae (Copenhagen: 1837; ASKB 648), which was issued in a Danish
translation in 1841 with the tide Den menneskelige Selvbevidstheds Autonomie i
vor Tids dogmatiske Theologie (ASKB 651). The translator, L. V. Petersen,
states in the introduction that "it was the first work to appear in this country
[Denmark] in the new speculative trend and heralded the era in theology
from which we have begun to reckon."
7. A reference to). L. Heiberg's Urania (Copenhagen: 1844; ASKB U 57),
an astronomical annual that was published at Christmas 1843 as "a New
Year's gift." Kierkegaardjoked about the fact that the first 1,000 copies of the
first printing were sold out in two months, but that copies of the second
printing could be had at one~ighth of the price of those of the first (Prefaces,
KW IX; S V V 25-26). .

224

Notes to Pages 7-10

8. "A currency of doubtful value" and "authority for the current year"
(see p. 8) refer, of course, to the Danish Hegelianism of that day. See S0ren
Kierkegaard, Der BegriJf Angst, in Gesammelte Werke, I-XXXVI, ed. Emanuel
Hirsch (Dusseldorf: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 19~9), XI-XII, p. 240, note
2.
9. See Matthew 7:21.
10. The source of this exclamation is unknown. It is composed of Italian
and German words: Bravo, bravissimo may be translated "bravo, bravo,
bravo"; schwere Noth means "severe need," and Gottsblitz means the "lightning of God. "
11. Compare the last paragraph of the draft. See Supplement, pp. 179-80
(Pap. V B 72:5).
12. See I Corinthians 2:3.
13. The decanus, or chairman, of the philosophical faculty of the university
placed his imprimatur upon all dissertation manuscripts before their publication. In Holberg's comedy Erasmus Montanus, Per, the parish clerk, asks
Erasmus, the Latin student who has just returned from Copenhagen, "Who is
Imprimatur this year?" Per takes the word to refer to the professor rather than
to the practice of accepting manuscripts as qualified dissertations.
14. Wissenschaft der Logik, I, Book Two, Section Three, Georg Wilhelm
Friedrich Hegel's Werke, vollstiindige Ausgabe, I-XVIII, ed. Ph. Marheineke et
al. (Berlin: 1832-40; ASKB 549-65), IV, pp. 184 ff.;Jubiliiumsausgabe U.A.},
I-XXVI (Stuttgart: 1927-40), IV, pp. 662 tr.; Hegel's Science of Logic, tr. A. V.
Miller (London: Allen & Unwin; New York: Humanities Press, 1969), pp.
529 ff. A marginal note in the draft adds: "which Hegel has done and the
Hegelian school did again and again." See Supplement, p. 180 (Pap. V B
49:1). Hegel divided his treatment oflogic into the doctrine of Being, the doctrine of Essence, and the doctrine of the Notion. Actuality is treated as the last
part of the doctrine of essence. Whereas classical and formal logic do not deal
with actuality, Hegel's logic is principally ontological, and he himself calls the
first part of his logic "ontological logic." Philosophische Propiideutik, Course
III, Part Two, Division One, Die Logik, §§15-53, Werke, XVIII, pp. 149-58;
J.A., III, pp. 171-80.
Influenced by Adolf Trendelenburg, Kierkegaard maintained that if actuality is treated as part of logic, both actuality and logic are confused. For
Kierkegaard, actuality comprises the accidental, whereas Hegel maintains
that it pertains to necessity. Kierkegaard's position allows for freedom, which
belongs in the realm of actuality.
15. A marginal note in the draft suggests that this happens every day before our eyes. See Supplement, p. 180 (Pap. VB 49:2). Here the polemic is not
directed primarily against Hegel but against the Danish Hegelians Rasmus
Nielsen and H. L. Martensen. Hegel had criticized F. H. Jacobi for defining
faith as "immediate Knowledge." Geschichte der Philosoph ie, III, Part Three,
Section A, 2, Werke, XV, pp. 543-45;J.A., XIX, pp. 543-45; Hegel's Lectures
on the History of Philosophy, I-III, tr. E. S. Haldane and Frances H. Simson,
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul; New York: Humanities Press, 1955), III,
pp. 417-19. See Fear and Trembling, KW VI (SV III 118).

Notes to Pages 10-12

225

16. The Danish word ophawe corresponds to the German word aujheben,
which usually is translated "annul," "sublate," or "cancel." Hegel maintains
that aufheben is one of the most important concepts in philosophy. The term
has two meanings: (1) to preserve, to maintain, and (2) to abolish, to do away
with. Thus what is annulled is at the same time preserved. In the Hegelian
triad, the synthesis both preserves and abolishes the difference between the
thesis and antithesis. This twofold activity is expressed by the word "annul"
(aujheben). See Hegel's Science of Logic, pp. 106-7, and Kierkegaard's criticism
in Postscript, KW XII (S V VII 126-27).
17. Possibly a reference to the Danish Hegelian P. M. Stilling's
Philosophiske Betragtninger over den spekulative Logiks Betydning for Videnskaben
(Copenhagen: 1843), pp. 45-46, where the word "atonement" (reconciliation)
is used for speculative knowledge. For Kierkegaard, the word "atonement"
(Forsoning) has definite religious connotations.
18. Kant maintained that self-evident and universal understanding is possible by virtue of analysis of concepts such as those that are central to logic
and geometry. However, he was a skeptic in that he insisted that things-inthemselves are unknowable. The content of our knowledge is derived from
experience, but the mind conceives and thinks its experiences according to its
own a priori rational ways. Although things-in-themselves do exist and we
can think them, we cannot know them as we know the phenomenal world.
19. Hegel does not use the term "manifeostation" but "self-revelation"
(Selbstoffenbarung). See Hegel, Encyclopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im
Grundrisse, Part Three, Die Philosophie des Geistes, §383 and Zusatz, Werke,
VIP, pp. 27-29; J.A., X, pp. 33-35; Hegel's Philosophy if Mind, tr. William
Wallace, Zusiitze, tr. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970), pp. 16-18.
It is of interest that Miller in Zusatz to §383 uses "manifestation" (Kierkegaard's term) for Selbstoffenbarung. See Fragments, KW VII (S V IV 243).
20. Schelling maintained that "intellectual intuition" is the organ of all
transcendental thinking. Intellectual intuition is akin to the artist's intuition.
The identity of the ideal and the real is expressed in man, who is identical
with nature and is also the vehicle by which nature reaches its highest development. The intellectual intuition, also called "the organic conception," is
the faculty of seeing unity in plurality, identity in diversity. To intuit an object and to produce it are the same. See F. W. Schelling, Vorlesungen iiber die
Methode des academischen Studium (Tiibingen: 1830; ASKB 764), p. 98 (Lecture
IV, end); System des transcendental en Idealism us (Tiibingen: 1800), pp. 146-69;
Siimmtliche Werke, I-XIV, ed. K.F.A. von Schelling (Stuttgart and Augsburg:
1856-61), Part One, III, pp. 369 ff. See Fragments, KW VII (S V IV 243).
21. In the Christian sense, "logos" is "the word" Uohn 1:1). In philosophy
logos stands for "thought," and in logic it is the true doctrine of logos. The
reference is possibly to Stilling, Philosophiske Betragtninger, p. 11.
22. In Hegelian philosophy, a concept that presents itself to thought provokes a contradictory concept, the antithesis, which is the negation of the first
concept or thesis. Thesis and antithesis unite to form a new thought, the synthesis. In Hegelian dialectic, the negative is the principle of motion as well as
the creative principle. See Supplement, p. 181 (Pap. V B 49:6).

226

Notes to Pages 12-16

23. Kierkegaard caricatures the Hegelian philosophy by inserting ergo between two statements from Hegel's Logic: (1) "The German language has
preserved essence in the past participle [gewesen] of the verb 'to be'; for essence is past-but timelessly past-being" [Die Sprache hat im Zeitwort:
Seyn, das Wesen in der vergangene Zeit: gewesen behalten; denn das Wesen
ist das vergangene aber zeidos vergangenen Seyn]; (2) "Essence is sublated
[annulled] being" [Das Wesen ist das aufgehobene Seyn]. Wissenschaft der
Logi/e, I, Book Two, Section One, Werke, IV, pp. 3, 8; ).A., IV, pp. 481, 486;
Hegel's Science if Logic, pp. 389, 394.
24. Lulu, a romantic opera by C. F. Giintelberg (Copenhagen: 1824).
25. I Corinthians 9:26.
26. The Danish terms Tilv~relse (vb. v~re til) and Eksistens (vb. eksistere)
are both translated into English by the word "existence" (vb. "to exist").
Tilv~relse corresponds to the German word Dasein (was da ist), and it usually
denotes the outer observable existence in time and space. To make more
explicit the distinction between "existence" in the existential sense and "existence" as the outward observable existence, the German word Dasein might
well be used for the latter.
27. Hegel uses the term "the other" rather than the expression "necessary
other." See Wissenschafl der Logik, II, Section Three, Chapter 3, Werke, V, p.
340; J.A., V, p. 340; Hegel's Science of Logic, p. 834.
28. See Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechls, §§18, 139 Zusalz, Werke, VIII,
pp. 54, 1~8: ).A., VII, pp. 70, 202-4; Hegel's Philosophy if RighI, tr. T. M.
Knox (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961), pp. 28, 92-93.
29. Anne Louise Germaine (Necker) Stael-Holstein said that the most insignificant men appear clever when they are acquainted with speculative philosophy (De AlIemtlgne [Paris: 1814], lII, Chapter 8).
30. The term "system" always refers to Hegel's system.
31. See Matthew 25:21-23.
32. "A dog, while carrying a piece of meat across the river, caught sight of
his own image floating in the water, and thinking that it was another prize,
carried by another dog, decided to snatch it But his greed was disappointed;
he let go the meat that he held in his mouth, and failed besides to grasp the
meat for which he strove" (The Aesopic Fables of Phaedrus, tr. B. E. Perry,
Loeb Classical Library, Book I, no. 4).
33. See Supplement. pp. 181-82 (Pap. VB 49:7).
34. "It is plain, Gorgias, that Polus is well equipped to make speeches. but
he failed to accomplish what he promised Chaerophon.... For it is obvious
from what Polus has said that he is much better versed in what is called
rhetoric than in dialogue" (Gorgias, 448 d-e, tr. W. D. Woodland, The Collected Dialogues of Plalo, ed. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns [New
York: Pantheon Books, 1961]).
35. See Galatians 3:19. 21, 24.
36. The draft explains virtue by the addition of1caA.OlCaya9ia (Pap. V 49 B
8). The Greek word is composed of 1CaA.6c; [beautiful] and c'tya8O!; [good].

Notes to Pages 16-19

227

The word ICaM>ICaya9ia was used of masculine perfection. See Ethica
Nicomachea, Book I, Chapter 8.

37. See II Corinthians 5:17.
38. "Recollection is the ethnical view of life" (Repetition, KW VI; S V III
189). "Generally every ethnical teaching, including pure philosophy (in contrast to that which deceitfully has blended with Christianity) comes to the
same point-that knowledge (wisdom) is virtue. Socrates presented this
thesis; later, all Socratics. -Christian teaching is the opposite-that virtue is
knowledge. From this comes the expression-to do the truth. -At the same
time, it is still always a problem for Christianity to establish on the basis of
spirit an existence [Existents 1which is indifferent with respect to knowledge
so that one could be perfect although completely ignorant. The question is
whether knowledge is accented first or last. But even then a very dialectical
deliberation is necessary" UP 1895; Pap. IV C 86).
39. In Stromateis, Clement of Alexandria states several times that he presents Christian doctrine in a concealed form, in order that the uninitiated
might not misuse and abuse it. He does not refer to heretics.
40. This page number is from the original edition of Repetition, KW VI
(S V III 189).
41. Under the caption "The Delight that Determines the Judgment of
Taste Is Independent of all Interest," Kant says: "Everyone must allow that a
judgment on the beautiful which is tinged with the slightest interest is very
partial, and not a pure judgment of taste. One must not in the least be presupposed in favor of the real existence of the thing, but must preserve a complete
indifference in this respect, in order to play the part of judge in matters of
taste" (Immanuel Kant, Critik der Urtheilskraft [2 ed., Berlin: 1793; ASKB
595), I, §2, pp. 5-7; The Critique ofJudgment, tr. J. C. Meredith [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1952), p. 42).
42. This page number is from the original edition of Repetition, KW IV
(S V III 254).
43. In his yearbook Urania, pp. 97-102, J. L. Heiberg discusses Repetition,
but he completely misinterpreted the nature of the book. He understood
"repetition" to be something that refers to the phenomena of nature, whereas
Kierkegaard deals with repetition in the realm of spirit, in the life of the individual. "In the entire book I have said nothing about repetition in the phenomena of nature. I have dealt with repetition within the realm offreedom. It
is significant that among the Greeks freedom was not posited as freedom;
therefore its first expression became recollection, for only in recollection did
freedom have eternal life. The modern view must be precisely that of expressing freedom with a view toward the future, and here repetition belongs"
(Pap. IV B 111, p. 273). From the subtide of the book, "A Venture in Experimenting Psychology," Heiberg ought to have recognized that Repetition has
nothing to do with the phenomena of nature. At first Kierkegaard intended to
publish a polemical answer to Heiberg, and he made a draft (Pap. IV B 110)
for that purpose. However, he decided against publication, especially because
the pseudonymous author of Repetition, like Clement of Alexandria, writes

228

Notes to Pages 19-20

"in such a way that the heretics cannot understand it." In view of such a
statement, Kierkegaard would have been out of character ifhe had replied to
Heiberg (Pap. IV B 109).
44. See K. Hase, Hutterus redivivus, tr. A.LC. Listow (Copenhagen: 1841),
§38 fE, §73 fE The auction-catalog lists the German edition (4 ed., Leipzig:
1839; ASKB 581).

45. See Supplement, p. 182 (Pap. VB 49:11).
46. The reference is no doubt to Democritus, who maintained that "atoms
are unlimited in size and number, and they are borne along in the whole universe in a vortex, and thereby generate all composite things" (Diogenes Laertius, tr. H. D. Hicks [Loeb Classical Library 1, IX 44).
47. The reference is to Schleiermacher's Der Christliche Glaube, I-II (3 ed.,
Berlin: 1835; ASKB 258); The Christian Faith, ed. H. R. Mackintosh andJ. S.
Stewart (Edinburgh: T. T. Clark, 1956). Kierkegaard undoubtedly gained insights from Schleiermacher's deliberations on hereditary sin.
48. See Supplement, p. 182 (Pap. V B 49:12). The "first ethics" has
metaphysics as its presupposition and is expressed in the Greek thought of
recollection. It assumes that there is no absolute distinction between the
world of ideas and the world of sense, and that the world of sense participates
in the world of ideas. Man has the possibility of recollecting himself back into
metaphysical reality. The first ethics is altogether ideal and proposes to bring
ideality into actuality. It is the ethics of law. It is a chastiser that demands, and
by its demands it only judges and does not bring forth life. The "second
ethics," which is Christian ethics, has the new science, dogmatics, as its presupposition. It assumes that man is a sinner, that sin constitutes a complete
break in the harmonious development of man, and that there is no way back
to metaphysical reality. The new science does not interpret the disharmony as
ignorance or weakness, but as sin; it offers a condition for overcoming sin,
not by restoration of the former harmony, but by a new beginning. Because
the new ethics proceeds from the assumption that man is a sinner, it places its
demands upon man. Its ideality in no sense consists in making ideal demands,
but in a penetrating consciousness of actuality, namely, the actuality of sin.
Kierkegaard presents this ethics in Works of Love and in "Imitation" in Practice
in Christianity. See Works of Love, II A, KWXVI (SV X), and Practice in Christianity, KW XX (SV XII).
49. Emanuel Hirsch, in a notation to his translation of The Concept of Anxiety (Der BegriJf Angst, p. 243), suggests a comparison ofKierkegaard's presentation of hereditary sin with that ofSchleiermacher. The following are paragraph headings in Schleiermacher, The Christian Faith, pp. 283-314:
§70. The sinfulness which is present in an individual prior to any action
of his own, and has its ground outside his own beginning, is in every case a
complete incapacity for good, which can be removed only by the influence
of Redemption.
§71. Original sin, however, is at the same time so really the personal
guilt of every individual who shares in it that it is best represented as the
corporate act and the corporate guilt of the human race, and that the recog-

Notes to Pages 20-23

229

nition of it as such is likewise recognition of the universal need of redemption.
§72. While the idea that we have thus developed cannot be applied in
precisely the same way to the first human pair, we have no reason for explaining universal sinfulness as due to an alteration in human nature
brought about in their persons by the first sin.
§73. In all men original sin is always issuing in actual sin.
§74. There is no difference in worth between men in regard to sin, apart
from the fact that it does not in all stand in the same relationship to redemption.
50. According to Aristotle, theoretical philosophy has three branches:
mathematics, physics, and first philosophy. The latter treats of being qua being. First philosophy, which Aristotle also called theology (Metaphysics, 1026
a), is the highest theoretical science or philosophy and deals with the universal
characteristics of knowable reality, as well as with the principles of its
organization in their universality. See Metaphysics, Book V, 1. Kierkegaard
proceeds to apply the term "first philosophy" to Hegel's speculative system,
"that totality of science which we might call ethnical, whose essence is immanence."
51. Kierkegaard attended Schelling's lectures on the philosophy of revelation (Philosophie der Offenbarung) in Berlin during the winter semester 18411842. Although he took extensive notes, the distinction that Schelling made
between negative and positive philosophy in his fifth lecture is not recorded
among them. At the beginning of the lecture course, Kierkegaard wrote, "I
am so happy to have heard Schelling's second lecture-indescribably. I have
been pining and thinking mournful thoughts long enough. The embryonic
child of thought leapt for joy within me, as in Elizabeth, when he mentioned
the word 'actuality' in connection with the relation of philosophy to actuality" UP V 5535; Pap. III A 179, n.d., 1841). By February he was through with
Schelling and wrote to his friend Emil Boesen in Copenhagen, "Schelling
talks endless nonsense both in an extensive and an intensive sense" (Letters,
KW XXV, Letter 69).
52. See Leibniz, Opera Philosophica, ed. J. E. Erdmann (Berlin: 1840;
ASKB 620), p. 78; Philosophical Fragments, KW VII (SV IV 209); Kierkeg::!ard's draft, Supplement, pp. 182-83 (Pap. VB 49:14).
53. See Supplement, p. 183 (Pap. V B 49:15).
54. See the marginal note in the draft, Supplement, p. 183 (Pap. V B 49:16).
55. Hegel arranged the sciences in three groups: (1) the sciences of Subjective Spirit: anthropology, phenomenology, and psychology; (2) the sciences
of Objective Spirit: law (Rechtslehre), morality of conscience (Morallehre), and
moral law and social ethics (Sittlichkeitslehre); and (3) the sciences of Absolute
Spirit: art, religion, and philosophy. See Hegel's Philosophy of Mind, §§387 ff.
Karl Rosenkranz entitled his work on psychology Psychologie oder die Wissenschaft vom subjektiven Geist (Konigsberg: 1837; ASKB 744).
56. See Supplement, p. 183 (Pap. VB 49:17).

230

Notes to Pages 25-27
CHAPTERl

1. Kierkegaard first presents the traditional concepts of hereditary sin as
found within the historic Christian church. He regards the Roman Catholic
view as dialectical-fantastic and considers the view of the "federal theology"
to be historical-fantastic. Between the conceptions of the Greek Church and
the Protestant Church lie the interpretations of Augustine and Tertullian.
Unfortunately, the traditional concepts do not attempt to explain what
Adam's sin signified for Adam himself but deal only with the consequences
of Adam's sin for the race. The inadequacy of the dogmatic conceptions of
Christianity lies in their tendency to make sin an ontological qualification of
man's substance. Compare the first paragraph of§1 in the draft, Supplement,
pp. 183-84 (Pap. V B 50). A notation from the journal of 1850 speaks of the
paradoxical character of "hereditary sin":

That "Hereditary Sin" is "Guilt"
is a real paradox. How paradoxical is best seen as follows. The paradox is
formed by a composite of qualitative heterogeneous categories. "Hereditary" is a category of nature. "Guilt" is an ethical category of spirit. How
can it ever occur to anyone to put these two together, the understanding
says-to say that something is hereditary which by its very concept cannot
be hereditary.
It must be believed. The paradox in Christian truth always involves the
truth as before God. A superhuman goal and standard are used-and with
regard to them there is only one relationship possible--that of faith. UP II
1530; Pap. X2 A 481, n.d., 1850)

As a student, Kierkegaard had attended H. N. Clausen's lectures on dogmatics in 1833-1834, and his notes from these lectures are found in Papirer
XII. Both Clausen and Kierkegaard made use of G. B. Winer, Comparative
Darstellung des LehrlJegrijfs der verschiedenen christlichen Kirchenparteien . . .
(Leipzig: 1837; ASKB 178).
2. Kierkegaard takes the expression from Thomas Aquinas. See Pap. XIII,
p. 134; Hutterus redivivus, §80, 4, §81.
3. "Federal theology" was developed in Holland by Joh. Coccejus in the
middle of the seventeenth century. It divided dogmatics into a double covenant (joedus): the covenant of works (state of innocence) and the covenant of
grace (after the fall). Adam, as a plenipotentiary for the whole race, established the first covenant. See Hutterus redivivus, §26, 10.
4. Part III, Art. I, 3.
5. Kierkegaard has ltj>Otoltatopuc6v instead of ltprotoltatopuc6v.
6. The term "vice of origin" (vitium originis) is used by Tertullian in De
Anima, 41, and the designation has been used since his time. A distinction is
made between the fall (peccatum originale originans) and hereditary sin brought
forth by the fall (peccatum originale originatum [derivatum)), which in shortened
form is called original sin (peccatum originale). Hutterus redivivus, §84,1. See
also SchIeiermacher, The Christian Faith, §71.
7. See Fonnula of Concord, Part II: Solid Declaration, I, 10, and Apology rif the

Notes to Pages 27-29

231

Augsburg Confession, II, 15-23. See Supplement, pp. 201'''()2 (Pap. VB 56:7n.).
The Latin on p. 27 is a case in point. C£ Pap. XIII, p. 137.
8. See Apology of the Augsburg Confession, II, 38 and 47.
9. See Formula of Concord, Part II: Solid Declaration, I, 9ff., and The Augsburg
Confession, I, 2.
10. See Romans 5:12-14 and Formula of Concord, Part II: Solid Declaration, I,
8-9.
11. Dracon (ca. 624 B.C.), an Athenian lawgiver, recorded the old laws of
punishment Although it was not the first Athenian code, it was the first
comprehensive code. It was regarded as intolerably harsh, punishing trivial
crimes with death. Solon repealed all but the laws dealing with murder.
Plutarch, Solon, 17.
12. Pelagius (fifth century) denied the notion of hereditary sin and maintained that every man, like Adam before the fall, is born without sin. Socinius
(sixteenth century) rejected the traditional doctrines of hereditary sin.
"Philanthropic individualism" is a reference to the radical moral-religious
individualism associated with the philanthropic movement of J. B.
Basedow.
13. "'This,' namely, that man is both himself and the race, is spoken of as
man's perfection, that ideal of man that can be actualized within the development of the human race in time where man has not as yet entered into
relation with the eternal and where the highest ideal is that of serving the race.
This is confirmed by the statement, 'viewed as a state,' where state signifies
precisely the result of the synthesis that is brought about when the individual incorporates in himself the development of the race. 'Man's perfection'
also expresses his advantage over the animal. In the animal world, the particular specimen does not contribute to the species, nor does the species contribute to the specimen. That the sentence in question is to be understood in this
way is obvious from what follows, namely, that man's perfection is a contradiction. The contradiction is that man is at once both himself and the race,
i.e., as individual he receives the contributions of the race in its development,
while he, in tum, makes his contributions to coming generations. Thus the
contradiction places man over against a task. He is to combine his own existence with that of the race. This task is an historical movement. Here again lies
a contradiction, because the individual is born at a particular time in history
and must begin his development entirely anew, while he at the same time
repeats the development of the race" (Gregor Malantschuk, Frihedens Problem
i Kierkegaards Begrebet Angest [Copenhagen: Rosenkilde og Bagger, 1971 J, pp.
17-18, ed. tr.).
14. Movement in which both nature and end are one and the same, and in
which the essential development of the individual embodies the tension between being both himself and the race, is defined as historical movement.
15. "As head ofthe human race by nature, by generation" is an expression
found in older works on Lutheran dogmatics. The expression "by covenant"
belongs to the federal theology. See C. G. Bretschneider, Handbuch der Dogmatik der evangelisch-Iutherischen Kirche, I-II (4 ed., Leipzig: 1838; ASKB 43738), II, pp. 70-71; Hutterus redivivus, §85,6.

232

Notes to Pages 30-31

16. For Kierkegaard, "quality" signifies the unique character of an appearance [Erscheinung Jand its concept He maintains that the transition from one
quality to another can take place only by a "leap." Hegel also speaks of a qualitative leap but on the basis of quantitative change. "On the qualitative side,
therefore, the gradual, merely quantitative progress, which is not in itself a
limit, is absolutely interrupted; the new quality in its merely quantitative relationship is, relatively to the vanishing quality, an indifferent, indeterminate
other, and the transition is therefore a leap; both are posited as completely
external to each other." In the case of morality, Hegel maintains that "there
occurs the same transition from quantity into quality, and different qualities
appear to be based on a different magnitude. It is through a more and less that
the measure of frivolity or thoughdessness is exceeded and something quite
different comes about, namely, crime, and thus right becomes wrong and virtue vice" (Wissmschaft der Logik, I, Book One, Section III, Chapter 2 B, Werke,
III, pp. 448, 451; J.A., IV, pp. 458, 461; Hegel's Samce of Logic, pp. 368, 37071). Over against Hegel, Kierkegaard maintains that the leap has no place
whatever in logic, that it does not take place by necessity but by freedom, and
that the transition from virtue to vice is never a quantitative process. For the
"leap" see Philosophif4l Fragments, KW VII (S V IV 236-49).
17. Schelling maintains over against Hegel that there is a qualitative difference between Absolute Spirit and nature. But the absolute manifests itself in
two potencies: the ideal (mind) and the real (extended nature). The origin of
the sensible world is due to a cosmic fall, a falling or breaking away from the
Absolute. See F. W.J. Schelling. Darstellung meines Systems der Philosophie
(1801). §§23 fE, Siimmtliche Werke, I-XIV, ed. K.F.A. von Schelling (Stutrgatr
and Augsburg: 185tMil), Part Four, I, pp. 123 ff.; Idem zu einer Philosophie der
Natur (1797), Sammtliche Werke. Part Two, I, p. 313; Philosophie urtd Religion
(1804), Sammtliche Werke. Part Six, I, pp. 38 ff.
18. "One merely needs to recall Hegel's beautiful expression in the first
part of his Logie. where he indicates that a quality by a change in its quantity
passes over into another quality" (Karl Rosenkranz. Psychologie oder die Wissmschaft vom subjeaiven Geist. p. 332). Kierkegaard knew of Rosenkranz's
view of Schelling through two works by Rosenkranz, Sertdschreibm an P.
Leroux "ber Schelling und Hegel (Konigsberg: 1843) and Voriesungm Uber Schelling (Danzig: 1843; ASKB 766).
19. Kierkegaard insists that there is no qualitative difference between
Adam's sin and the first sin of any subsequent individual. The quality is posited by the individual's own action. An undated journal entry from 1844
reads: "There is really only one single quality-individuality. Everything revolves around this, and this is al5() why everyone understands qualitatively
with regard to himself what he understands quantitatively with regard to
others. This constitutes individuality, but not everyone wants to have it"
UP II 1986; Pap. V A 53, n.d., 1844).
20. "Sin" signifies actual sin; "sinfulness" expresses the greater possibility
for new and actual sins. a possibility that never constitutes the actuality of sin.
Traditional conceptions have not been aware of or distinguished between the
actuality of sin as actual sin and the possibility of sin as hereditary sin.

Notes to Pages 31-35

233

21. In]. L. Heiberg's vaudeville Recensenten og Dyret (The Reviewer and the
Beast), Trop, a studiosus perpetuus (perpetual student) ofjurisprudence, says: "I
can at any time obtain a testimonial to the fact that I have almost been close to
taking my law examination."
22. Even before D. F. Strauss, H. N. Clausen had used the designation
"Mosaic myth" about the Genesis account, Katholidsmens og Protestantismens
Kirkeforfatning, Ltrre og Ritus (Copenhagen: 1825; ASKB A I 42), p. 521.
According to Hegel, the incidents of the myth of the fall "form the basis of
an essential article of the creed, the doctrine of original sin in man and his
consequent need of succour" (Hegel's Logic, §24 Zusatz 3). Kierkegaard maintains that Hegel treated the story as a "myth of the understanding." Such a
myth is based on the assumption that it adequately expresses the eternal in
temporal qualities and that its truth can be grasped by the understanding.
Over against Hegel's position, Kierkegaard affirms the paradoxicality of
Christian truths, including that of hereditary sin, which involves a transcendence that is incapable of being grasped by reason.
23. It is impossible to translate the Danish rhyme, "Pole-een-Mester,
Pole-to-Mester, ... Politi-Mester." I am indebted to Walter Lowrie for his
excellent substitution.
24. See the more extensive presentation in the draft, Supplement, p. 184
(Pap. VB 53:4).
25. See Romans 5:12-21; I Corinthians 15:21-22.
26. These were boys from an orphanage in Copenhagen who were dressed
in blue uniforms. When admitted to the orphanage, each boy was given a
number, and the boys addressed one another by number rather than by name.
27. Philipp Marheineke, Grundlehren der christlichen Dogmatik (2 ed., Berlin:
1827; ASKB 644), p. 260. Marheineke fmds support in the most recent philosophy (Hegelianism), which defmes innocence, a state in which there is no
distinction between good and evil, as the state of immediacy.
28. "Man must not remain what he is immediately; he must pass beyond the
state of immediacy: that is the notion or conception of Spirit." See Hegel,
Vorlesungen iiber die Philosophie der Religion, II. Part Three, II, 3, Werke (2 ed.,
1840; ASKB 564-65), XII, p. 259;J.A., XVI. p. 259; Leaures on the Philosophy
of Religion, I-Ill, tr. E. B. Speirs and]. B. Sanderson (London: Roudedge &
Kegan Paul; New York: Humanities Press, 1962), Ill, p. 47.
"When man's condition is immediate and mentally undeveloped, he is in a
situation in which he ought not to be and from which he must free himself.
This is the meaning of the doctrine of original sin [Erbsiinde 1without which
Christianity would not be a religion of freedom" (Grundlinien der Philosophie
des Rechts, §18 Zusatz, Werke, VIII. p. 54; J.A., VII, p. 70; Hegel's Philosophy
of Right, p. 231).
29. Hegel states: "Upon a closer examination of the myth of the Fall ...
we find an expression of a universal relation of knowledge to spiritual life. In
its immediacy the spiritual life is next qualified as innocence and simple confidence. But the essence of spirit is that the immediate state is to be annulled,
for spiritual life differs from natural life, and more particularly from animal
life in that it does not remain as being-in-itself; but that it is for-itself. This

234

Notes to Pages 35-41

standpoint is in tum likewise to be annulled, and spirit by itself will return to
unity" (Encydopiidie, Part One, Die Logi/e, §24 Zusatz 3, Werlee, VI, p. 55, ed.
tr.;J.A., VIII, p. 93; Hegel's Logic, tr. William Wallace [Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1975 J, §24, pp. 42-43). Wallace's translation does not bring out the distinctive terminology of Hegel that is so essential for understanding Kierkegaard's argument.
30. "But even if we take up an empirical, and external attitude, it will be
found that there is nothing at all that is immediate, that there is nothing to
which only the quality of immediate belongs to the exclusion of that of mediation; but that which is immediate is likewise mediated, and that immediacy
itself is essentially mediated" (Hegel, Philosophie der Religion, I, Part One, B,
111,2, a, p, Werlee, XI, p. 158; J.A., XV, p. 174; Leaures on the Philosophy if
Religion, I, p. 162).
31. "This pure being is after all a pure abstraaion, and therefore absolutely
negative; regarded immediately it is nothing" (Encyclopiidie, Part One, Die
Logik, §87, Werlee, VI, p. 169, ed. tr.; J.A., VIII, p. 207; Hegel's Logie, p. 127).
"Pure being and pure nothing are, therefore, the same... Hegel, Wissenschaft
der Logik, Book One, Section One, Chapter I, C, Werlee, III, p. 78;J.A. IV, p.
88; Hegel's Science if Logic, p. 82.
32. The editors ofKierkegaard's Samlede V~rleer suggest that "it" refers to
"immediacy" and not to "innocence" on the ground that "innocence" is
found nowhere in Hegel's Logic. However, Thulstrup points out that this is
not quite true, for the term "innocence" appears several times in the LogiC,
also in the very place where Hegel deals with the Mosaic myth. See Encyclopiidie, Part One, Die Logik, §24 Zusatz 3, Werlee, VI, pp. 53-59; J.A., VIII,
pp. 91-97; Hegel's Logic, pp. 41-45.
33. See Upbuilding Discourses, KW V (SV IV 24-26).
34. Romans 3:19.
35. Psalm 51:7. This passage was used as part of the baptismal liturgy.
36. See John 1:29; Supplement, p. 184 (Pap. VB 53:5).
37. Leonhard Usteri, Entwickelung des paulinischen Lehrbegriffes mit Hinsicht
auf die iibrigen Schriften des neuen Testamentes (4 ed., Zurich: 1832); Udvikling af
det Paulinske L~rebegret ... , tr. W.).). Boethe (Copenhagen: 1839; ASKB
850).
38. Franz Baader's doctrine of will and freedom rests on the assumption
that the will can become conscious of its freedom and determination only
through a choice necessitated by external incitements of various kinds.
Baader also applied this concept to Adam in Paradise. See Franz Baader,
Vorlesungen . . . iiber religiose Philosophie (Munich: 1827; ASKB 395);
Siimmtliche Werlee, I-XVI (Leipzig: 1851~), I, §35, pp. 249-50.
39. See Supplement, pp. 184-85 (Pap. V B 53:6).
40. In the siege of Pelusium, Cambyses, the Persian king, placed anirnals
sacred to the Egyptians in the front of his army. See Polyaenus, Strategemata,
7,9.
41. Augsburg Corifession, II, 1.
42. See Supplement, p. 185 (Pap. VB 53:8).
43. Genesis 2:17,3:5.

Notes to Pages 41-48

235

44. For. another description of paradisiacal innocence, see Upbuilding Discourses, KWV (SV IV 24 ff.).
45. See Christian Discourses, KW XVIII (SV X 113).
46. The editors ofKierkegaard's Samlede Vrerleer assume that the term "the
possibility of possibility" is a slip of the pen and that the intended reading is
"the possibility of freedom." The assumption is hardly tenable. The term
must be understood in relation to its context When man is psychically qualified in unity with his naturalness, and spirit is sleeping, human freedom does
not manifest itself. Anxiety is the qualification of the dreaming spirit, and
when spirit becomes awake, the difference between oneself and the other is
posited. In the dreaming state, spirit has a presentiment of the freedom that
follows when consciousness is awakened. This presentiment of freedom, this
state of anxiety, is spoken of as "freedom's actuality as the possibility of possibility." It is also spoken of as "entangled freedom, where freedom is not
free in itself but is entangled, not by necessity, but in itself." See p. 49.
47. See Supplement, p. 185 (Pap. V B 53:9). A journal entry reads: "The
nature of hereditary sin has often been explained, and still a primary category
has been lacking-it is anxiety (Angst); this is the essential determinant. Anxiety is a desire for what one fears, a sympathetic antipathy; anxiety is an alien
power which grips the individual, and yet he cannot tear himself free from it
and does not want to, for one fears, but what he fears he desires. Anxiety
makes the individual powerless, and the first sin always occurs in weakness;
therefore it apparently lacks accountability, but this lack is the real trap" UP I
94; Pap. III A 233, n.d., 1842).
48. See The Sickness unto Death, KW XIX (SV XI 127-28).
49. Genesis 2:17.
50. A board upon which were pasted letters of the alphabet Each letter
was illustrated by an animal whose name begins with that letter.
51. A superficial reading of this paragraph might suggest that Kierkegaard
is at the same time both affirming and denying monogenesis. However, this
paragraph must be understood in the context of§2 (pp. 29-35). Kierkegaard's
anthropological postulate, "the relationship of generation," affirms that every
human being as an individual is both himself and the race. The race does not
begin anew with every individual, for in that case there would be no race.
Were the race descended from several pairs-an assumption that is dismissed
by the statement that nature does not favor a meaningless superfluity--every
particular Adam would have been a statue by himself; qualified by the indifferent determination (number), and every particular man would have been
himself, not himself and the race.
52. Genesis 3:1.
53. See Supplement, p. 186 (Pap. V B 53:12).
54. See the sentence deleted from the draft, Supplement, p. 185 (Pap. V B
53: 11). It appears that Kierkegaard conceived of the serpent as a symbol of
language.
55. James 1:13-14.
56. Augustine in the City t?fGod, XIV, 23, raised the question of whether
there would have been procreation in Paradise if no one had sinned. Follow-

Notes to Pages 48-57

236

ing Jacob Bohme, Franz Baader suggested the possibility of the androgynous
nature of man prior to the fall.
57. See Genesis 2:25.
58. Liberum arbitrium, freedom of indifference or the ability of the will to
choose independendy of antecedent factors. Kierkegaard states: "A perfecdy
disinterested will (equilibrium) is a nothing, a chimera; Leibniz demonstrates
this superbly in many places; Bayle also acknowledges this (in opposition to
Epicurus)" UP II 1241; Pap. IV C 39, n.d., 1842-43). See also Pap. IV C 31 ff.,
and Leibniz, Theodicee, Opera philosophica, I-II, ed. J. E. Erdmann (Berlin:
1840; ASKB 620), §311, §319-20, II, pp. 595, 597-98.
59. See the deleted continuation in the draft, Supplement, p. 186 (Pap. V B
53:13).
60. A man had a daughter called Clever Elsie. He tried to get her married,
and at length a man called Hans came and wooed her but stipulated that if she
was not really smart, he would not have her. After the meal, Elsie was sent to
the cellar to fetch beer. As she was filling the pitcher, her eyes fell upon a
pickax above her on the wall. She said to herself; "If Hans and I get married
and have a child, when he grows up and is sent to the cellar to fetch beer, the
ax may fall upon his head and kill him." And she wept and screamed. When
she did not return with the beer, the mother sent the maid to see why Clever
Elsie did not return, but when Clever Elsie had told her story, the maid sat
down and screamed with her. At length, all the members of the family
gathered in the cellar and wept and screamed with Elsie, saying: "What a
clever Elsie we havel" When at last Hans came to the cellar and was told of
the tragedy that was in store for their son, he said: "Come, more understanding is not needed for my household." "Die Kluge Else," Kinder- und HausMiirchen. Gesammelt durch die BrUder Grimm, I-III (2 ed., Berlin: 1819-22;
ASKB 1425-27), I, no. 34; The Complete Grimm's Fairy Tales, tr. Margaret
Hunt and James Stem (New York: Pantheon Books, 1944), pp. 171-72.
61. The traditional date for the creation of the world was 4000 B.C.
Nebuchadnezzar lived about 600 B.C. The round number 4000 is arbitrary.
Daniel 4:25, 33.
62. Soldin was an absent-minded bookseller in Copenhagen, notorious for
his many distractions. Once when a customer entered the bookstore, Soldin
was standing on a ladder reaching for a book. Imitating the voice of Sol din,
the customer said a few words to the bookseller's wife. Turning on the ladder, Soldin said, "Rebecca, is it I who is speaking?"
CHAPTER II

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Romans 8:22.
See Chapter IV §2.

Luke 18:11.
See Supplement, p. 186 (Pap. V B 53:15).
See Supplement, pp. 186-87 (Pap. VB 53:16).
The Greek word c'molCapaliolda is translated Forltrngsel in the Danish

Notes to Pages 57-59

237

Bible, and iingstUche Harren in the German Bible. The term occurs twice in the
New Testament, in Romans 8:19 and in Philippians 1:20, where it is associated with hope. Kierkegaard uses the word twice in The Concept of Anxiety,
on pages 53 and 57-58. The word is used once in the Postscript, KW XII (SV
VII 164), and twice in The Concept if Irony, KW II (S V XIII 173, 258). It does
not appear in the Danish index to the Papirer.
7. See the continuation of this statement in the draft, Supplement, p. 187
(Pap. VB 53:17).
8. The first and second editions of Begrebet Angest and the first edition of
Samlede V.rrker use the term Endeligheden (fmitude). The second edition ofSV
has substituted Elendigheden (misery), which must be a misprint, because no
account of this change is made in the text-critical supplement to the second
edition. German editions translate the word as End/ichkeit. Walter Lowrie in
his translation (The Concept if Dread) uses the phrase "man's pitiful condition," which alters the meaning of the whole passage. For the reference to
Baader, see Vorlesungen in spekulative Dogmatik (Stuttgart, Tiibingen: 182838; ASKB 396), XVII, Siimmt/iche Werke, I-XVI (Leipzig: 1851-60), VIII, pp.
143 If.
9. See Supplement, p. 187 (Pap. VB 53:18).
10. Referring to Plato's Parmenides, Hegel says: "That which enables the
Notion to advance itself is the already mentioned negative which it possesses
within itself; it is this which constitutes the genuine dialectical element.
Dialectic in this way acquires an entirely different significance from what it
had when it was considered as a separate part of logic and when its aim and
standpoint were, one may say, completely misunderstood. Even the Platonic
dialectic in the Parmenides itself and elsewhere even more direcdy, on the
other hand, aims only at abolishing and refuting limited assertions through
themselves, and, on the other hand, has for results simply nothingness.
Dialectic is commonly regarded as an external, negative activity which does
not pertain to the subject matter itself; having its ground in mere conceit as a
subjective itch for unsetding and destroying what is fixed and substantial, or
at least having for result nothing but the worthlessness of the object dialectically considered" (Wissenschtift der Logik, I, Introduction, Werke, III, p. 43;
J.A., IV, pp. 53-54; Hegel's Science if Logic, pp. 55-56). Specific reference is
made to the Platonic l'tEPOV in Hegel's Geschichte der Philosoph ie, II, Part One,
Section One, Period 1, Chapter II, A, 1, Werke, XIV, p. 233; J.A., XVIII, p.
233; History of Philosophy, II, p. 64.
11. Schelling, Philosophische Untersuchungen uber das Wesen der mensch/ichen
Freiheit, Siimmt/iche Werke, IV, p. 291.
12. "To think only of oneself is the most painful state for a healthy man.
Man does not remain in himself [an sich]. Johannes Miiller writes, 'I am
happy only when I produce.' In his creative activity man is not occupied with
himself; but with something outside himsel£ Because of this, God is called
the Great Blissful One" (H.E.G. Paulus's edition of Schelling's lectures in
Berlin, Die end/ich offenbar gewordene positive Philosophie der Offenbarung
[Darmstadt: 1843], pp. 476-77, ed. tr.).

238

Notes to Pages 59-70

13. Philipp Marheineke, Zur Kritik der Schellingschen Offenbarungsphilosophie (Berlin: 1843; ASKB 647), p. 47.
14. See Supplement, pp. 187-88 (Pap. VB 53:19). In the translation an uncommon, older English form (see OED) is used to signal the special addi-

tional meaning of the Danish term.
15. See the continuation of this statement in the draft, Supplement, p. 188
(Pap. VB 53:20).
16. See Supplement, p. 188 (Pap. VB 53:21).
17. See the continuation of this statement in the draft, Supplement, p. 188
(Pap. V B 53:22).
18. In Erasmus Montanus, III, 5,Jasper, the bailiff, says about Erasmus Montanus, "Oh, it's terrible: My hair stands on end when I think of it. I can't
remember all that I heard, but I know that among other things he said that the
earth was round. What can I call such a thing Monsieur Jeronimus? That is
nothing else than overthrowing all religion and leading folk away from the
faith. A heathen certainly cannot speak worse" (Comedies by Holberg, tr.
Oscar James Campbell Jr. and Frederick Schenck [New York: American
Scandinavian Foundation, 1935 D.
19. See Supplement, pp. 188-89 (Pap. VB 53:23).
20. Kierkegaard takes a position opposite to that of Hegel, who maintained that beauty and spirit are identical in a perfect work of art.
21. Genesis 3:6.
22. See the addition in the draft, Supplement, p. 189 (Pap. VB 53:25).
23. See Supplement, p. 189 (Pap. V B 53:26).
24. See Supplement, p. 190 (Pap. VB 53:27).
25. See Supplement, p. 190 (Pap. VB 53:28).
26. Instead of beginning the paragraph with the preceding words, the draft
has a much longer presentation. See Supplement, pp. 190-93 (Pap. VB 53:29).
Compare the following journal entry: "An example of dialectic in regard to
guilt and innocence. An old sensualist, yet still witty and ironical (a diplomat)
guides some young girls into an exhibition of Greek sculpture. There are
some young men in the company. One of the young girls, the most innocent
of them all, blushes, not because she is disturbed, but because there is something in the old scoundrel's countenance which wounds her modesty. But
this blush does not escape his notice; in his face she reads his thoughts. In that
same moment one of the young men looks at her-she is mortified; she cannot speak to anyone about it, and she becomes melancholy" UP II 1526; Pap.
IV A 121, n.d., 1843).
27. Matthew 23:4.
28. See Supplement, p. 193 (Pap. VB 53:30).
29. "The beautiful will not tolerate to be kissed, but the ugly like it, because they believe they are called beautiful for the sake of their soul"
(Memorabilia, II, 6, 32-33; Xenophontis Memorabilia, ed. F. A. Bornemann
[Leipzig:1829; ASKB 1211], pp. 137-38).
30. See Supplement, p. 193 (Pap. VB 53:31).
31. See Supplement, pp. 193-94 (Pap. VB 53:32).
32. See Galatians 3:28.

Notes to Pages 70-77

239

33. "What do you think, Critobulus, happens to you when you kiss a
beautiful face? Do you not believe you lose your freedom in no time, and are
made a slave, begin to spend great sums on pleasure which do not benefit
you, never have time at your disposing which a gentleman should have, and
are forced to things which a true man should not care about?" (Memorabilia, I,
3,8).
34. The quotation is from Pierre Bayle, Dictionaire, article "Puteanus,"
note J. Kierkegaard owned the German translation of the Didionaire, Herm
Peter Baylens ... Historiches und Kritisches Wiirterbuch, nach der neuesten Auflage
von 1740 ins Deutsche ubersetzt; auch mit einer Vorrede und verschiedenen Anmerkungen sonderlich bey anstiissigen Sullen versehen, von Johann Christoph Gottscheden, I-IV (Leipzig: 1741-44; ASKB 1961~). It was through reading Leibniz
that Kierkegaard became aware of Bayle.
35. Athenaeus (ca. 200 A.D.), Deipnosophista, Book V.
36. Plutarch, Pericles, 24,2; Plutarks Levnetsbeskrivelser, tr. Stephan Tetens,
I-IV (Copenhagen: 1800-11; ASKB 1197-12(0), II, pp. 210-11.
37. Socrates says about his wife, "I have taken her because I am convinced
that if I can handle her, my relation to the rest of mankind will cause me no
trouble" (Symposium, II, 10; Xenophontis Opera, I-IV, ed. G. A. Thieme,
[Leipzig: 1801-04; ASKB 1207-10], IV).
38. Originally the relationship had the nature of a spiritual fellowship, and
this is no doubt what Kierkegaard refers to.
39. A significant addition in the draft adds meaning to the text. See Supplement, p. 194 (Pap. VB 53:33).
40. See Exodus 20:5; Deuteronomy 5:9.
41. See the section on "Quantitative Infmity," Wissenschaft der Logik, I,
Book One, Section Two, Chapter I, C, Werke, III, pp. 263 ff.;J.A., IV, pp.
273 ff.; Hegel's Science of Logic, pp. 225 ff.
42. See the continuation of this statement in the draft, Supplement, p. 194
(Pap. V B 53:34).
43. An animal with the legs of a frog and the tail of a salamander, which,
according to the zoology of that day, passed through a development opposite
to that of a frog and eventually became a fish.
44. Kant maintained that man does not have an innate evil will and that
man's sensate nature is not evil. Evil consists in the fact that man derives his
strongest incentives from self-love and self-interest and not from the unselfish moral law. "For despite the fall, the injunction that we ought to become better men resounds unabatedly in our souls; hence this must be within
our power, even though that we are able to do is in itself inadequate and
though we thereby only render ourselves susceptible of higher, and for us,
inscrutable assistance. It must indeed be presupposed throughout that a seed
of goodness still remains in its purity, incapable of being extirpated or corrupted; and this seed certainly cannot be self-love, which, when taken as the
principle of all our maxims, is the very source of evil" (Immanuel Kant, Die
Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vemuft [Konigsberg: 1793], p. 47;
Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone, tr. Theodore M. Greene and Hoyt
H. Hudson [New York: Harper & Row, 1960], pp. 40-41).

240

Notes to Pages 77-79

For Hegel, evil consists essentially in asserting one's own subjective peculiarity over against the universal. "Once self-consciousness has reduced all
otherwise valid duties to emptiness, and itself to the sheer inwardness of the
will, it has become the polentiality of either making the absolutely universal
its principle, or equally well of elevating above the universal the self-will of
private particularity, taking that as its principle, and realizing it through its
action, i.e., it has become potentially evil" (Philosophie des Rechts, §139, Werke,
VIII, pp. 1~5; J.A., VII, pp. 200-201; Hegel's Philosophy oj Right, p. 92).
See also Philosophie der Religion, I-II (2 ed., 1840; ASKB ~5), II, Part
Three, II, 3, Werke, XII, p. 261;J.A., XVI, p. 261; Lectures on the Philosophy of
Religion, III, p. 49.
Both Hegel and Kant maintain that man possesses within himself the possibility of knowing and actualizing the good, something that is contrary to
the Christian position.
45. A possible reference to N.F.S. Grundtvig's subjective interpretation of
Nordic mythology or to his mythological interpretation of romantic philosophers of Schelling's school. See N.F.S. Grundtvig, Nordens Mythologie
(Copenhagen: 1832; ASKB 1949), p. 114.
46. Kierkegaard's remark is directed against the Danish Hegelian P. M
Stilling's Philosophislte Betragtninger oller den speltulatille Logilt (Copenhagen:
1812), p. 12. See also J. L. Heiberg's introductory lecture to the course in
logic, Indlednings-Foredrag til det logislte Kursus, Prasaislte Sltrifter, I-XI
(Copenhagen: 1861-62), I, p. 472. For Hegel, "Know yourself" is an absolute
command, but it is not meant to promote mere self-knowledge of the individual's particular capacities, character, inclinations, and weaknesses, for such
self-knowledge is negative in its relation to the absolute, and consequendy
evil. Self-knowledge is that of the most concrete and universal knowledge of
man's spirit as it expresses itself in the history of the race and in the state. See
Hegel, Encydopiidie, Part Three, Die Philosophie des Geistes, §3n and Zusatz,
Werke, VIP, pp. 3-5;j.A., X, pp. 9-11; Hegel's Philosophy oj Mind, pp. 1-2.
47. Hutterus redillillus, §130, 7, slates that in the Resurrection the sexual difference is retained, but excluso semine et laae [with the exclusion of semen and
milk).
48. According to Luke 20:34-36, angels are without sex. See K. G. Bretschneider, Handbuch der Dogmatilt der ellangelisch-lutherischen Kirche, I-II (4 ed.,
Leipzig: 1842; ASKB 437-38), 1, §101,2.
49. Sinlessness is attributed to the human nature of Christ. See Ibid., II,
§136.
SO. Terence, Phormio, II, 1,1. 265; Terentses Sltuespil, tr. F. H. Guldberg, I-II
(Copenhagen: 1805; ASKB 1293-94), II, p. 251. The proposition becomes a
principle in Kierkegaard's psychological method. It is based on the assumption that one in a sense is all. The principle is reaffirmed in the Postscript,
which states that speculative philosophy is indifferent to what it means to be
an existing subject. At the most, it deals with the pure idea of mankind.
Existence-communication, on the contrary, understands something entirely
different by unum in the principle unum noris omnes and something different by
"yourself" in the dictum "know yourself" and indicates thereby that the

Notes to Pages 79-81

241

words do not refer to anecdotal differences between Peter and Paul. See Postscript, KW XII (S V VII 498, also 306, 309). Kierkegaard's opposition to Hegel
is expressed in ajoumal entry: "The excellence of Plato's Republic is that he
did not make the state higher than the individual, least of all in the manner of
Hegelianjargon. In order to describe the individual, he describes the state; he
describes a democrat by describing democracy; he constructs a state for the
individual, unum noris omnes-this is the proper human ideality; otherwise we
get the confusion that many by being many produce something entirely
different from what each one is individually" UP III 3327; Pap. VIP A 70,
n.d., 1846). See Supplement, p. 183 (Pap. VB 49:15).
51. Hegel speaks of the Heiterieeit and Wehmut (sadness, melancholy) of
Hellenism. See "Gymnasial-Reden," September 29, 1809, Vermischte Schriften,
Werke, XVI, p. 139; l.A., III, p. 237. He also speaks of Heiterkeit in Greek
religion. See Philosophie der Religion, II, Part Two, Division II, II, C, a, Weriee,
XII, p. 131; l.A., XVI, p. 131; Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion, II, p. 261.
52. See the addition in the draft, Supplement, pp. 194-95 (Pap. V B 53:38).
CHAPTER III

1. The lesser logic is one of the few places where Hegel deals wi th the category of transition. The onward movement of the notion is neither a transition into nor a reftection of something else. It is a kind of development.
"Transition into something else is the dialectical process within the range of
Being: reftection (bringing something else into light) in the range of essence.
The movement of the notion is development: by which that only is explicit
which is already implicidy present" (Encyc/opiidie, Part One, Die Logik, §161
and Zusatz, Weriee, VI, pp. 317-18; l.A., VIII, p. 355; Hegel's Logic,
pp. 224-25).
Kierkegaard maintains that Hegelian logic is unable to account for transition: "Ancient philosophy, the most ancient in Greece, was preeminendy occupied with the question of the motion whereby the world came into existence [blev tiLJ, the constitutive relationship of the elements to each other.
-The most recent philosophy is especially occupied with motion-that is
motion in logic.... Modem philosophy has never accounted for motion"
UP III 3294; Pap. IV A 54, n.d., 1843).
"Hegel has never done justice to the category of transition. It would be
significant to compare it with the Aristotelian teaching about ICiVll(J~
[changeJ." In margin: "See Tennemann, III, p. 125; he translates the word as
change" UP I 260; Pap. IV C SO, n.d., 1842-43).
Kierkegaard distinguishes between dialectical transitions in the realm of
thought and pathetical transitions, which take place in the realm of freedom
and which involve a leap. "Can there be a transition from a quantitative qualification to a qualitative one without a leap? And does not the whole of life
rest in that?" UP I 261; Pap. IV C 87, n.d., 1842-43). "Every qualification for
which being (V«renJ is an essential qualification lies outside ofimmanental
thought, consequendy outside oflogic" UP I 196; Pap. IV C 88, n.d., 184243).

242

Notes to Page 81

Finally, compare this significant notation: "The category to which I intend
to trace everything, and which is also the category lying dormant in Greek
Sophistry if one views it world-historically, is motion (1dvl'\(J~), which is
perhaps one of the most difficult problems in philosophy. In modern philosophy it has been given another expression-namely, transition and mediation" UP V 5601; Pap. IV C 97, n.d., 1842-43). The concept of 1dVl'\(J~ is
most systematically treated in the "Interlude" of Philosophical Fragments, KV
VII (SV 236-39).
2. These were Greek monks who by gazing at their own navels induced an
ecstatic state in themselves, through which they believed they could look into
divine glory. In an earlier journal entry Kierkegaard wrote: "There is nothing
more dangerous for a man, nothing more paralyzing, than a certain isolating
self-scrutiny, in which world-history, human life, society-in short,
everything--disappears, and like the navel gazers ... in an egotistical circle
one constantly stares only at his own navel" UP II 1971; Pap. II A 187, Nov.
3, 1837).
3. According to Hegel, the concept of essence, when deprived of all its
concretions, is identical with "nothing." On nothing and presuppositionlessness, see, for example, Hegel's Wissenschaft der Logile, Werlre, III, pp. 63, 68;
J.A., IV, pp. 73, 78.
"But if no presupposition is to be made and the beginning itself is taken
immediately, then its only determination is that it is to be the beginning of
logic, of thought as such. All that is present is simply the resolve, which can
also be regarded as arbitrary, that we propose to consider thought as such.
Thus the beginning must be an absolute, or what is synonymous here, an
abstract beginning; and so it may not presuppose anything, must not be mediated
by anything nor have a ground; rather it is to be itself the ground of the entire
science. Consequently, it must be purely and simply an immediacy, or rather
merely immediacy itself. Just as it cannot possess any determination relatively
to anything else, so too it cannot contain within itself any determination, any
content; for any such would be a distinguishing and an interrelationship of
distinct moments, and consequently a mediation. The beginning therefore is
pure being" (Hegel's Science of Logic, p. 70).
" As yet there is nothing and there is to become something. The beginning
is not pure nothing, but a nothing from which something is to proceed; therefore being, too, is already contained in the beginning. The beginning, therefore, contains both, being and nothing, is the unity of being and nothing; or is
non-being which is at the same time being, and being which is at the same
time non-being" (Hegel's Saence of Logic, p. 73).
Among references to the theme of nothing and presuppositionlessness,
Kierkegaard'sjournals include a sketch of Hegel and Socrates:
The Dialectic of Beginning
Scene in the Underworld
Characters: Socrates
Hegel

Notes to Pages 81-82

243

Socrates sits in the cool [of the evening] by a fountain, listening.
Hegel sits at a desk reading Trendelenburg's Logische Untersuchungen, IL
p. 198, and walks over to Socrates to complain.
Socrates: Shall we begin by completely agreeing or disagreeing about
something which we call a presupposition.
[Sic I Hegel:
Socrates: With what presupposition do you begin?
Hegel: None at all.
Socrates: Now that is something; then you perhaps do not begin at all.
Hegel: I not begin-I who have written twenty·~>ne volumes?
Socrates: Ye gods, what a hecatomb you have offered!
Hegel: But I start with nothing.
Socrates: Is that not with something?
Hegel: No--the inverse process. It becomes apparent only at the conclusion of the whole process, when I have treated all the sciences, history,
etc.
Socrates: How shall I be able to surmount this difficulty, for many remarkable things must certainly have happened which would captivate me.
(Misuse of the oratorical element.) You know that I did not allow even
Polos to talk more than five minutes at a time, and you want to talk XXI
volumes.
JP 1113306 (Pap. VI A 145) n.d., 1845.

4. For Aristode the term means any kind of change. See Supplement,
p. 195 (Pap. VB 72:12).
5. Kierkegaard's knowledge of the Pythagoreans and the Eleatics is from
Tennemann, Geschichte der Philosophie, I-XII (Leipzig: 1798-1819; ASKB
815-26), I, pp. 53-208. See Kierkegaard's excerpts from this work (Pap. IV C

3).

6. "Must we not even refuse to allow that in such a case a person is saying
something, though he may be speaking of nothing? Must we not assert that
he is not even saying anything when he sets about uttering the sounds 'a thing
that is not'?" (Plato, Sophist, 237 e, tr. F. M. Cornford [The Colleaed Dialogues
of Plato, ed. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns D. The rest of the
dialogue is a refutation of the position that non-being is an absolute contradiction of being. "When we speak of 'that which is not,' we do not mean
something contrary to what exists, but only something that is different"
(ibid., 257 b). The Stranger in the Sophist concludes: "Whereas we have not
merely shown that things that are not, are, but we have brought to light the
real character of 'non-being.' We have shown that the nature of the Different
has existence and is parcelled out over the whole field of existent things with
reference to one another; and of every part of it that is set in contrast to 'that
which is' we have dared to say that precisely that is re411y 'that which is not' "
(ibid., 258 doe).
7. Socrates speaks of rhetoric and Sophistry as semblances and false imitations oflegislation and justice (Gorgias, 464 b If.).

244

Notes to Pages 82-84

8. The reference is to the helmet of Hades, which made the wearer invisible. In the battle against Ares (Mars), Athene placed the helmet on her head
(Diad, 5, 845).
9. SeeJohannes Clilfl4cus, or De omnibus dubitandum est: "For example, during a discussion of the importance of having doubted as a prerequisite for philosophy, he heard the following remark: 'We ought not waste time doubting
but should just begin right away with philosophy' " (KW VII; Pap. IV Bl, p.
143). See Supplement, p. 195 (Pap. VB 55:3).
10. The translator prefers "experimental dialectic" but has adopted the
terminology established for the entire edition of Kierleegaard's Writings. See
note to subtide of Repetition, KW VI.
11. In Parrnenides, &tOltOV signifies the moment [to Al;a{cpv,,~] and involves the category of transition discussed below. "The instant [moment]
seems to indicate a something from which there is a change in one direction
or the other. For it does not change from rest, nor from motion, while it is
still moving, but there is this strange instantaneous nature, something interposed between motion and rest, not existing in any time, and into this and
out from this, that which is in motion changes into rest, and that which is at
rest changes into motion" (Parrnenides, 156 d, tr. H. N. Fowler, Loeb Classical
Library).
12. The editors ofSamlede Vlrrlter state that Kierkegaard's translation is incorrect and that it should read "neither being separated nor combined," inasmuch as the meaning is that the moment is also the transition in the case of
separation and combination.
13. A conventional term for a hackney. It was the popular conveyance
from Copenhagen to Deer Park.
14. The editors of Samlede Vlrrlter state that it would be more correct to
translate this passage, "Is not to be participation of being in the present time,"
and that Plato means to say no more than that to be is present tense and consequendy expresses being in the present. H. N. Fowler translates the passage:
"But is to be anything but participation in existence together with present
time" (Parrnenides, Loeb Classical Library). Gregor Malantschuk (Frihedens
Problem, p. 42) points out that Kierkegaard follows the translation by
Schleiermacher, which reads: "1st aber das Sein wohl etwas anderes als
Theilhabung an einem Wesen in der gegenwartigen Zeit" (Platons Werlee I-VI
[2 ed., Berlin: 1817-18; ASKB 1158-61], II, 1, p. 151). In the first edition,
Schleiermacher had translated, "Heist denn Sein etwas anderes, als das Sein
an sich haben in der gegenwartigen Zeit." In a notation about "The Concept
of Category," Kierkegaard adds: "The definition of being which Plato gives
in Parrnenides, S151, the last words: Being is nothing other than participation
in an essence in time present" UP III 3324; Pap. IV C 70, n.d., 1842-43). He
understands Plato's "being" (Vlrren) as something that occurs in the present
time in the sensuous world, as well as something that participates in the ideas;
or in other words, for anything to be called being it must, in addition to participating in essence, have touched the now, which is a determination of time.
15. A reference to Hegelian philosophy, which begins with pure being as

Notes to Pages 84-88

245

the most extreme abstraction and from this proceeds toward continually
more concrete determinations. For example: "Eternity is not before or after
time, not before the creation of the world, nor when it perishes; rather is eternity the absolute present, the Now, without before and after" (System der
Philosophie, Pan Two, Die Naturphilosophie, §247 Zusatz, Werke, VIP, p. 26;
J.A .• IX, p. 52; Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, tr. A. V. Miller [Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970], §247 Zusotz, p. 15).
Schelling, too, defmes the eternal as "the constant now." Both Hegel and
Schelling follow an old tradition in philosophy. See also Augustine, Cotifessions, XI, 10-11; Aristode, Physics, 221 b; Plato, Timaeus, 37 c-38 b.
16. See the continuation of this statement in the draft, Supplement, pp.
195-96 (Pap. VB 55:4).
17. Hegel's view of time is set forth briefly in Hegel's Philosophy of Nature:
"The dimensions of time, present ,future, and past, are the becoming of externality as such, and the resolution of it into the difference of being as passing over
into nothing, and of nothing as passing over into being. The immediate vanishing of these differences into singularity is the present as Now, which, as singularity, is exclusive of the other moments, and at the same time completely
continuous in them, and is only this vanishing of its being into nothing and of
nothing into its being. Thejinite present is the Now fixed as being and distinguished as the concrete unity. and hence as the affirmative, from what is negative, from the abstract moments of past and future, but this being is itself only
abstract, vanishing into nothing. Funhermore in nature where time is a Now,
being does not reach the existence of the difference of these dimensions; they
are of necessity, only in subjective imagination, in remembrance, andfear or
hope. But the past and future of time as being in nature, are space, for space is
negated time; just as sublated space is immediately the point, which developed for itself is time" (System der Philosoph ie, Part Two, Die Naturphilosophie,
§259 and Zusatz, Werke VIP, pp. 57-61;J.A., IX, pp. 83-87; Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, pp. 37-40).
18. Kierkegaard has the reference from Hegel's Philosophie der Geschichte,
Part One, Section Two, Werke, lX, p. 200; J.A., XI, p. 222; Philosophy of History, tr. J. Sibree (New York: Collier, 1902), p. 231.
19. See Hegel's analysis of the sensuous consciousness as that which is tied
to the now and the here. Phiinomenologie des Gdstes, A, I. Werke, II, pp. 73-84;
J.A., II, pp. 81-92; The Phenomenology of Mind, tr. J. P. Baillie (New York:
Harper Torchbook, 1967), pp. 149-60.
20. The presence of the gods as immediately intervening (Terence, Phormio, III, I, 1. 345).
21. The Danish word 0iblikket (the moment) is figurative in the sense that
it is derived from 0iets Blik (a blink of the eye). Cf. the German word Augenblick.
22. The reference is to Esaias Tegner's Frithjof's Saga (Stockholm: 1825)
IX, p. 71, and to a pictorial illustration on the tide page. SeeJP III 3800 (Pap. I
A 136).
23. I Corinthians 15:52. See Supplement, p. 196 (Pap. VB 55:6).

246

Notes to Pages 89-98

24. See Philosophical Fragments, KW VII (SV IV 239).
25. Plato uses recollection as a proof of the immortality of the soul. Our
perceptions of the beautiful, the good, etc. among the phenomena of nature
are explained only by a knowledge of such universal concepts recollected
from an earlier existence (Tilv~relse) (Phaedo, 72e ff.).
26. The philosopher's task is that of dying away from the pleasures of the
body and from sensuousness in the broadest sense; through such dying away
he would enter into "eternity" (Phaedo, 64 a ff.). See Supplement, p. 196 (Pap.
VB 55:7).
27. Galatians 4:4.
28. See Supplement, pp. 196-97 (Pap. VB 55:9).
29. See Supplement, p. 197 (Pap. VB 55:10). In this notation Kierkegaard
translates the term discrimen as "ambiguity."
30. "Wie die Alten den Tad gebildet" [How the Ancients Pictured Death),
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing's siimmtliche Schriften, I-XXXII (Berlin: 1825-28;
ASKB 1747~2), III, pp. 75-159.
31. See Kierkegaard's discourse, "At the Side of a Grave," in Three Discourses on Imagined Occasions, KW X (SV V 226 ff.).
32. See the continuation of this statement in the draft, Supplement, p. 198
(Pap. VB 55:12).
33. See Supplement, p. 198 (Pap. VB 55:13).
34. Kierkegaard uses an idiomatic folk phrase about sparks from burning
flax straw. When the fire was almost extinguished and only a few sparks followed one by one, the spectators would say, "There come the school children." Finally, when the last spark appeared, they would say, "There went
the schoolmaster."
35. Reference to Socrates and Hamann. See the epigraph to The Concept of
Anxiety and Supplement, pp. 198-99 (Pap. VB 55:14).
36. I Corinthians 2:4.
37. See Matthew 5:13; Luke 14:14. A verbatim translation of the Greek
word j1COpav9fl is "becomes dumb"; j1COpO;' "dumb."
38. See Supplement, p. 199 (Pap. VB 55:15).
39. Hegel speaks in several places of Fatum as identical with "necessity."
See Philosophie der Geschichte, Part Two, Section Two, Chapter 2, Werlee, IX,
p. 301; ).A., XI, p. 323; Philosophy oj History, p. 326 (where Fatum is incorrecdy translated as "fact" rather than as "fate"); Philosophie der Religion, II,
Anhang, Beweise vom Daseyn Gottes, no. 16, Werlee, XII, p. 505;}.A., XVI, p.
44; Lectures on the Philosophy oj Religion, III, p. 314; Encyc/opiidie, Part One, Die
Logile, §147 Zusatz, Werlee, VI, pp. 293-98; ).A., VIII, pp. 331-36; Hegel's
Logic, pp. 207-11.
40. I Corinthians 8:4. In the Danish New Testament: "an idol is nothing in
the world."
41. See Supplement, p. 199 (Pap. VB 55:17).
42. Hegel states that "By genius, we are to understand the particular nature
of a man which, in every situation and circumstance, decides his action and
destiny. I am in fact a duality: on the one hand, what I know myself to be
according to my outward life andgeneral ideas, and on the other hand, what I

Notes to Pages 98-105

247

am in my inner life which is determined in a particular manner. This particular
nature of my inwardness constitutes my destiny: for it is the oracle on whose
pronouncement depends every resolve of the individual; it forms the objective element which asserts itself from out of the individual's character" (Encyc/opiidie, Part Three, Philosophie des Geistes, §405 Zusatz 3, Werlre, VIP, p.
161; J.A., X, p. 167; Hegel's Philosophy of Mind, p. 1(0). See also Vorlesungen
;,;ber die Aisthetik, Part One, Chapter 3, C, I, b, Werlre, Xl, pp. 365~9;J.A.,
XII, pp. 381-85; Hegel's Aesthetics, I-II, tr. T. M. Knox (Oxford; Clarendon,
1975), I, pp. 281-88.
43. That something is an sich means in Hegelian terminology that it is not
dependent upon something else. For Kant, on the other hand, an sich signifies
an object that exists independently of the forms of human apprehension.
Applied to the genius, this means that, immediately determined, he has his
own laws and purposes within himself and not outside ofhimsel£
44. OnJune 14, 1800, Napoleon defeated the Austrian army in the battle of
Marengo. On December 2, 1805, he defeated the Austrian and Russian armies
at Austerlitz. When the sun rose over Moscow on September 7, 1812, Napoleon is reputed to have said, "Where is the sun of Austerlitz."
45. See Supplement, p. 199 (Pap. VB 55:18), for additions in the draft.
46. See Plutarch, Caesar, 38.
47. In this paragraph, which deals with the relation of the genius to religiousness, Kierkegaard speaks in a concealed way about himsel£ Talleyrand
was of noble birth, but because he had a clubfoot his life was intended for a
position in the church. This position Talleyrand forsook in order to pursue an
entirely secular career. Kierkegaard suggests that Talleyrand's deformity
might have been a divine sign, and that ifhe had disdained the temporal and
immediate and had turned instead to himself and the divine, a religious genius
might have emerged.
48. For Kierkegaard there is no such a thing as a genius in religiousness,
like a genius in poetry or a genius in mathematics. By the term "religious
genius," he means not one with profound virtuosity for religiousness but one
who is a genius and also a religious person. See pp. 107-10; "The Difference
between a Genius and an Aposde," KW XVIII (SV XI 95-109).
49. The Carpocratians were a second-century Gnostic sect. They believed
that a person must participate in all of human experience, even the worst and
most condemnable, before he can attain perfection. Kierkegaard detects a variation of this view in Hegel's thought, in which evil is a necessary transitional
link with the good and consequently is not a radical evil. As a theological
student, Kierkegaard had written in his journal: "May it not seem right to do
as that ancient sect (see Church History) did-go through all the vices simply
to have experience of life" UP IV 4391; Pap. I A 282, n.d., 1836).
50. The repetition of the sacrifice in the Old Testament becomes for Kierkegaard an indication of its imperfection, as well as an indication that the "actual relation of sin is not posited." See Hebrews 9:12-28, a passage that Lutherans affirmed against the Catholic sacrifice of the mass. Kierkegaard calls
attention to this confessional distinction.
51. Possibly a reference to N.F.S. Grundtvig's review of world-historical

248

Notes to Pages 105-14

surveys, Udsigt over Verdens-Kf1lniken, fomemlig i det Lutherske Tidsrum
(Copenhagen: 1817; ASKB 1970). It may also refer to Hegel's Philosophy of
History.
52. See Protagoras, 320 ff.
53. In the Postscript, Kierkegaard calls attention to the questionable nature
of the absolute inwardness of the monastic movement, because its inwardness
created for itself a conspicuous and very distinct outwardness. See, for example, KW XII (SV VII 351-54).
54. A lucky fellow.
55. A paraphrase of Matthew 25:21 and Luke 17:33.
56. Talleyrand is reputed to have said to the Spanish envoy Isquierdo, "La
parole a ete donnee a l'homme pour desguiser sa pensees [Speech was given
to man to conceal his thoughts)." Edward Young writes in Love !if Fame, I,
207-8: "Where nature's end of language is declined I And men talk only to
conceal the mind." In an undated journal entry from 1844, Kierkegaard
writes, "Men do not seem to have acquired speech in order to conceal their
thoughts (Talleyrand, and before him Young in Night Thoughts [sic)) but in
order to conceal the fact that they have no thoughts" UP I 623; Pap. V A 19,
1844).
57. See the continuation of this statement in the draft, Supplement, p. 200
(Pap. VB 55:26).
58. On the "religious genius," see note 48 above,
CHAPTER IV

1. See Supplement, pp. 200-201 (Pap. V B 56:2). The reference is to Leibniz, Theodicy, §§319-20; see p. 236, note 58.
2. All of these terms signify lazy reasoning and refer to the fatalistic view
that effects are entirely dependent upon fate, that they are what they are regardless of what a person does. C£JP III 2361 (Pap. IV A 12); Leibniz, Theodicy, §55.
3. See the draft of§I, Supplement, p. 201 (Pap. VB 56:4).
4. In Mozart's Don Juan, tr. Laurids Kruse (Copenhagen: 1822), II, last
scene.
5. See the continuation of this statement in the draft, Supplement, p. 201
(Pap. V B 56:5).
6. Murmicoleon formicarius.
7. "To this belongs, for example, what is called talent or genius, and certainly not only genius for fine arts and the sciences, but also genius for action.
It sounds harsh, but it is nevertheless no less true that just as by nature countless people are incapable of the highest function of the spirit, so coundess
people are never able to act beyond law with freedom and elevation of spirit,
because this is granted only to a few who are chosen. Therefore, even from
the outset free actions are made impossible by an unknown necessity which
compels men to accuse or extol first the favor or disfavor of nature, and then
the destiny of fate" (F. W.J. Schelling, System des tranzendentalen Idealismus
[Tiibingen: 18(0),4, A. Zweiter Satz, p. 351; Siimmtliche Werke, Part One, III,
p. 549). Emanuel Hirsch states that "Schelling's words express with un-

Notes to Pages 114-22

249

equaled sharpness the view that Kierkegaard as an ethical, religious, and
Christian author combats as the fundamental corruption, namely, the telescoping of the ethical concept of the single individual into the esthetic concept
of the single individual, when the concept of the single individual is used in
the sense of something distinctive" (Der BegrijJ Angst, tr. Emanuel Hirsch
[Dusseldorf: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1958], p. 263, ed. tr.).
8. See Supplement, p. 202 (Pap. V B 56:8).
9. King Lear, IV, 6. Kierkegaard quotes from Shakespeare's dramatische
Werke, I-XII, tr. A. W. v. Schlegel and L. Tieck (Berlin: 1839-40; ASKB
1883-88), XI.
10. In The Point of View, KW XXIII (SV XIII 567), Kierkegaard states that
in the crisis of his life he was on the way to perdition. See Matthew 7:18. See
also Supplement, pp. 173-74 (Pap. Xl A 637).
11. See Fear and Trembling, KW VI (SV III 146).
12. J. G. Fichte's answer to an open letter from F. H. Jacobi in Nachgelassene Werke, I-III, ed. I. H. Fichte (Bonn: 1834-35; ASKB 489-91), III, p.
349: "To be occupied with incessant self~xamination of one's own character
in general and by way of preparation for a general confession is quite useless,
just as if the world were not replete with other tasks and actions. Instead, a
person should permit his weak side to be forcefully touched and uncovered
by life; but the hidden comer oflife that is as yet untouched and stirred up by
his reflection is itself pardy sin, for it is idleness, and pardy through an excessive humility does he bring along all manner of impurities when he definitely
and consciously searches himsel£ Let us be content with a simple fidelity to
the divine within us and follow where it leads us, and not cultivate by one's
own piety an artificial self-remorse that is not of oneself" (ed. tr.). The same
thought is expressed both in Die Anweisung zum seligen Leben and in Die
Grundziige des gegenwiirtigen Zeitalters, Johann Gottlieb Fichte's [sic] siimmtliche
Werke, I-VIII, ed. I. H. Fichte (Berlin: 1845-46; ASKB 492-99), V, p. 565; VII,
p.14.
13. Kierkegaard may have had in mind Hermann Olshausen, who in his
Biblischer Kommentar iiber siimmtliche Schriften des Neuen Testaments, I-IV (3 ed.,
Konigsberg: 1837-40; ASKB 96-100), I, pp. 284-302, gives a detailed exposition of each account. When Kierkegaard refers to the synoptic Gospels, he
usually quotes one variant, but in this case he quotes all three accounts. From
1760, Johann Salomo Semler had successfully advocated a naturalisticmedical interpretation of the demonic possessions of the New Testament.
14. Johann Caspar Lavater, Physiognomische Fragmente, I-IV (Leipzig and
Winterthur: 1775-78; ASKB 613-16).
15. Appealing to the Scripture "compel them to come in" (Luke 14:23),
Augustine, speaking in Carthage in A.D. 411, advocated that force be used
against the heretical Donatists as a duty oflove in order to bring them to the
true faith (Contra Candentium, I, 28). However, he did not speak of punishment. This thought was expressed by Tertullian in Scorpiace, II.
16. See Gorgias, 479 a.
17. See Supplement, p. 202 (Pap. VB 56:9).
18. Kierkegaard owned E.T.A. Hoffmann's Auserwiihlte Schriften, I-X

250

Notes to Pages 122-35

(Berlin: 1827-28; ASKB 1712-16), and Erzahlungen, I-V (Stuttgart: 1839;
ASKB 1717-21). The particular expression has not been located. The refer_
ence may be to a physician in Die Doppelganger, ibid., I.
19. Inclosing reserve is a prominent subject ofKierkegaard's psychology.
See Supplement, pp. 17~n (Pap. VB 147).
20. Kierkegaard has in mind Brutus ofShakespeare'sJulius Caesar.
21. Shakespeare, Henry IV, first part.
22. The term communicere (German, kommunizieren) is used for receiving
the sacrament of the Eucharist In the text, Kierkegaard refers to the religious
meaning of the word.
23. Possibly a reference to Mark 5:17, where the people, when they saw
how the demoniac had been healed, begged Jesus to depart from their neighborhood.
24. See Supplement, pp. 210-11 (Pap. VB 72:22).
25. Reference to Oehlenschlager's Aladdin.
26. John 8:44.
27. "And whatsoever else shall hap tonight I Give it an understanding but
no tongue" (Hamlet, I, 2). Kierkegaard quotes Schlegel and Tieck's German
translation, "allem einen Sinn und keine Zunge."
28. KW III (S V I 29-30).
29. The reference is to the ballet master Antoine Auguste Bournonville,
who presented his own ballet Faust in Copenhagen and who himself danced
the part of Mephistopheles. The ballet was presented for the first time in
1832. Kierkegaard writes in his journal: "The leap with which Bournonville,
in the role of Mephistopheles. always enters and bounds into a motionless
pose is commendable. This leap is an element which ought to be noted in an
understanding of the demonic. The demonic is namely the sudden.
"Another aspect of the demonic is the boring, as litde Winsl0v so excellendy interpreted it, whereby it passes into the comic (the way in which, as
Pepin in Charlemagne, he said, 'Patience'-. See his Klister in De Uadskillelige." UP 1732; Pap. IV A 94).
30. C. Winsl0v played (1827-1834) the role ofKlister (the word "Klister"
means glue) inJ. L. Heiberg's vaudeville De Uadskillelige.
31. Karl Michael Bellmann (died 1795) was a Swedish author known for
his description of Swedish folk life.
32. For a distinction between Hegel's conception of irony and that of Socrates, see Kierkegaard's The Concept of Irony, KW II (SV XIII); Hegel's Ceschichte der Philosaphie, Part One, Section One, Period I, Chapter II, B, I,
Werke, XIV, pp 60 f[; J.A., XVIII, pp. 62 f[; History of Philosophy, I, pp. 398
f[ See also Vermischte Schriften, "Vber Solgers nachgelassene Schriften urad Briefwechsel," I, Section IV, 4, Werke, XVI, p. 487; J.A., XX, p. 183.
33. Matthew 6:6.
34. The Danish term Professor in this anecdote may be a garbling of the
word Provisor (provisioner).
35. Note that the rubrics of the draft are different from those of the published text. See Supplement, pp. 203-07 (Pap. V B 60).

Notes to Pages 136-46

251

36. "Freedom lost somatic-psychically and freedom lost pneumatically" is
changed from "freedom lost bestially, freedom lost intellectually, and freedom lost religiously" (Pap. V B 72:24, n.d., 1844).
37. Schelling uses the term Korporisation in Philosophische Untersuchungen
uber das Wesen der Menschlichen Freiheit (1809), Siimmtliche Werke, Part One,
VII, p. 387.
38. Parent-Duchatelet was the author of De la prostitution de la ville de Paris.
No accurate reference to Kierkegaard's statement has been found.
39. John 8:32.
40. "A freedom involving no necessity, and mere necessity without freedom, are abstract and in this way untrue formulae of thought. Freedom is no
blank indeterminateness; essentially concrete, and unvaryingly selfdeterminate, it is so far at the same time necessity" (Hegel, Encyclopiidie, Part
One, Die Logik, §35, Werke, VI, pp. 72-73;J.A., VIII, pp. 110-11; Hegel's
Logic, pp. 54-56).
41. J. G. Fichte, Uber den Begriff der Wissenschaftslehre, Werke, I, pp. 40 ff.;
Bestimmung des Menschen, Werke, II, p. 225.
42. In 1831, Ludwig Feuerbach published his work on death and immortality, Gedanken uber Tod und Unsterblichkeit, in which he maintained that as a
result of Hegel's philosophy, the doctrine of individual immortality could no
longer be accepted. Against this position, Karl Friedrich Gaschel presented
his essay on the immortality of the human soul in light of speculative philosophy, Von den Beweisenfur die Unsterblichkeit der menschlichen Seele im Lichte der
spekulativen Philosophie. In Denmark, the debate about the immortality of the
soul found expression in the most important ofPoul Martin M0ller's works,
an essay on the possibility of proofs for the immortality of the soul, Tanker
om Muligheden af Beviser for Sjtrlens Udlldelighed med Hensyn til den derhen
h/lrende nyeste Literatur, Efterladte Skrifter, I-III (Copenhagen: 1839-43; ASKB
1574-76), II, pp. 158-272. M0ller's work was of significance for Kierkegaard's
understanding of the issue. "The episode Poul M0ller includes in his essay on
the immortality of the soul in the latest issue of Maanedsskrift is very interesting; perhaps it will become the usual thing to mitigate the more stricdy
scholarly-scientific tone with lighter portions which, however, bear forth life
much more fully, and in the area of knowledge will be somewhat comparable
to the chorus, to the comic portions of romantic dramas" UP V 5201; Pap. II
A 17, Feb. 4, 1837).
43. See Supplement, pp. 209-10 (Pap. VB 66).
44. Kierkegaard might have had in mind Bruno Bauer, Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte der Synoptiker (Critique of the Evangelical History of the
Synoptics), I-III (Leipzig: 1841-42). See Supplement, p. 208 (Pap. V B 64);
Postscript, KW XII (SV VII 74).
45. Joseph von Garres, Die christliche Mystik, I-IV1-2 (Regensburg and
Landshut: 1836-42; ASKB 528-32). See Supplement, p. 208 (Pap. V B 63,
VIIP A 93; IX A 331, 333).
46. "from this instant/There's nothing serious in mortality;/All is but toys;
renown and grace is dead:/The wine oflife is drawn, and the mere lees lIs left

252

Notes to Pages 146-51

this vault to brag of" (Macbeth, II, 3). Kierkegaard quotes from Shakespeare's
dramatische Werke, tr. A. W. von Schlegel and L. Tieck, XII, p. 301 (II, 2).
47 Ecclesiastes 1:2.
48. "When our first encounter with an object surprises us and we judge it
to be new and very different from what we have previously known, or from
what we supposed it ought to be, this causes us to wonder and be astonished.
Since this can happen before we have any idea of whether the object is beneficial to us or not, it seems that wonder is the first of all passions, and it has no
opposite; for if the object which presents itself has nothing in it that surprises
us, we are not moved by it at all, and we consider it without passion" (Descartes, Traaatus de Passionibus Anima'; Passiones, sive /iffectus Anima', Part II,
Article LIII, Opera Philosophica, Editio ultima [Amsterdam: 1685; ASKB
437], p. 27). See Supplement, pp. 175-76 (Pap. IV C 10, III A 107). Kierkegaard collapses the tide and appropriately changes the case of Affectus.
49. In Allgemeine Metaphysik, I-II (Konigsberg: 1828-29), II, §§201-4,
Johann F. Herbart affrrms, over against Kant and the idealistic philosophy,
that objective reality and the definite being [Sein] of things are independent of
the perceptive subject, and thus something that excludes all negation.
50. See Supplement, pp. 211-12 (Pap. VB 72:28).
51. See Supplement, p. 209 (Pap. VB 68).
52. See the addition to this statement in the draft, Supplement, p. 212 (Pap.
VB 72:29).
53. Kierkegaard owned the first edition of Karl Rosenkranz, Psychologie
oder die Wissenschaft vom subjektiven Geist (Konigsberg: 1837; ASKB 744).
Rosenkranz's definition of Gemut differs from that of Hegel, who speaks of
Gemut as "this shrouded undetermined totality of the bearing of the spirit
upon the will, in which a man in even so general and indefmite manner has a
satisfaction within himself" (Philosophie der Geschichte, Part Four, Section
One, Chapter 1, Werke, IX, p. 425; j.A., XI, p. 447, ed. tr.). In another place,
Hegel indentifies Gemut with the "Inwardness [Innigkeit] of the Spirit's perceptibility" (.lEst~etik, Part Two, Section Three, Chapter 1, 2, Werke, X2, p.
149;J.A., XIII, p. 149, ed. tr.).
54. See Supplement, p. 212 (Pap. V B 72:30).
55. See Supplement, p. 210 (Pap. V B 69).
56. See Repetition, KW VI (SV III 175).
57. G. O. Marbach, Geschichte der Griechischen Philosophie . . . und Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters (Leipzig: 1838-41; ASKB 642-43).
58. W. G. Tennemann, Geschichte der Philosophie, I-XII (Leipzig: 17981819; ASKB 815-26). According to the legend, when Bellerophon attempted
to ride Pegasus to heaven, he was thrown by the horse. Kierkegaard may
have confused this legend with the story in Euripides' Stheneboea, in which
Bellerophon, returning from Lycia to Tiryns, persuaded the queen ofTiryns,
who was responsible for his having to batde the Chimaera, to mount Pegasus
with him on the pretence that he would return her love. Upon reaching the
open sea, he hurled her into the waves.
59. See Repetition, KW VI (SV III 254), and the addition in the draft, Supplement, p. 212 (Pap. VB 172:31).

Notes to Pages 152-57

253

60. The draft mentions Bettina's letters as an example. Anna Elisabeth von
Arnim (1785-1859), called Bettina, the sister of Clemens Brentano, wrote a
volume of imaginary letters (1835) under the tide Goethes Britfwechsel mit
einem Kinde (Goethe's Correspondence with a Child). See Supplement,
p. 212 (Pap. VB 60; 72:32).
61. "True art is an anticipation of the blessed life" (Poul M. M0ller, Efterladte Skrifter, 1 ed., II, p. 217). See p. 251, note 42; Supplement, p. 207 (Pap. V
B 60 p. 137); Postscript, KW XII (S V VII 268 fn.).
62. A reference to J. L. Heiberg's apocalyptic comedy, En Sja?l tfter Dllden
(1841), and H. L. Martensen's review of the same in the daily paper Fa?drelandet.
63. A reference to Fichte's philosophy, where the I (ich) is conceived partly
as empirical and pardy as essentially absolute and identical with the Absolute.
64. Poul M. M0ller, in the essay on immortality, Efterladte Skrifter, 1 ed., II,
pp. 188-200. See p. 251, note 42.
65. A reference to the review by Martensen mentioned in note 62 above.
See Supplement, p. 207 (Pap. V B 60 p. 137).
66. Matthew 12:36.
67. "And so, Glaucon, the tale was saved, as the saying is, and was not lost
And it will save us if we believe it, and we shall safely cross the river of Lethe,
and keep our soul unspotted from the world. But if we are guided by me, we
shall believe that the soul is immortal and capable of enduring all extremes of
good and evil, and so we shall hold ever to the upward way and pursue righteousness with wisdom always and ever, that we may be dear to ourselves and
to the gods both during our sojourn here, and where we receive our reward,
as the victors in the game go about and gather theirs. And thus both here and
in that journey of a thousand years, whereof I have told you, we shall fare
well" (Plato, Republic, 621 b-d, Paul Shorey's translation in The Colleaed
Works of Plato).
68. See Supplement, p. 213 (Pap. V B 72:33). The reference is to H. L. Martensen.
CHAPTER V

1. "Das Miirchen von einem, der auszog, das Furchten zu lernen" (Kinder- und
Haus-Miirchen. Gesammelt durch die Briider Grimm, I, no. 4, p. 14; "The Story of
the Youth Who Went Forth to Learn What Fear Was," The Complete Grimm's
Fairy Tales, pp. 29-39).
2. Matthew 26:37,38; Mark 14:33, 34; John 12:27, 13:27.
3. Mark 15:34.
4. Kierkegaard does not quote Hegel. He may have had in mind such passages from Hegel as "Faith must be defined as the witness of the spirit to absolute Spirit, or as a certainty of the truth" or "faith may be defined as being
the witness of the Spirit to Spirit, and this implies that no finite content has
any place in it" (Philosophie der Religion, Part One, C, I, 2, Werke, XI,
pp. 206, 213; j.A., XV, pp. 222, 229; Lectures on the Philosophy if Religion, I,
pp. 212, 218).
5. Although innocent of the accusations against him, the French Calvinist

254

Notes to Pages 157-62

Jean Calas was executed in 1762. Daniel Chodowiecki, a German painter and
engraver, made an engraving showing Calas taking leave of his family. Later,
Chodowiecki made an engraving in which he pictures the four temperaments
watching "Les adieux de Calas." Kierkegaard has confused the surrender of
Calais with the "Farewell of Calas."
6. See Phaedo, 117b.
7. When Kierkegaard had completed his theological examination, he took
a trip to Judand to see the place where his father was born. At that time he
wrote in his journal (1840): "The heath must be particularly adapted to developing vigorous spirits; here everything lies naked and unveiled before
God, and here is no place for a lot of distractions, those many odd nooks and
comers where the consciousness can hide, and from which earnestness often
has a hard time recovering vagrant thoughts. Here consciousness must come
to definite and precise conclusions about itself. Here on the heath one must
truly say. 'Whither shall I flee from thy presence?' " UP 1Il 2830; Pap. III A
78).
8. The Danish Heksebrev means literally "witch's letter," which is a magiclike set of picture segments of people and animals that recombine when unfolded and turned. The figure is used also in EitherlOr, II, KW IV (S V 1123132): "The person who lives ethically has seen himself, knows himself, penetrates his whole concretion with his consciousness, does not allow vague
thoughts to rus~e around inside him, or let tempting possibilities distract him
with their juggling; he is not like a 'magic' picture that shifts from one thing
to another, depending on how one turns it."
9. "Whoever is educated by anxiety is educated by possibility, and only he
who is educated by possibility is educated according to his infinitude. Therefore possibility is the weightiest of all categories" (p. 156).
to. Socrates says, "I have long been wondering at my own wisdom. I cannot trust myself. And I think that I ought to stop and ask myself; what am I
saying? For there is nothing worse than self-deception-when the deceiver is
always at home and always with you it is quite terrible, and therefore I ought
often retrace my steps and endeavor to 'look fore and aft' in the words of the
aforesaid Homer" (Crarylus, 428 d, Jowett's translation in The Colleaed
Dialogues of Plato).
11. Luke 10:30. In the parable the man travels from Jerusalem to Jericho.
12. The reference is to EitherlOr, II, KW IV (SV II 243). "Autodidact"
means self-taught; "theodidacc," taught by God. See I Thess. 4:9: "concerning the love of the brethren you have no need to have anyone write to you for
you yourselves have been taught by God to love one another." Here Paul
uses the term geolHliaICtOL
13. "In volume VI, p. 194, of his works U. G. Hamann, Schriften, I-VlIl
(Berlin: 1821-43; ASKB 536-44) J, Hamann makes an observation which I can
use, although he neither understood it as I wish to understand it nor thought
further about it: [text as in note, p. 162),' UP 196; Pap. 1Il A 235, n.d., 1842).

Notes to Pages 177-212
SUPPLEMENT

255

1. Magister arlium (liberal ium )-master of the liberal arts-was conferred by
the philosophical faculty of the University of Copenhagen. The degree was
equivalent to that of doctor. the degree conferred by the other faculties. In
1854. the magister degree was replaced by the degree of doctor of philosophy. and all persons holding the magister arlium degree were declared to be
doctores philosophiae.
2. See K. Rosenkranz. Psychologie. p. 334.
3. See p. 253. note 60.
4. See p. 137 and note 38.
5. See p. 253. note 60.

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

For general bibliographies ofKierkegaard studies, see:
Jens Himmelstrup, Seren Kierkegaard International Bibliografi.
Copenhagen: Nyt Nordisk Forlag Arnold Busck, 1962.
Aage J0rgensen, Seren Kierkegaard-litteratur 1961-1970. Aarhus:
Akademisk Boghandel, 1971.
Kierkegaard: A Collection of Critical Essays, ed. Josiah Thompson.
New York: Doubleday (Anchor Book), 1972.
Seren Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers, I, ed. and tr. Howard V.
Hong and Edna H. Hong, assisted by Gregor Malantschuk.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1967.
For topical bibliographies of Kierkegaard studies, see ibid., I-IV
(1967-75).

INDEX

ABC board, 46, 235
ABC's, 156
absolute, an, 242; the, 106, 114,253;
absolutely educated by possibility,
155-62
abstract, the, 138-39; and conception
of the eternal, 84, 90, 152
abstraction, 10, 83-84, 86-87, 132,
141-43,147,196; freedom never in
abstracto, 111; of inclosing reserve,
124; of the moment, 82-83, 89, 93
absurd, the, 17-18
accidental, the, 19, 32,88, 127, 154,
162; unity of necessity and, 96-97.
See also contingency
action, 114, 118, 138, 143, 145
activity-passivity, 142-46
actuality, 44, 53, 55, 98, 142, 152,
156, 158, 160-62, 180, 183, 195,
229,231,247; consciousness of,
20, 228; and dogmatics, 19; and
ethics, 16-19; and freedom, 42, 52,
96,98; and qualitative leap, 112; of
sin, 20, 22-23, 53, 104, 109, 115,
229; of sinfulness, 58; of spirit,
41-42,49; of truth, 205
Adam, 28-36, 44-48, SO, 64, 79, 93,
196,231,234-35; and anxiety,
44-45, 56, 58, 64, 109; and hereditary sin, 28, 33; and language, 44,
46-47; and the race, 28-29, 33-34,
57, 186; and sinfulness, 33, 57, 63,
67, 184, 187; sin of, 230; and state
of innocence, 56, 185; and subsequent individual, 52, 64, 72-73, 77,
90-91, 109, 112
Adler, Adolph Peter, 181
adulteraTe, set alteration

Aesopic Fables, 226
affectation, 67, 70

age, of distinction, 178; our, 212; of
unbelief, 222
Albert Magnus, 151, 209
algebraic, the, 113, 128, 137
alteration, 59; compared with adulterare, 59, 187-88, 238
ambiguity, 9, 21, 40-41, 59, 74, 76,
89, 97, 122, 197, 246; of anxiety,
43, 45, 68, 74, 103, 109; dialectical,
52,112,117
ancient, the, 11, 19,82,195
angels, 20, 34, 49, 155, 240
animal (beast), 119, 132, 187,203,
233, 285; and anxiety, 42, 185; and
man, 28, 43, 45, 49, 52, 68, 72, 89,
92, 155,203-04,231; not qualified
as spirit, 42, 185
annihilation, 53, 80,83, 112
annulment, 86, 113, 225, 234; of anxiety, 111; of being, 12, 181,226; of
freedom, 203; of immediacy, 10,
35 ff., 39, 233; of innocence,
35-38; of sin, 15. See also cancellation
ansich, 99, 108, 237, 247
anthropological postulate, 235
anthropomorphism, 59
anticipation, 91, 99, 153, 157
Antigone, xiii
anxiety, 187-89, 191; concept of, 14;
defined, 197,206; about Christianity, 172; cancellation of, 96;
education by, 115-17, 159, 162,
254; experience of (S. K.), xii-xiii,
170-72; about finitude, 157, 161;
form of, 119, 131; and freedom,
xvii, 49, 61, 76-77, 155, 197,203;
and the future, 197; about going to
communion, 143,208; about the
good, 135-36,203, 205; about

260

Index

anxiety (cont.)
guilt, 203; inborn, xiii, 122-23; of
innocence, 41-44, 56, 115; over
nothing, 41-44, 61-62, 65, 77, 96,
103; ontological, xvii; psychological interest in, 14,22-23,39,41-42,
72, 74, 115, 162; over sin, 173; of
spirirual trial, 172; as sympathetic
antipathy and antipathetic sympathy, 42, 61, 97, 103
Apollo, 65
Apology if Augsburg Confession, 231
appropriation, 14, 16,205
approximation, 57, 60; determinant
of, 60; psychical, 200; psychological, 76, 91, 113, 115, 118
Aristotle, ix, xi, 5, 16, 21, 82, 176,
178, 195, 222, 227, 229, 242, 243,
245
art, 14, 106, 153,207,253; classical,
87, 92; of preaching, 16
artist, 107, 133
Aspasia,70
ataraxia, 19
Athenaeus, 70, 239
Athene,244
atom, of eternity, 88; of time, 196.
See also moment
atomistic, the, 83
Atonement, in Christian sense, 28,
33,36,58,83,90, 104, 117, 162,
187, 195, 198
atonement (Forsoning), in speculative
sense, 10-11, 195, 225
aujheben, Aujhebung, see annulment
Augsburg Confession, The, 234
Augustine, Saint, 27, 121,230,235,
245,249
authority, 8, 45, 179
autodidact, 162, 254
aversio, 176
Baader, Benedict Franz X., 39,59,
234,236,237
Bacchus, 65
Basedow, Johan Bernard, 231

Bauer, Bruno, 251
Bayle, Pierre, 70, 236, 239
beast. See animal
beauty, 29, 64, 111, 132; and the
erotic, 69-72; in Greek art, 65-66;
in romanticism, 66; unity of the
psychic and the somatic, 69
beginning, ii, 17, 38-39, 49, 57; in
dogmatics, 10, 16, 19,58; of history of race, 25, 30, 52; individual's, 29, 34, 73; presuppositionless, 81, 242
being, 12, 16, 78, 181,226,229,241,
245; Platoon, 244; presuppositionless, 181; pure, 37, 234, 242-45
being able, 44-45, 201
being-for-itself, 233
being-in-itself, 233
Bellerophon, 150,252
Bellmann, Karl Mikael, 134, 250
bestiality, 118, 194, 203...{)4
Bettina, Anna Elizabeth von Arnim,
207,212,253
Binswanger, Ludwig, xvii
blasphemy, 22, 103, 151
blue boys, 34, 233
body, 48, 68, 81, 88, 122, 135-36,
195. See also soma
B6hme, Jakob, 187, 236
boredom, 132-33, 250
Bournonville, Antoine Auguste,
131,250
Brandes, Georg Morris c., xiv
Bretschneider, Karl Gottlieb, 231,
240
Byron, Lord George Gordon, 131
Caesar, Caius Julius, 100, 247
Calas, Jean, 245
Cambyses, 234
cancellation, 104-05; of anxiety, 96,
111; of immediacy, 10; of sinfulness, 32
Carpocratians, 103, 247
category, 12-13, 17, 75, 102, 104,
127-28, 133, 135-36, 139, 150, 155,

Index
160,206; of honor, 102; ofmultitude, 94; psychological, 17; universal, 77. See also concept; determination
certainty, 157
certitude, 101, 138-41, 146, 151, 205
change, 83, 232. See also transition
child, 29, 46, 65, 68, 72, 93, 126, 156,
169; and anxiety, 42; environmental influence on, 75-76
Chodowiecki, Daniel Nikolaus,
157,254
choice, 49, 106,200,234
Christ, 80,155,174-75,222,250; and
Adam, 33; and the demonic, 119,
124, 204; and hereditary sin, 28;
and sinfulness, 38, 184; sinlessness
of, 240
Christian, experience, 40; orthodoxy, 93; presuppositions, 79;
terminology, 78; view, 80, 83, 90,
97,191,240
Christian Discourses, 235
Christianity, 73-74, 83, 87-88, 98,
104, 154, 172, 198-99,202,208,
222,227,230,233; and the erotic,
70, 193-94; and fullness of time,
90; paganism within, 93-94; and
pagan philosophy, 84
Chrysippus, 113
Church, 71, 79, 105, 107, 111, 121,
200
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, 113
Clausen, Henrik Nicolai, 230, 233
Clement of Alexandria, 227
Clever Elsie, 50, 236
Cocejus (Koch), Joannes, 230
cogito ergo sum, viii
collision, 75,173,191; of inclosing
reserve, 127-28
comic, the, 51, 94, 106, 134, 141, 150;
and boredom, 133, 193-94; category of, 207; and the erotic, 69-70;
and Hegel, 213; and mime, 88, 105
commensurability, 87-88, 106, 138,
141,200

261

communication, 103, 138,221; and
the demonic, 123-28, 129
concept, 34-35, 76-77, 83, 147,212,
246; existential, 147; moral, 83
conception, 44, 109, 140
Concept of Anxiety, The, viii, x, xiixv, 221-23, 237
Concept of Irony, The, 237, 250
conceptual, the, 33, 133, 147
Concluding Unscientific Postscript,
221-22,237,241,248,251,253
concrete, the, 12, 22-23, 109, 112,
138, 148-49, 151, 173,210
concupiscence (inordinate desire),
20,40-41,73
confession of faith, 95
conscience, 125, 134
consciousness, 30, 67,179,182,185,
206, 254; of actuality, 20, 228; anxious, 169; comic, 207; concrete,
142; demonic, 206; ethical, 17;
sensuous, 245; of sin, 81, 93, 110,
114. See also self-consciousness
consequence, 38, 104, 113, 138-39,
145,169; of Adam's relation to the
race, 33; of historical relationship,
73-76; of nature, 73; of sin, 26, 30,
32,77, 113
Constantin Constantius, 17, 19, 21,
149, 151
contemplation, 22, 71, 135, 143
content, 81, 86,133,137,139,141; of
the eternal, 87; of Genesis story,
32; of inclosing reserve, 129; of
spirit, 94
contendessness, as demonic, 132-33
contingency, 9. See also accidental
contradiction, 17,32,38,69-70,
97-98,122,128,135,195,207; category of, 14; in concepts, 83; ethical, 16, 117; in "the one," 84; as
synthesis, 49, 85; as a task, 28, 31,
49,231
contrition, 27, 36
I Corinthians, 224, 226, 233, 245, 246
II Corinthians, 227

262

Index

corruption, 58
courage, to believe, 117; to understand, 102
cowardice, 79, 121, 144-45
creation, 46-47, 53, 57-59, 73, 78, 83
Crites, Stephen D., xi
Critobulus, 70, 239
cupiditas, 176
curiosity, 39, 57, 138
cynic, 70
Daniel, Book of, 196
Dante, Alighieri, 207
Dasein, 226
death, 45, 92-93, 96, 121
deceiver, 150, 160
dedication, The Concept of Anxiety,
5, 178, 222-23
defiance, 108, 116, 145-46
definition, categorical, 12; dogmatic,
35,79; of sentience, 148
deity, 59, 86, 150. See also God
delusion, 56
Democritus, 228
demon, 119, 125, 132
demoniac, 124, 204,250
demonic, the, 118-36,202-08,249; as
anxiety about the good, 123, 135,
203; as the boring, 132-33, 250;
category of, 138; concept of, 119,
122; as the contendess, 132-33;
defined, 119, 122-23, 135; forms
of, 124,137, 141-42, 144; as inclosing reserve, 123-29; as the negative, 134; in New Testament, 124;
as noncommunication, 124-25;
spheres of, 137-38; as the sudden,
129-32, 250; views of, 119-23, 202.
See also knowledge
Descartes, Rene, vii-ix, xi, 146, 175,
252
desire, 66, 73. See also concupiscence
despair, 105, 169, 173, 175,200
determinability,37-38
determinant, ethical and metaphysical, 133; quantitative, 114

determinations (determinateness, determine), 61, 63, 69, 92, 105, 133,
181, 234; conceptual, 133; dialectical, 42, 102; psychological, 42;
quantitative, 30-31, 33-34, 38,43,
52, 54, 56, 59, 74, 90, 93, 114, 185;
of time, 84, 87
Deuteronomy, 239
devil,62, 125, 128
dialectic, 82-83, 116,238, 242; Hegelian,225,237
dialectical, the, II, 15, 25, 32, 40,
42-43, 59, 84, 92, 96, 102-03, 118,
136, 160,227,241
didactic, the, 221
Diogenes Laertius, 228
disbelief, 172. See also unbelief
disclosure, 123, 126-29; category of,
127
discrimen, 90-91; discrimen remm, 50
disposition, 37, 47, 148-49,209; defined, 148. See also Gemiit
divine, the, 102-03, 134
dizziness, 61, 130, 158
dogmatics, 9-10, 12, 20-24, 58, 60,
79,180, 183,221; and Adam, 33,
36; and ethics, 12,39; and faith, 10,
18; and Hegel, 35; and hereditary
sin, iii, 14, 19-20, 23, 119, 182; and
psychology, 58, 77, 162; and repetition, 18; science of, 12, 19-20,23
Don Giovanni, xiii, 113, 131,248
doubt, ix, II, 25, 146, 176, 208, 244
Dracon, 27, 231
drive, 80; sexual, 69, 76, 79, 195
Duchatelet, Alexandre Jean B. B.
(Parent-), 137, 204, 251
eager longing, 53, 57, 236-37
earnestness, 146-54, 210; as certitude
and inwardness, 138-41, 146, 151,
153, 208-09; defined, 147; and disposition, 148-49,209; as mood
corresponding to sin, 15-16, 181;
and personality, 149
Ecclesiastes, 146, 196,212,252

Index
education, 98, 156-59, 173; by an)tiety, 155-57, 159, 162; by possibility, 156-60
EitherlOr, )tiii, 19, 43, 131, 162, 189,
254
Eleatics, 13, 82, 243
emperor,99,l08
empirical, the, 22, 60, 63-64, 234
Engels, Friedrich, vii
Epicurus, 236
epigraph,3, 177-78,222
Epimetheus,l06
Erasmus Montanus, 62, 224, 238
erotic, the, 69, 72, 191, 194; and
cheerfulness (Heiterkeit), 80; and
Christianity, 69; as the comic, 69,
71,193-94
Eschenmayer, Adam Karl A., 30,
187
essence, 21, 84, 226, 241-42
esthetic, the, 14, 17-19,29,35-36,38,
53,65-66,71, 121, 131, 132, 141,
144, 153, 180-81, 183; category of,
144
eternal, the, eternity, 13, 65, 75, 84,
86-87,93, lOS, 138, 149, 170, 211,
231,233,246; conception of, 89,
152-54,206-07,209-10; content
of, 87; fear of, 206-07; Greek view
of, 89; Hegel on, 245; life, 146; in
man, 151-52; and the moment, 84,
86-90, 196,207; possibility of, 297;
and the present, 86, 206; and repetition, 13, 18, lSI, 207; and the
temporal (temporality), 83, 85, 88,
90-91, 117, 154,207
€ttpOV, 59, 187, 237
Ethica Nicomachea, 59, 187, 237
ethics, the ethical, 13-24, 26, 31,
35-36,38,43,65-66,70,77, 114IS, 121, 144, 153, 183, 185; and the
demonic, 120-21; and dogmatics,
12,19,23,36,39; first, 20, 23-24,
228; Greek, 16, 19; an ideal science, 16-19; and repetition, 18;
science of, 12, 16,23; second (new,

263

Christian), 20-21, 23, 228; and sin,
16-17, 19,21-22, 117-18, 133, 135,
181-82; a task, 16, 19
ethnical, the, 18,21,227,229
Eve,36,46,48,63-64,66,189
evil, 39, 62, 112, 122, 131, 133, 140,
169,240,247; amciety about, 11319,131,203; choosing between
good and, 49, 106, 112; concept of,
62; difference between good and,
41,45, 52, 111-12; as negative, 13,
112, 124; tree of knowledge of
good and, 44. See also good and
evil
e)tample, 75, 83
Exemplar, 61
existence, 13, 58, 94, 101, 140, 172,
226-27,231; and genius, 99, 102,
104; human, 28; past, 128; reduced, 35; religious, 105; spheres
of,l99
existence (Tilvaerelse), 13, 17, 102,
124,149,170,172,188,226,246;
God's, 22, 140; mysteries of, 102;
nonhuman, 57
Exodus, 221, 239
experiment, see imaginary construction
external, the, 109, 127; relation to
spirit, 18, 96, 98
157, 170, 172-73,205,253;
and anxiety, 117, 144, 155-62; as
immediate, 10, 180,224; originality of, 62; and repetition, 18
fall of man, 25, 32, 48, 61, 233, 236;
concept of, 38-41; consequences
of, 48; as qualitative leap, 48
fantasy, 25-26, 28, 32-36, 122,207
fate, 38, 103, 108, 120-21, 159-60,
199,246,248; and anxiety, 96-103;
concept of, 48; and genius, 98-101,
107-08, 110,200; and the oracle,
97, 104; and spirit, 96; the unity of
necessity and the accidental,
96-97, 199
f~th,27,

264

Index

Faust, 131,250
fear, 169-70, 206~7; and anxiety,
xvi, 42, 185, 235
Fear and Trembling, 17, 182, 224, 249
federal theology, 25, 230-31
feeling, 178; defmed, 148
femininity, 15,26,61,66, 127, 144
fetish, 8, 95
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas, 251
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 118, 138,
249,251,253
finite, the, 61-62, 83, 112, 143, 15556, 159 f[; and the present, 245;
and spirit, 18, 107, 151
finitude, 156, 160-61, 237; anxieties
of, 157, 161; educated by, 156,
158, 161-62
Formula of Concord, 230-31
Four Upbuilding Discourses, xii
freedom, viii, 18,42,44, 56, 58, 69,
75,77,108,111,113,119-24,
187-88,200,202,209,233-34,251;
actuality of, 22, 52, %, 98, 235;
and anxiety, 49, 61, 76-77, ISS,
203; category of, 49; concrete expression of, 61, 111-12; and the
demonic, 118-36; entangled, 49,
239; and good and evil, 46, 111-12,
200; Greeks and, 227; and guilt,
61, 108~9; historical, 82, 84-85;
and innocence, 123; £'s possibility, 44, 49, 64, 74, 91, 108~9, Ill,
123, ISS, 196-97,200, 203, 222;
and psychological attitude toward
sin, 113-18; as a task, 19; ways of
losing, 136-54, 202~5, 207, 251.
See also liberum arbitrium
future, the, 83, 85-87, 89-92, 94, Ill,
1%-97; concept of, 89-90
Galatians, Epistle to the, 226, 238,
246
Ganymede, 66
Gemiit, 147-48,209,252. Sualso disposition

generation, 7, 47, 56-57; relationship
of, 34, 46, 62-73, 90, 233
Genesis, 31, 37, 44, 46, 64, 66, 189,
221,223,233-36,238
genius, 114, 194; and fate, 200; Hegel
on, 246-47; immediate, 98-105,
200; Kant on, 247; as religious,
102, 107-10, 247; Schelling on,
114, 248
Gnostics, 247
God, 22, 44, 54,72, 100, 107, 125,
134, 139, 147, lSI, 170-73, 187,
1%,210,237; defined, 86; and
evil, 112; moods in, 59; proofs of
existence of, 140; represented as
eye, 87; and temptation, 48, 172.
See also deity
God-relation, xvii, 11 0, 173
gods, 246
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von,
222-23, 253
good, the, 83, 112, 160; anxiety
about, 118-36, 152, 203; and freedom, 111; indefinable, 111; unfree
relation to, 119; as unity of state
and movement, 135, 203
good and evil, 18, 76, 201, 212, 233;
ability to choose, 47, 106; concept
of, 112; difference between, 41,
45-46, 52, 111-12, 233; finitizing
of, 112; knowledge of, 41, 44
Gorres, Joseph Jakob von, 143, 187,
208,251
Goschel, Karl Friedrich. 251
Greeks, the. 17,20,26.71,79, 136,
154, 191. 194, 1%; art and beauty
of, 65, 87; concept of freedom,
227; concept of temporality and
time. 89-90; culture of, 65. 88, 103.
178; ethics of, 16; thought of, 21,
83,112,181,228
Grimm Brothers, 236, 252
Grundtvig, Nicolai Frederik Severin, 240, 247
guilt. 12. 38, 40, 47, 64, 94, 169, 175,
230; and anxiety, 42-43, 54, 60-62,

Index
74-75,103-10, 161, 203; concept
of, 97, 107; determinant of, 40;
and genius, 101-02,107; and innocence, 35-38, ~1, 76, 238; in
Judaism, 103-04; in paganism.
97-98; by qualitative leap, 41, 52,
54-55, 62; in subsequent individual,38, 185
.. 'Guilty?'rNot Guilty?' .. in Stages
on Life's Way, 176
Giintelberg, Christian Carl H. F.,
226
Hamann, Johann Georg, 3, 162,
177-78,198,222,246,254
Hamlet, 128
Hamlet, 250
Hase, Karl August von, 228. See also
Hutterus redivivus
Hebrews, Episde to the, 247
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich,
11-14, 19,59, 157, 180-81,207,
213, 222, 224-26, 229, 232-34,
237-42, 245-48, 250-53; and dialectic, 225, 237, 242-43; and immediacy, 35, 37, 233; and logic, 12-13,
30, 180-81, 241-42; and transition,
81-82,232,241
Hegelianism, 11-14,81, 180, 224-25,
233,244
Heiberg, Johan Ludvig, 18-19, 180,
21~ 22~ 22~ 233,240, 250,253
Heidegger, Martin, xvi-xvii
Heiterleeit, SO, 241
Henry V, 123
Herbart, Johannes Friedrich, 146,
252
Herder, Johann Georg, 222
hereditary sin, 14, 98, 117, 170, 177,
182-85, 195,200,221, 228-33; and
anxiety, 183-84, 235; concept of,
25-26, 76; in the history of the
Church, 25-29, 200, 230-31;
paradox of, 230; presupposition
of, 25-51, 179
Hermann, Karl Friedrich, 176

265

Himmelstrup, Jens, xii
Hirsch, Emanuel, 224, 228, 248
historical, the, 12, 26, 28-29, 62, 70,
73,82-83, lOS, 142-43, 149,208,
210; and presuppositions, 10,84,
104
history, 30, 34, 39, 43, 47, 49,66,89,
94,207,231; and Adam, 25-26, 28,
33; of the individual, 29, 31, 33-35,
73,90, 113; of the race, 25, 29, 31,
33-34, 52-53, 59, 73
HoiTding, Harald, xv
HoiTmann, Emst Theodor
Amadeus, 122,249
Holberg, Ludvig, 224, 238
Holy Spirit, 170
Homer,S, 178
hope, 170, 172
human, the, xv, IS, 28-29, 39, 49,
54-55,119,125, ISO, ISS, 185,229,
241
humor, 198
Hutterus redivivus, 228, 230-31, 240.
See also Hase, Karl
hypochondria, 162, 204
hypocrisy-oiTense, 145
idea, 15,55, 67, 98, 117, 123, 142,
150; fixed, 46, 130
ideal, the, 16-17, 19-20, 228, 231; as a
task, 16
idealism, 79
idealization, 157
identical, identity, 10,25,35,75,86,
89, 142, 144-45
idol, 95, 97
ignorance, 57, 68; and innocence,
37-38, 41-42, 44, 62, 67; and sexuality, 48, 68
illusion, 76, 135
imaginary construction (experiment), xiii-xiv, 40, 56-57, 66, 74,
78, 83, 112, 135
immanence, 13, 18, 20-21,32,37,50,
138,182,229,241; and movement,
180

266

Index

immediacy, the immediate, 12, 102,
107, 142, 148; cancellation of, 10,
35-38, 39; concept of, 35; determinant of, 148-49; and faith, 10, 180;
and genius, 99, 105, 107, 110;
Hegel on, 233-34, 242; as innocence, 35-36; and logic, 10-11, 35;
and spirit, 43, 99, 103
immortality, 69, 102, 153; concept
of, 105; Greek conception of, 154,
246, 253; Poul M. Meller on, 153,
210,251,253; Plato on, 246;
proofs of soul's, 139-40, 205
imperfection, 37, 47, 52, 58, 64,87,
89, 102
impotence, 61, 73, 99, 100
incarnation, 170, 202
inclosing reserve, 123-35, 177,250;
defmed, 123. See also demonic
individual, the, 33, 38, 56, 62, 68-69,
72, 103, 107~, 115-16, 122, 124,
196-97,209,247; and anxiety,
52-55,60, '73,75,109,115,197,
235; concept of, 76, 105; and freedom, 75, 140, 196; and guil t, 53,
61, 98; history of, 29, 31, 33-35;
and innocence, 31, 60-61, 185; and
qualitative leap, 37, 47, 54, 112;
and the race, 28, 31, 33, 46, 75, 98,
186,231,235; and sin, 19, 57, 59,
61; and sinfulness, 34, 37. See also
single individual; subsequent individual
individuality, 55,65, 104, 114, 121,
123, 126, 129, 139, 140-41, 145,
150-52,194,209,232; demonic,
130, 135, 152; and possibility, 53,
91, 158, 160-61
individual life, 52, 81, 91
infinite, the, 21, 31, 45, 61-62, 74,
85-86,l12,133,l56-57,239;quantitative, 239
innocence, 39-40, 47, 66-67, 73-74,
80,93,107,109,122,199,234-35,
238; of Adam, 35, 38, 41, 48, 56,
185; anxiety of, 41-46, 56, 115;

concept of, 35-38, 233; defmed as
ignorance, 38, 41, 44, 62, 68; as
dreaming spirit, 43, 48, 91; state
of, 37, 41,52,56,200; ofsubsequent individual, 36, 38, 41, 52,
56,60,62
Inseparables, The, 133, 250
instinct, 49, 68
intellectUal, the, 11, 137, 162
Interesse, interest, 18, 21-22
intermediate term, 39-40, 75-76
intUition, 11, 20
inwardness, 14, 137-38, 172, 240,
247-48,252; absence of, 139-46,
205; concrete, 142; defined, 146,
206,208-09
irony, 95, 150, 186,202,250; Socratic, 70-71, 134
issue, 9, 15, 18, 23, 212
jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, 222, 249
james, Book of, 48, 204, 235
jaspers, Karl, xvi

Johannes Climacus, or De omnibus
dubitandem est, 244

johannes de Silentio, 17
john, Gospel of, 204, 225, 234, 25051,253
judaism, 90, 103-04, 109
judgment, 46, 90,116,154,199,212;
ethical, 16, 22, 153; of taste (Kant),
227; word of, 45, 47
jupiter, 65
lCaAOlcaya9ia, 226-27
Kant, Immanuel, 11, 18, 222, 225,
227,239-40,247,252
KIERKEGAARD, S0REN, and Aristotle,
ix-x; concept of the self, xvii;
and Descartes, viii-ix; interest in
anxiety, xii-xiv; and Leibniz, viiviii; principle of unum noris omnes,
xv-xvi; style, xviii. Set also tit/eso!

individual works

ix, 82,195,241-42. See also
change; movement; transition

Kiv1J~

Index

King Lear, 249
kiss, 70, 238
knowledge, 10,37,44,73,84, lOS,
141, 185,233; demonic, 138,204;
faith as immediate, 224; and innocence, 44, 69; Kant on, 225;
speculative, 10, 19; tree of, 39, 44,
76; is virtue, 227
"know yourself," xv-xvi, 79, 240
language, 9, 12, 42-43, 45, 66, 124,
181, 183-84,248; and Adam,
45-48; Hamann on, 222; man not
inventor of, 47, 186; serpent symbolof, 185,235
Lavater, Johann Caspar, 118, 249
law, 16, 103, 130
leap, 17,38,49,60, 74, 77, 79, 85,
112, 132, 182-83, 199,241; dialectical, 17; and fall of man, 39-40,
48; guilt by, 41, 52, 60; Hegel on,
30; Heffding on, xiv f.; and individual, 33, 37, 54, 63, 77, 114; psychological approximations to, 43,
91, 200; sin by, 32, 47, 92-93,
111-12. See also qualitative leap
Lear, King, 115
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von, vii,
112, 229, 236, 248
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, 92, 208,
246
Lethe, 154, 210, 253
liberum arbitrium (freedom of indifference), 49, 112, 200, 236. See also
choice
life, 23, 75, 87, 93, 100, 146, 192;
eternal, 149; individual, 81,113;
spiritual, 233
logic, 12-13, 21, 30-31, 35, 37, 139,
180-81,237,241,243; and actuality, 9, 16, 180; Hegel's, 9, 12; and
movement, 12-13,30,83, 180; and
transition, 13, 81-82
A.c:Syo~, 12, 225
longing, see eager longing
Lenning, Per, xi

267

love,44-45,53, 80, 147; defined, 147;
erotic, 69, 85; God's, 173
Lowrie, Walter, 233, 237
Luke, Gospel of, 119, 236, 240, 246,
248-49,254
Lulu, 12, 226
Luther, Martin, 155
Lutheranism, 221, 231, 247
Macbeth, 146
Madvig, Johan Nicolai, 186
Malantschuk, Gregor, 231, 244
man, 17-18,27,2~34,41,44,47-48,
79,89,92,95,102-03,109-10,114,
122, 132, 151,235,237; being oneself and the race, 28, 231, 235; innocence of, 35-36, 38, 43, 52; and
sin, 29, 31, 33,112-13; a synthesis,
46, 85, 122, 231. See also synthesis
man and woman, 47, 64, 66
manifestation, II, 225
Marbach, Gotthard Oswald, ISO,
252
Marengo, 99, 161
Marheineke, Philipp, 59, 233, 238
Mark, Gospel of, 119, 250, 253
Martensen, Hans Lassen, 207, 22324, 253
Matthew, Gospel of, 224, 226, 238,
246,248-50
maturity of spirit, 69, 102
May, Rollo, xvii
mediacy,37
mediation, 11,81-82,234,242
medicine, 169,204
melancholy, 14,36,42,57, 149,
171-72, 187, 190
Mephistopheles, 131-32
metaphysics, IS, 20-21, 59, 82,119,
182, 221; and conception of eternity, 153; and ethics, 17,24, 181;
and proofs of immortality, 139
method, II, 125; Socratic, 112
Middle Ages, 194; artists of, 200;
blasphemy of, 151; philosophy of,
11; religion of, 106

268

Index

misunderstanding, 10, 19, 33, 98,
112, 124, 127
mockery, 206
modesty, 68-69, 238
M011er, Poul Martin,S, 153, 178,
222-23, 251, 253; on immortality,
210,223
moment, the, 49-50, 80-81, 103, 105,
110, 117-18, 196; category of,
82-91; and the leap, 61; paraphrased in New Testament, 88;
Plato on, 82-84, 88, 244-45; and
spirit, 48, 88
monogenesis, 235
mood, 15,36,55, 59,62,67, 149,
181, 183, 190
moral, the, 67-68, 80, 83,111,195
moralist, 70
"more," a, 91,109; of historical relationship, 73-75, 77; of relationship
of generation, 64, 72-73
motto, see epigraph
movement, motion, 11, 14, 18,71,
82-83, 113, 115, 181, 241; ethical,
16-17,20; historical, 28-29,231;
immanental, 13,37, 180; logical,
30. See also change; KiVl]crl~; transition
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 248
mulieres subintroductae, 70, 239
Miiller, Johannes Georg, 237
Mynster, Bishop Jacob Peter, xii
myth, 32, 34, 46-47,194; of the fall,
32,233-34
naivete, 17,65,67,89,92
Napoleon, 99-100, 247
naturalistic categories, 135
natural life, 233
natural philosophy, 78
natural scientists, 185
nature, 18,20,41,46,57,59,73,89,
127, 130,235; determinant of, 148
navel gazers, 242
Nebuchadnezzar, 50, 236
"necessary other," 13, 39, 226

necessity, 49, 138; category of, 49;
and fate, 96-97, 190, 246; and freedom, 108,251; and sin, 21, 98
negation, the negative, 17, 21, 78,
81-82,113,134,139,145,176,181,
187, 225; as demonic, 134; as
dialectical, 59, 237; as evil, 13, 112;
as principle of motion, 12-13, 225
Nero, xiv
New Testament, 208
Nicolas Notabene, 221
Niebuhr, Reinhold, xvii
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, xiv
non-being, 82-83,243
nothingness, 68, 83, 86, 111, 237,
245; of anxiety, 41-44, 61-62, 65,
77, 96, 103; of fate, 96-97, 99; of
ignorance, 44, 62; of possibility,
50,53,77; of pure being, 37, 81,
84,234,242,245
notion, 237, 241
now, the, 245
objectivity, 51, 140-41, 237
observation, 22, 55, 60, 71, 116, 118,
126-27, 130, 132, 151; imaginatively constructed, 55, 66, 74; psychological, 15,22, 40, 45, 176,222
Oehlenschlager, Adam Gotdob, 250
offense, 30, 32, 144-45
Olsen, Regine, 170
Olshausen, Hermann, 249
omphalopsychoi, 81, 242
ontology, and logic, 224; of man,
xiv, xv, xvii, 230; of non-being, 82
opposition, 13, 18, 58, 73-74, 108
original, the, 63
originality, 55, 62, 73, 79, 104, 149,
210
original sin, 221. See also hereditary
SIn

orthodoxy, 57,93, 139, 142, 187,205
other, the, see "necessary other"
outwardness, 33, 47, 104"'()5, 200,
246,248
Ovid,188

Index
paganism, 9, 21, 40, 84, 104, 185,
193, 199; and anxiety, 96 ff.;
within Christianity, 93-94; and
fate, %-97; and sensuousness, 74,
93, 96; and sin, 93, 96-97, 198; and
spirit, 95, 193
Paradise, 235
paradox, of Christian truth, 230,
233; of hereditary sin, 230
Parent-Duchatelet, see Duchatelet
Parmenides, 83-84, 237
particular, the, 76, 77-79
passion, 27, 56, 88, 100, 116, 124; of
the absurd, 17; offreedom, 109,
120; of wonder, 146, 176,252
passivity-activity, 142-46
past, the, 26, 84-85, 91-92, 94, 98,
117, 159; concept of, 90; and dimensions of time, 85-87, 89-94
pathos-filled transition, see transition
Pauline doctrines, 39
Paulus, Heinrich Eberhard G., 237
Pegasus. 150
Pelagianism, 28, 34, 37, 59, 186,231
perfection, II, 27, 49, 63-64, 72, 79,
87,92, 103-D4, 117,227; of man.
28-29, 188, 231
personality, 148-49
phenomenon, 60. 188, 225
philanthropic individualism, 28, 231
Philippians, Epistle to the, 237
philosopher, 246
Philosophical Fragments, viii, xii, 222,
229. 232, 242, 246
philosophy, II, 13,21,81-82,90,94,
134, 176, 181,229,241
physical, the, 64, 90. See also soma
Plato, 82, 83, 88-89, 106, 146; Apology, 222; Cratylus, 254; Gorgias,
82,226,243,249; Parmenides,

83-84, 237, 244; Phaedo, 246, 254;
Protagoras, 248; Republic, 241, 253;
Sophist, 82, 243; Theaetetus, 176;
Timaeus, 245

Plutarch, 231, 239, 247
pneuma, 77, 122; freedom lost

269
See also spirit

pneumatically, 36, 137-54, 251.

poet, poetic, 71
poet-existence, 128
poetic, the, 55, 117

Point of View, The, 249
Pol yaenus, Strategemata, 234

positive, the, 17, 146; philoliOphy, 21
possibility, 22, 42, 50, 53, 58, 61. 77,
91, 102, 109, 113, 195; and anxiety.
53, 77, 96, 98, 108,205; of being
able, 44-45, 49, 235; ca tegory of,
156; educated by, 155-62; freedom's, 44, 49, 64, 74, 91, 108-09,
Ill, 123, 155, 196-97, 200, 203,
222; and the future, 91-92; ofp.,
42,235; of sin, 21-23, 183; transition from, to actuality, 49, 82
Practice in Christianity, 222, 228
preaching. 16
predestination, 62, 169
Prefaces, xii, 210, 223
present, 26, 94,152,245; and definition of time, 85-88; time, 84, 244
presentiment, xii, 53, 61, 169, 185,
235
presuppose, 32, 62, 112
presupposition, 19,21-22,35,52.58.
79; of ethics, 19, 23, 24; of hereditary sin, 25-51, 179; historical, 10,
84
presuppositionlessness, 81, 181,242
pride, 116, 144, 157
pride-cowardice, 145
primitive, 26, 52, 62, 70, 104, 107,
116. See also original
principle, x, 78
problem, 28. 34, 51, 105-06, 123,
132. See also issue
procreation, 65-66, 72, 77
prohibition, and the fall, 39-40,
43-45
proof, 95, 139-40, 147
Protestantism, 26-27, 41
providence, 97-98, 101, 161; corresponds to concept of sin, 98-99.

270

Index

providence (cont.) 104
Psalms, 196,221,234
pseudonymity, xviii, 221-23
psyche, the psychical, 22, 41, 130,
136-37, 200. See also synthesis
psychology, the psychological, IS,
17-18,20,24,40,45,54-56,58,62,
75,77,117,123,135,147-48,
176-78, 188-91, 193,227; and anxiety, 14,22-23,39,41-42,72,74,
115, 162; and the fall, 39-41, 61;
and qualitative leap, 43, 48, 91;
science of, 22, 39, 51; and sin, IS,
21,23,51,92,188,221;subjectof,
21-22, 39, 76, 113-15; S.K. 's contribution to, xiii-xvi
punishment. 45, 92, 112, 121-22,
125,137,173,249
Pythagoreans, 82, 243

qualification, to, 31, 38, 41, 68, 77,
90, 123, 141,241
qualitative, 22, 74, 185
qualitative leap, xv, 40, 80; sin enters
by, 61, lIS, 204. See also leap
quaJity, 30, 52, 57, 72,181,195;posited by leap, 30, 32, 57, 232
quantitation, 47, 59
quantitative difference, 40, 63
quantity, 180-81, 195
race,the,20,36-37,76, lOS, 186,231;
and Adam, 25, 28-31, 33, 57, 18687; concept of, 76, 105; history of,
31,33-34, 52-53, 59, 73; and the
individual, 28, 33-34, 46, 75, 98;
sinfulness of, 33, 52, 57
reality, II, 19,21,229; metaphysical,
228; objective, 252
reason, 233
recollection, 21, 89-90, 227-28, 246
reconciliation, to-II, 153
redemption, 74, 90, 119, 127,229
reflection, 33, 56-58, 69, 104, 112,
142, 241; category of, 108, 144; of

eternity in time, 85, 88. See also
self-reflection
Regine, see Olsen, Regine
relation, 48, 79, 96, 104; man's, to
spirit, 43-44; sympathetic and antipathetic, 103
religion, 17-18, 70, 97, 106-07, 143,
193,208,210,212; commensurabilityof, 106, 141; and consciousness, 143; and existence, t05-06;
and genius, 101, 107-10, 114; and
the outward, 200; as a task, 200
repentance, 12,92, t03, 109, 114-16,
173
repetition, 34, 46, 113, 149; category
of, 17-19,90, 106, 151,210,227;
concept of, 17-18
Repetition, 17-19,208,227,252
representation, 196
reserve, see inclosing reserve
resurrection, 49, 79, 90, 240
Richter, Jean Paul F., 222
Romans, Book of, 57, 202, 221, 231,
233-34,236
Rosenkranz, Johann Karl F., 30, 147,
149,187,209-10,229,232,252,
255

sacrifice, 104, 247
salvation, 53, 75-76,119,122,124,
127, 130,206; and anxiety, 158;
demonic attitude toward, 137
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm J., vii,
II, 13,30, 136,225,232,237,240,
245; on genius, 114,248,251; on
moods in God, 59, 187; on negative and positive philosophy, 21,
229
Schlegel, Friedrich von, 69
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Ernst D.,
20, 230, 244; on hereditary sin,
228-29
Schubert, GotthilfHeinrich, 187
science, 9, 11-12,35, SO, 58, 77, 192;
and language, 184-85; presupposes

Index
mood, 14; unable to deal with sin,
16,21, 182
scientist, 51, 185
"The Seducer's Diary," 189, 191
seduction, 43, 47, 55,64,66,189
self, xvii, 78-79
self-<:onsciousness, 79,143,148, 153,
240. See also consciousness
self-<ieception, 139, 160
self-examination, 185, 247
selfi shness, 61, 77-79
self-knowledge, xv-xvi. See also
"know yourself"
self-reflection, 142, 144. See also reflection
Semler, Johann Salomo, 249
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus, 185
sensualiry,69,190
sensuous consciousness, 245
sensuousness, 49, 86, 92, 246; and
anxiery, 64, 72-73; and Christianity, 74, 84; and sinfulness, 49,
58-59,63,65,73-77,80,89,91,93;
and spirit, 73, BO, 83, 87, 89;
woman more s. than man, 64-66
serpent, 46, 48, 66,103; as symbol of
language, 185,235
sexual difference, 48-49, 76
sexualiry, 49, 190-95,222; and
Adam, 79; and sensuousness, 49,
80; and sin, 48, 194-95; and sinfulness, 52, 67, 79; and spirit, 69, 79
Shakespeare, William, 131
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 131
Sickness unto Death, The, viii, xi, xiv,
222,235
silence, 56, 66, 124; and inclosing reserve, 125, 128; as method of observation, 54-55
sin, 14-28,50,63,73,101-04,117-18,
170,173,182, 190, 194, 198,200,
202-03, 229, 247; and actualiry,
109, 113-15,221,232; Adam's,
25-26, 28, 30, 32-34, 39, 57, 187,
230; and anxiery, 53-54,73-74,
81-154; category of, 19,57,117;

271

conceived in, 38, 192; concept of,
14-22,76,97-99; consciousness of,
81,93, 110, 114; consequence of,
114-17,187,230; and ethics,
16-17,19,21-22,181; first, 25-26,
28-34,184,188,229,232,235;and
paganism, 19, 93, 96-97, 198; possibiliry of, 23, lIS, 183,201, 221;
presupposes itself, 62, 112; a qualitative leap, 32, 47, 61, 92, 111-12,
199; as selfishness, 77-79; and sexuality, 194-95; state of, IS, 53, 76,
92-93,114,117-18; as subject of
psychology, 15,21-22,39,76,
113-15. See also hereditary sin; sinfulness
sinfulness, 20, 26, 30, 39, 48, 52,
57-58,60,173,184,187,195,227;
cancellation of, 32; distinguished
from sin, 32-34,57,63,232; quantitative determinability of, 31, 33,
37-38, 47, 52; and temporaliry,
92-93. See also sin
single individual, the, 16, 20, 38, 50,
61,77,98, 111, 192,249
skepticism, ix, 11, 19, 104,225
Smalcald Articles, The, 26, 221
Socianism, 28, 231
Socrates, 3,5, 16,68-70,83,121,134,
159,160,177-78, 191, 193, 198,
222, 227, 239, 242-43, 246, 250,
254
Socratic method, 112
Soldin, 51, 236
Solon, 231
soma, the somatic, 69, 122, 130,
136-37. See also body; physical
Sophists, sophistry, 16, 30,83, 114,
116, 135, 178,243
soul, 27, 93, 102, 126, 154, 158-59,
169, 171, 195,201; proofs for immortality of, 139-40, 246. See also
psyche
speculation, 8, 39, 78, 83-85, 140,
147,179,195. See also knowledge
spheres, 63, 67, 75, 82, 103, 122,

272

Index

spheres (cont.)
124-25; practical, 83; religious,
114, 143
Spinoza, Baruch (Benedict), 199
spirit, 31, 44, 64, 66, 70, 72, 80, 92,
94-95,142,151,153,193,196,208,
227,233-34,238,253;absolute,23,
183,229; and animals, 42, 185; and
anxiety, 44, 73, 115; category of,
89; concept of, 88; as dreaming
(immediate), 41-44, 48-49, 91,
103, 235; and the erotic, 69, 71, 80,
193-94; in Greek thought, 87-90;
and human synthesis, 43, 48-49,
52,61,64, 68, 81, 85, 88, 91-92,
122, 136, 195-97; and modesty
(Scham), 68-71; objective, 183,
229; and sensuousness, 73, 83; and
sexuality, 69, 79; spheres of, 71,
136; subjective, 23, 229
spiritiessness, 93-96, 107, 117, 157,
199
spiritual trial (AnjtPgtelse), 117, 120,
143,172,174-75,208
Stael-Holstein, Anne Louise G. de,
13,226
stage, 67, 159
Stages on Life'S Way, 176
state (Tilstand), 19, 28, 55, 58-59, 79,
82, 85, 93, 113, 114, 115, 118, 126,
134,202,231; demonic, 123, 135,
144; of innocence, 37, 41, 52, 56,
200; posited by leap, 113; of sin,
15,53,76,92-93, 114, 117-18
Steffens, Henrich, 187
Stilling, Peter Michael, 225, 240
Strauss, David Friedrich, 233
subjectivity, 18,23,98, 140-44, 151,
209,237; and anxiety, 56, 60-62
sublate, 245
subsequent individual, 52, 63-64,
72-75, 90, 109
substance, 199
sudden, the, 30, 32, 88; category of,
130-31; as the demonic, 129-32
suffering, 120-21, 145, 170

superstition, 139-40, 144, 205-06
sympathy, 29, 54, 72, 119-22; sympathetic antipathy, 42, 235
synthesis, Hegelian, 225; of the
human being, 43, 48-49, 52, 58,
61,64-65, 68-69, 71-72, 80-81, 85,
88,90-91, 117, 122, 142, 155, 190,
195-97, 203, 231
system, 3, 14,49, 51, 81, 84, 153,
178, 180-81, 191-92, 210, 226
talent, 98, 102, 106-07, 193,201,248
Talleyrand (-Perigord), Charles
Maurice, 102, 108, 247-48
task, religious, 200
tautology, 78
Taylor, Mark C, xi
Tegner, Esaias, 245
teleological, 112
"tEl.. oC;,69
temporality, 83-84, 88-89, 102, 15254, 233; concept of, 88-89; and sinfulness, 92-93; synthesis of, and
the eternal, 85, 88, 90-91, 196-97.
See also time
temptation, 39-40, 42, 80, 109, 172;
of Adam and Eve, 43, 48; contrasted, 174
Tenneman, Wilhelm Gottlieb, vii,
ix, 151, 195,241,243,252
Terence (Publius T. Afer), 240
terrible, the, 27, 45, 92, 94, 126,
129-30, 135, 155-59, 162
Tertullian, Quintus Septimus, 27,
230, 249
theater, 21, 34, 150
theodidact, 162, 254
I Thessalonians, 254
Thomas Aquinas, 230
thought, 14-15,27, 29, 46, 60, 81 ff.;
and being, 78; and freedom, 112,
138; and reality, 11, 19
Three Discourses on Imagined Occasions, 246
Three Upbuilding Discourses, xii
Thulstrup, Niels, xii

Index
Tillich, Paul, xvi
time, 85-91,132,152,196, 198; category of, 82, 86; concept of, 86;
fullness of, 33, 90, 198; Hegel's
view of, 245. See also future; moment; past; present; temporality
transcendence, 13-14, 17-18,21,37,
50,233
transition, 18, 60, 72, 77, 113, 132;
Aristode on, 82; category of, 81,
83-84; dialectical and pathosfilled, ix, 241; in Hegelian
thought, 81-82, 180-81,232, 24142; from innocence to guilt, 39-40,
43; as JdVTtcrt~, 195; and logic, 13,
83; Plato on, 82-83; quantitative,
76-77,85; in the sphere of his torical freedom, 82, 85. See also
change; Jet vTtcrt~; movement
Trendelenburg, Friedrich Adolph,
vii, ix, 181, 224, 243
trilogy, 111
truth,ll,15,19, 67, 94,103,111,
139, 206, 227, 233; and freedom,
138, 204, 205; before God, 230
Two Upbuilding Discourses, xii
typology, 169

Uadskillige, De, 133,250
unbelief, 139-40, 144, 205-D6
understanding, 3, 79, 95, 100, 128,
178, 233; and myth, 32; personal,
142; and sin, 50-51
unfreedom, 130, 141, 144, 203, 20506; and the demonic, 120-24, 133,
136,138
unity, 199, 225, 234; of being and
nothing, 242; of feeling and self-

273

consciousness, 148; of psyche and
soma, 41, 69
universality, 229
untruth, 128, 205
unum noris omnes, xv-xvi, 79, 183,
240-41
Upbuilding Discourses, 234
Urania, 223, 227
Usteri, Leonhard, 39, 234
Venus, 65, 107
Vigilius Haufniensis, xviii, 167,
221-22
virtue, 16-17, 19, 226; defined, 16
weakness, 131, 138, 144
will, 114, 124, 129, 135, 143,234,239
Winer, Johan Georg G., 230
WinsI0v(w), Carl, 133, 250
woman, 64, 69-70, 120, 189; and
anxiety, 47, 64, 72,194; more sensate than man, 64-65, 188-89;
seduction of, 47-48
wonder, 146, 175-76,252; the beginning of philosophy, 146, 176
word, 44-45, 88, 124, 131-32. See also
language
Works of Love, 228
world, 56-57, 72, 134, 187; sin entering into, 31-34, 48-51
world-historical, the, 90, 104, 135,
156
world-view, 188
Xantippe, 70
Xenophon, 69-70, 162,238-39
Young, Edward, 108, 211, 248

ADVISORY BOARD
KIERKEGAARD'S WRITINGS
Howard V. Hong, General Editor, St. Olaf College, 1972Robert 1. Perkins, University of South Alabama, 1972-76.
Niels Thulstrup, University of Copenhagen, 1972-76.
Gregor Malantschuk, University of Copenhagen, 1977-78.
John W. Elrod, Iowa State University, 1977Per L0nning, University of Oslo, 1977Sophia Scopetea, University of Copenhagen, 1978-

