HOMO VIATOR

HOMO VIATOR
Introduction to a Metaphysic

of Hope

by

GABRIEL MARCEL
Translated by

EMMA GRAUFURD

HENRY REGNERY COMPANY
CHICAGO

1951

The Camelot Press

Ltd.,

London and Southampton

CONTENTS
PREFACE

7

THE EGO AND

ITS

RELATION TO OTHERS

.

.

.

13

SKETCH OF A PHENOMENOLOGY AND A METAPHYSIC OF

HOPE

29

THE MYSTERY

OF THE FAMILY

THE CREATIVE Vow

AS ESSENCE OF

68

FATHERHOOD

.

98

OBEDIENCE AND FIDELITY

125

VALUE AND IMMORTALITY

135

DANGEROUS SITUATION OF ETHICAL VALUES

.

.

-155

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS

THE REFUSAL
THE

MAN

166

OF SALVATION AND THE EXALTATION OF
OF ABSURDITY

185

RILKE:

A

WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL: PART I

.

.

213

RILKE:

A

WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL: PART II

.

.

242

THE EXTRACTS

from Rilke's

Selected Letters

are

used by kind permission of Macmillan & Co. Ltd.,
and those from Sonnets from Orpheus and The Duino
Elegies by kind permission of the Hogarth Press Ltd.

PREFACE
"PERHAPS A STABLE order can only be established on earth
man always remains acutely conscious that his condition is that

if

of a traveller."
I should like this paradoxical sentence, which concludes the
essay on Value and Immortality, to serve as Ariadne's thread, guiding
the reader through what it might perhaps be a little pretentious
to call the labyrinth formed by these essays. Pretentious, but not
altogether untrue: it is certainly less easy to find our way in a
series of meditations, in their essence dramatic or to be more exact
musical, than in a treatise through the whole of which a sequence
of thoughts, following one from the other, is logically developed.
I should have liked to produce such a treatise, although I see more
and more clearly the reasons, some valid and some the reverse,

which prevented me from doing so. Now, however,

I

have reached

the melancholy conclusion that I never shall write it. Moreover,
I feel rather irritated and annoyed with myself, because I am
aware that I shall most certainly not be conforming to all the rules
which have been almost universally observed in the philosophic
game up to the present day. Under these conditions, am I not
obliged to facilitate the reader's task to some extent, by offering
him on the threshold of this book, in as clear a form as possible,
the essential idea which animates it from end to end?
Nothing could seem more irrational at a first glance than to
connect the existence of a stable earthly order with the consciousness of our being travellers, that is to say on a journey. But what
journey is meant here? Obviously, if we want to avoid the worst
possible confusion, we must begin by eliminating everything in
any way connected with evolution from our discussion. It has
nothing to do with what we are considering here, and it is to be
wondered whether it does not tend to introduce into strictly
human affairs an element of disorder and a principle of disproportion and discord. This notion, in fact, can only be made clear
if we start from a particular idea of the sub-human order. There is
probably no system of ethics or sociology with evolutionary tendencies which does not at bottom involve references to a world

HOMO VIATOR

8

radically foreign to the values

which give human conduct

its

peculiar weight and dignity. You will forgive me if I here reproduce the incomparable passage of La Prisonniere which will help
to guide the reader:
"All that can be said

is that everything in our life happens as
though we entered upon it with a load of obligations contracted
in a previous existence. There is no reason arising from the conditions of our life on this earth for us to consider ourselves obliged
to do good, to be tactful, even to be polite, nor for the cultured

consider himself obliged to begin again twenty times; the
admiration his work will arouse cannot matter much to his body
eaten by worms, as for instance the space of yellow wall painted
with so much knowledge and taste by an artist for ever unknown
and scarcely identified under the name of Ver Meer. All these
obligations whose sanction is not of this present life, seem to
belong to a different world, founded on kindness, scruples, sacrifice, a world entirely different from this one, a world whence we
emerge to be born on this earth, before returning thither, perhaps, to live under the empire of those unknown laws we have
obeyed because we bore their teaching within us without knowing who had taught us, those laws which all deep work of our
intelligence brings closer to us, and which are only invisible (and
scarcely even then!) to fools. So then the idea that Bergotte was
not dead for ever was not improbable." We are probably at first
tempted to refer back to the Platonic myth which underlies this.
There is, however, every reason to think that we should be
making a serious mistake if we put the accent here on the word
myth. There is in fact, no reason to insist specially upon Proust's
hypothesis of a former existence in the course of which the soul
contracts the obligations it has to fulfil afterwards here below,
though to start with this hypothesis conflicts with certain theological presuppositions which philosophy as such is in no way
artist to

obliged to adopt.

On

the other hand,

and wb$t shoyj^cert^nly

what

is

Ij^re jttrongly

is^he^transcendent chapter p3x the exact arid nqn-ffieologicajxense "<3? the
tliijst true^an, to^ethfer,^vith tfte
word) ofthe
asserted,

jhe rejained^

standarcj^

artist,

re^gijj^

reftcSal,

implicit at leas^.jtg

of rales,

it is

ajsp the^

be

sati^Ted wifE^a pxjpdy aps*ract>6t

consequently!^

the,, last.

PREFACE

9

analysis we must agree to call the Beyond. It is no good for us to
wonder how far Prbust is contradicting the postulates which all
%

work takes for granted by introducing such a reference here;
the truth is that his work develops between two very different
planes; that of Platonism on the one hand, and of an empiricism
his

on the other. We might say rather that what
work and in its internal contradictions is the
dull tragedy of a soul shutting itself out more and more in an
exile of which it tends to lose all consciousness as it becomes more

inspired
is

by

nihilism

reflected in this

cut off. Taking everything into account, it seems to me admirable
that the writer who has perhaps gone further than any other in
micro-psychological investigation should have been able to recognise, at least at certain great moments, the existence of fixed
stars in the heaven of the soul.
The fact can not be disguised, however, that in speaking of the

Beyond, or simply of our situation as travellers here below, we
are laying ourselves open to a fundamental objection; we shall,
in fact, probably be reproached for pursuing the mirage of an
imagination that works in spatial terms of which thought becomes
only too easily the dupe. What importance should we give to such
an accusation? In a certain sense it is well founded. It remains to
be seen whether, when we try to think of our life we can ever free
ourselves completely from a spatial or quasi-spatial mode of

seem as though we can. If we consider the
look
back as it were at a road we have been
past
inevitably
following, we recall those who bore us company, that is to say
who did such and such a part of the journey with us. The idea
of a journey, which is not usually considered as having any value
or application of a specifically philosophic order, does however
offer the inestimable advantage of gathering together determinations which belong both to time and space; and it would be
worth while to try to find out how it accomplishes such a synthesis. It will no doubt be replied that we have no right to extrapolate, that is to say to produce the curve beyond the region
where observation is possible, for this curve may in fact be interrupted or perhaps stop just where a definite equipment can no
figuration. It does not

we

longer function. But this is precisely where hope comes into its own.
It is not a question here of resting on anything like the postulates of Kant, since these only have to do with pure subjectivity,

HOMO VIATOR

IO

considered as far as this is possible, apart from the conditions of
insertion in concrete experience, experience which involves an
element of specificity in a sense infinite. These postulates can not
be conceived apart from a moral formalism which seems precisely
to miss what is irreducible in the human drama and in the very
fact that all human life develops in the manner of a drama. I think
it is superfluous to give a summary here of the long analyses which
form the core of the present volume and which lead up to the
definition at the end of the essay on the Metaphysics of Hope.
Perhaps, instead, it might be useful to point out the essential
characteristics of the definition itself. First of all it must be noticed
that the experiences it summarises can in no way be reduced to
the image which an abstract and devitalising method of thought
the availability of a soul
forms of them. "Hope is essentially
which has entered intimately enough into the experience of communion to accomplish in the teeth of will and knowledge, the
transcendent act the act establishing the vital regeneration of
which this experience affords both the pledge and the first-fruits."
This means that in the first place hope is only possible on the
level of the us, or we might say of the agape, and that it does not
exist on the level of the solitary ego, self-hypnotised and concentrating exclusively on individual aims. Thus it also implies that
we must not confuse hope and ambition, for they are not of the
same spiritual dimension.
In the second place, there is only room for hope when the soul
manages to get free from the categories in which consciousness
confines itself as soon as it makes a clear line of demarcation
between what it knows for a fact on the one hand and what it
wishes or desires on the other. Perhaps hope means first of all the
act by which this line of demarcation is obliterated or denied.
This constitutes what I have elsewhere termed its prophetic
its

.

.

.

character; hope- is a

knowing which outstrips the unknown but
a knowing vy-hich qcdtudes #11 presumption, ,a
knowing
accorded, graced, a knowing wftiph rn^y be a grace but is in, no
degree a conquest.
I spoke of the soul. This word, so long discredited, should here
be given its priority once more. We cannot help seeing that there
is the closest of connections between the soul and
hope* I almost
it

is

think that hope

is

for the soul

what breathing

is

for the living

PREFACE

II

Where hope

is lacking the soul dries
up and withers, it
function, it is merely fit to serve as an object of
study to a psychology that can never register anything but its
location or absence. It is precisely the soul that is the traveller;

organism.

is

no more than a

of the soul and of the soul alone that we can say with supreme
truth that "being" necessarily means "being on the way" (en route) .
This has without a doubt been strongly felt throughout the ages
by the spiritually minded; but alas, an arid scholasticism stifled
the intuition. It is for us to-day to liberate it once more, without,
it is

however, falling into what we must surely call the error of
Bergsonism. And I mean by this word a theory of the intelligence
which does not really understand it, but instead of thinking its
character, instead of apprehending its movements from within,
tends to stop short at the materialising impression it forms of it.
I think that in starting from this knot of thoughts there should
be no difficulty in understanding what appear to me to be the
philosophical implications of the Mystery of the Family and of the
Creative Vow as Essence of Paternity. The reader must not be misled

by the mode of exposition which may appear somewhat exoteric;
the thought I have tried to express in these two studies is really
metaphysical in the highest degree. We have reason to assert, as
I have said, that family relations, like human things in general, do
not of themselves offer any consistency or any guarantee of
solidity. It is only when they are referred back to a superhuman
order of which here below we are able but to trace the indications, that they take on a truly holy character. Here indeed we
have the living renewal which is given or revealed through hope,
and which appears consequently to envelop our transitory existence and yet only to be attainable at its termination, that is to say
at the end of the journey to which all life is finally reducible. No
one could dispute the fact that there is a paradox or anomaly
here; but on the other hand it seems very much as though the

made to eliminate this paradox, and to rationalise this
anomaly, are doomed to reach further than what might be super-

attempts

and to end in the monstrosities which profrom any kind of giganticism. I have used the word
giganticism; the religion of technics at any rate must be included
under this head. We have there an indication which is perhaps
only implicit in the present volume, but which the reader will

ficially intelligible

liferate

HOMO VIATOR

12

have no difficulty in developing in his own way from the fundamental themes running through this collection of essays.

The study

of Rilke, a Witness

to the Spiritual.,

although

it is

very

different in tone, was conceived in the same spirit and culminates
in an intuition which coincides fundamentally with those perthe Family, and perhaps in particular the
Dangerous Situation of Ethical Values. There is a permanent value in
Orphism which can never be disregarded with impunity. That
value I have tried to bring out at the end of this book, not

vading the Mystery of

abstractly but by

an appeal which I do not think will go unheeded.

How can the spectacle of widespread ruin of which we who follow
after Rilke are the horrified witnesses,

awaken

how can such

a spectacle

mad, unbridled
destruction cannot take place without infinite reserves accumulating, in an irreparable domain where the reasoning and folly
of men have no access, reserves from which it seems to be given
us to draw at the extreme summit of recollection or of that sorrow
which is but its haggard and wounded sister? "The interconnected
consciousness of death and resurrection which pervades the Sonnets
to Orpheus like a breath of air from another world is the
principle
of a reverence for souls and things of which the secret has to be
rediscovered to-day." It is of such a reverence that I want to
awaken an echo in this time of universal sacrilege when some of
the most vigorous minds which have been known in France for
the last twenty years really seem to imagine that blasphemy, conceived moreover rather as statement than invective, can become
the corner-stone of philosophy and politics. This is a fatal illusion,
and it rests not only with faith, but above all with reflection to

fail to

in us the assurance that this

strive tirelessly to dispel

it*

To Mme. JEANNE VIAL

THE EGO AND
IN OUR SUBJECT

RELATION TO OTHERS*

ITS

to-day

we

shall find that the distinction, in

any case uncertain, between child psychology and psychology
pure and simple has practically no importance. If we forget, as
I think we should, the theories and definitions of philosophy in
order to learn all we can from direct experiences, we are led to
the conclusion that the act which establishes the ego, or rather
by which the ego establishes itself, is always identically the same:
it is this act which we must try to grasp without allowing ourselves
to be led astray by the fictitious speculations which throughout
human history have been accumulating in this field. I think that
we should employ current forms of ordinary language which distort

our experiences far

less

than the elaborate expressions in

which philosophical language is crystallised. The most elementaryexample, the closest to earth, is also the most instructive. Take,
for instance, the child who brings his mother flowers he has just
been gathering in the meadow. "Look", he cries, "I picked these."

Mark

the triumph in his voice and above all the gesture, simple
and rapid enough, perhaps, which accompanies his announcement. The child points himself out for admiration and gratitude:
"It was I, I who am with you here, who picked these lovely
flowers, don't go thinking it was Nanny or my sister; it was I and
no one else." This exclusion is of the greatest importance: it seems
that the child wants to attract attention almost materially. He
claims enthusiastic praise, and it would be the most calamitous

thing in the world if by mistake it was bestowed on someone who
did not deserve it. Thus the child draws attention to himself, he
offers himself to the other in order to receive a special tribute.
I do not believe it is possible to insist too much upon the presence
of the other, or more exactly others, involved in the statement:
"It is I who . ." It implies that "There are, on the one hand,
those who are excluded about whom you must be careful not to
.

1

Lecture given to the

1942-

Institut Suptriewr de

Ptdago&e at Lyons, December I3th,

HOMO VIATOR

14
think, and,

and

on the other, there

whom he wants

is

thejww to

whom the child speaks

as a witness."

affirmation on the part of an adult would be less
it would be enveloped in a halo of false
advertised;
openly
modesty where the complexities of the game of social hypocrisy
are discernible. Think of the amateur composer who has just been
singing an unknown melody in some drawing-room. People

The same

"What is that? Is it an unpublished song by Faure?"
." etc. If we leave
"No, as a matter of fact, it is my own
on one side, as we should, all the elaborations of social convention, we shall recognise the fundamental identity of the act. The
difference has only to do with the attitude adopted or simulated
exclaim:
etc.

.

.

regarding the expected tribute.
To go on with our analysis, we observe that this ego here before
us, considered as a centre of magnetism, cannot be reduced to
certain parts which can be specified such as "my body, my hands,

my brain"; it is a global presence a presence which gains glory
from the magnificent bouquet which I myself have picked, which
I have brought you; and I do not know whether you should
admire more the artistic taste of which it is a proof or the generosity which I have shown in giving it to you, I, who might so
easily have kept it for myself. Thus the beauty of the object is in
a fashion reflected upon me, and if I appeal to you, then, I repeat,
I do so as to a qualified witness whom I invite to wonder at the
whole we form the bouquet and I.
But we must not fail to notice that the admiration which I
expect from you, which you give me, can only confirm and
heighten the satisfaction I feel in recognising my own merits. Why
should we not conclude from this that the ego liere present certainly
involves a reference to someone else, only this other someone is
treated as a

foil

or amplifier for

my own self-satisfaction.

"But", you will object, "self-satisfaction, self-confidence, selflove: all this takes for granted a self already established which it
is necessary to define." I think that here we must be careful not
to fall into a trap of language. This pre-existent ego can only be

and if we try to describe it, we can only do so negaby way of exclusion. On the other hand it is very instructive
to give a careful account of the act which establishes what I call
myself, the act, for instance, by which I attract the attention of

postulated,
tively,

EGO AND

ITS

RELATION TO OTHERS

15

others so that they may praise me, maybe, or blame me, but at all
events so that they notice me. In every case Iproduce myself, in the
etymological sense of the word, that is to say I put myself forward.
Other examples bring us to the same conclusion. Let us keep to

A

little stranger stretches out his
the level of a child's experience.
hand to take the ball which I have left on the ground; I jump up;
the ball is mine. Here again the relationship with others is at the
root of the matter, but it takes the form of an order: Do not touch.
I have no hesitation in saying that the instantaneous claiming of

our

own property is one of the most significant of our experiences.

Here again I "produce" myself. I warn the other person that he
must conform his conduct to the rule I have given him. It can be
observed without any great subtlety that the sense of possession
was already implicit in the previous examples, only it was possession of-a virtue rather than a thing. Here, however, more clearly
than just now, the ego is seen as a global and indefinable presence.
I, here before you, possess the ball, perhaps I might consent to
lend it to you for a few moments, but you must quite understand
that it is I who am very kindly lending it to you and that, in con-

sequence, I can take it back from you at any minute if I so wish;
I the despot, I the autocrat.
I have used the term presence several times; now I will try as
far as possible to define what I mean by it. Presence denotes
something rather different and more comprehensive than the fact
of just being there; to be quite exact one should not actually say

an object is present. We might say that presence is always
dependent on an experience which is at the same time irreducible
that

and vague, the sense of existing, of being in the world. Verjr^aily
in the development ojfja hjm&n being tjiis consciousness of existing, w|uclTwe surdy have no reason to doubt is"co^i^n;;i3d^^itp
ammals, is jinked up with the Urge to make ourselves recognised fey
some other person? ''scone witness, fcelpeft ri^al or adversary who,
whatever

may be said, is needed to integrate tlie self, but whose
Met of consciousness can vairy almost indefinitely.

place in the

a whole is correct, it is necessary to see what
no way as an isolated reality, whether it be an
element or a principle, but as an emphasis which I give, not of
course to the whole of my experience, but to that part of it which
I want to safeguard in a special manner against some attack or
IFtihis analysis as

I call

my

ego in

HOMO VIATOR

l6

in this sense that the impossibility of
possible infringement. It is
of the ego has been often and
frontiers
establishing any precise
clear as soon as one underThis
becomes
out.
rightly pointed
stands that the ego can never be thought of as a portion of space.

On the other hand, it cannot be repeated often enough that,

after

here, now; or at any rate there are such close affinities
all,
between these facts that we really cannot separate them. I own
that I cannot in any way conceive how a being for whom there
was neither a here nor a now could nevertheless appear as "I."

the self is

From

this it follows paradoxically enough that the emphasis of
which I have spoken cannot avoid tending to conceive of itself
as an enclosure, that is to say as exactly the thing it is not; and
it is only on deeper reflection that it will be possible to detect
what is deceptive in this localisation.
I spoke of an enclosure, but it is an enclosure which moves, and
what is even more essential, it is vulnerable: a highly sensitive
enclosure. The incomparable analyses of Meredith in The Egoist
would fit in very naturally here. Nobody, perhaps, has ever gone
so far in the analysis of a susceptibility for which the term self-

love is manifestly incomplete. Actually, this susceptibility is rooted
in anguish rather than in love. Burdened with myself, plunged in
this disturbing world, sometimes threatening me, sometimes my
accomplice, I keep an eager look-out for everything emanating
from it which might either soothe or ulcerate the wound I bear

within me, which is my ego. This state is strikingly analogous to
that of a man who has an abscess at the root of his tooth and who
experiments cautiously with heat and cold, acid and sugar, to
get relief. What then is this anguish, this wound? The answer
that it is above all the experience of being torn by a contra*
[is
between the aH which f^'Si^pire'to possess, to annex^ or,
jdiction
still more absurd, to monopolise, and the obscure consciousness

am nothing but ah ..ejnpty void; for,, still, I can
nothing about myself which vrould ^be really myself;
nothing, either, which, would be permanent; nothing which
would be secure against criticism and the passage of time. Hence
thcr^iagLtp be confirmed from outside, by another; this pifaJ

|that

after all I

jaffinn

?

Jay

^

most

seffceiatred

Lto^

This contradiction

is

constantly appearing here.

among

us

Nowhere does

EGO AND

ITS

RELATION TO OTHERS

I*J

it show up in greater relief than in the attitude which our everyday language so aptly terms pose. The poseur who seems only to be
preoccupied with others is in reality entirely taken up with himself. Indeed, the person he is with only interests him in so far as he
is likely to form a favourable picture of him which in turn he will

receive back.

The

other person reflects him, returns to

him

this

picture which he finds so enchanting. It would be interesting to
find out what social climate is most favourable for posing, and
what on the other hand are the conditions most likely to dis-

courage it. It might generally be said that in a virile atmosphere
posing is unmasked immediately and made fun of. At school or in
barracks the poseur has practically no chance of success. A consensus of opinion is almost certain to be formed against him, his
companions see through him at once, each one of them accuses
him of infringing a certain implicit pact, that of the little com
munity to which he belongs. It is not easy to formulate it exactly,
but it is a distinct perception of the incompatibility between a
certain reality in which each one participates and this play-acting
it. On the other hand, the more artia
unreal
in
certain
and,
sense, effeminate the environment,
ficial,
the less the incompatibility will be felt. This is because in such

which degrades and betrays

everything depends upon opinions and appearances, from
follows that seduction and flattery have the last word.
Now, posing is a form of flattery, a manner of paying court

circles

which

it

while seeming to obtrude oneself. Beneath it all we invariably
find self-love and, I might add, pretension. This last, by its very
ambiguity, is particularly instructive. To pretend is not only to
aspire or to aim high, it is also to simulate, and actually there is
simulation in all posing. To realise this we only need to recall what
affectation is in all its forms. From the moment that I become preoccupied about the effect I want to produce on the other person,

and we all
know what even a studied or affected simplicity can be.
Here, however, we must note something of capital importance.
From the very fact that I treat the other person merely as a means
of resonance or an amplifier, I tend to consider him as a sort of

my every act, word and attitude loses its authenticity;

apparatus which
I

can dispose at

enough,

this

manipulate, or of which
idea of him and, strangely
a substitute for the real person, a

I can, or think I can,
will. I

form

my own

idea can become

HOMO VIATOR

!8

shadow

to

which

I shall

truth of the matter

is

come

to refer

that to pose

my

acts

and words. The

always to pose before oneself.
are accustomed to say, but the

is

.", we
play to the gallery
is still the self. To be more exact, we might say that the
gallery
other person is the provisional and as it were accessory medium,
a certain image, or idol of
through which I can arrive at forming
the work of stylisation by which each of us fashions this

"To

.

.

myself;

is
image might be traced step by step. This work helped by social
failure as much as by success. When he who poses is scoffed at by
his companions, he decides, more often than not, that he has to do
with imbeciles and shuts himself up with jealous care in a little
he can be alone with his idol.
private sanctuary where
Here we are in line with the merciless analyses to which the
anti-romantics have subjected the cult of the ego. "But", you may
far? Is there not a
ask, "should we not take care not to go too
should
not
be 'confused with
which
the
of
condition
normal
ego
its abnormalities or perversions?" The question is a very delicate
one. It must in no way be mistaken for a problem of technical
philosophy, with which we are not dealing here and which

involves the question of the very existence of a superior principle

of unity which guides our personal development. What concerns
us here is only to know under what conditions I become conscious
of myself as a person. It must be repeated that these conditions
are essentially social. There is, in particular, every reason to think
that the system of perpetual competition to which the individual
is subjected in the world of to-day cannot fail to increase and

exasperate this consciousness of the ego, I have no hesitation in
saying that if we want to fight effectively against individualism
in its most harmful form, we must find some way of breaking free
from the asphyxiating atmosphere of examinations and competion in which our young people are struggling. "I must win,

not you! I must get above you!"

We can never insist enough upon

how the real sense of fellowship which shows itself in such striking
contrast among any team worthy of the name, has been rendered
weak and anaemic by the competitive system. This system does in
fact encourage each one to compare himself with his neighbour,
to give himself a mark or a number by which he can be measured

against him. Moreover, we must notice a thing which is essential
in our argument: such a system, which makes self-consciousness

EGO AND

ITS

prefer to call

RELATION TO OTHERS

IQ

self-love ten times worse, is at the
you
same time the most depersonalising process possible; for^the thing
in us which has real value cannot be judged by comparison,
having no common measure with anything else. Unfortunately,
or, if

it so,

however, it seems as though people have taken a delight in accumulating every possible confusion concerning this point, and I
have no hesitation in saying that the responsibilities of those who
claim to celebrate the cult of the individual are overwhelming.
Maybe there is no more fatal error than that which conceives of
the ego as the secret abode of originality. To get a better idea of
this we must here introduce the wrongly discredited notion of
gifts. The best part of my personality does not belong to me. I am
in no sense the owner, only the trustee. Except in the realm of
metaphysics, with which we are not dealing to-day, there is no

On

sense in enquiring into the origin of these gifts.
the other hand,
to
know
what
be with
attitude
should
my
very important

it is

regard to them. If I consider myself as their guardian, responsible
for their fruitfulness, that is to say if I recognise in them a call or
even perhaps a question to which I must respond, it will not occur
to me to be proud about them and to parade them before an audience, which, I repeat, really means myself. Indeed, if we come to
think of it, there is nothing in me which cannot or should not be

regarded as a

is pure fiction to imagine a pre-existent self
were bestowed in virtue of certain rights, or
as a
some former merit.
This surely means that I must puncture the illusion, infinitely

gift.

It

on whom

these gifts
recompense for

persistent
leges

it is

am possessed of unquestionable privithe centre of my universe, while other

true, that I

which make

me

people are either mere obstructions to be removed or circumvented, or else those echoing amplifiers, whose purpose is to foster

my

self-complacency. I propose to call this illusion moral egomarking clearly how deeply it has become rooted

centricity, thus

in our very nature. In fact, just as any notions we may have of
cosmography do not rid us from the immediate impression that

the sun and stars go round the earth, so it is not possible for us to
escape completely here below from the preconceived idea which
makes each one tend to establish himself as the centre around
which all the rest have no other function but to gravitate. It is

equally true that this idea or prejudice^ no matter how becomingly

HOMO VIATOR

20

of great egoists, appears, when we
be merely another expression of
a purely biological and animal claim. Moreover, the ill-starred
in the nineteenth century,
philosophies which, particularly
to justify this position not only marked a retrogression

may be adorned in the case
come down to a final analysis,

it

to

attempted

wisdom of civilised humanity was concerned,
cannot be disputed for a moment, have directly helped to

as far as the secular
it

but,
chaos where it is struggling at the
precipitate mankind into the
time.
present
Does it, however, follow that this egolatry, this idolatry of the

must necessarily be met by a rationalistic and impersonal
doctrine? Nothing, I believe, would be farther from the truth.
Whenever men have tried to put such a doctrine into practice we
must own that it has proved itself extremely disappointing. To be

self,

more

exact, such

an experiment has never been and never could

Actually it is of the very essence of this doctrine that
cannot be really put into practice, except perhaps by a few
theorists who are only at ease among abstractions, paying for this
faculty by the loss of all real contact with living beings, and, I
might add, with the great simplicities of existence. For the
immense majority of human beings, the entities which such a
rationalism claims to set up as the object of everybody's reverent
attention are only shams behind which passions incapable of
recognising themselves take cover. It has been given to our
generation, as to that of the end of the eighteenth century and
that of the Second Empire, not only to observe but to suffer the
disastrous effects of the sin of the ideologists. This consists, above
all perhaps, of infinitely intensifying the inner-falsehood, of thick-

be

effective.

it

ening the film which is interposed between a human being and his
true nature until it is almost impossible to destroy it.
Moreover, this same point will enable us to understand the
most characteristic elements in what to-day is commonly accepted
as the meaning of the term "person". Nowadays, the individual
allows himself, legitimately enough, to be likened to an atom
caught up in a whirlwind, or, if you wish, a mere statistical unit;

because most of the time he is simply a specimen among an
infinity of others, since the opinions, which he thinks are his own,
are merely reflections of the ideas accepted in the circles he frequents and handed round in the press which he reads daily.

Thus

EGO AND
he

is

only, as I have

ITS

RELATION TO OTHERS

had occasion

to write,

21

an anonymous unit of

entity "one". But he almost inevitably has the
illusion that his reactions are authentic, so that he submits, while

that

anonymous

the time he imagines he

taking action. It is, on the contrary,
any given situation directly and,
I should add, to make an effective decision upon it. But, it may
be asked, is not this the ego appearing once more? I think not.
Let us understand each other. There could naturally be no question of conceiving of the person as of something distinct from that
other thing, the ego; as if they were in separate compartments.
Such an idea would be completely fictitious. We must go further.
all

is

in the nature of a person to face

The person cannot be regarded

as an element or attribute of the
would be better to say that it is something compelling, which most certainly takes its birth in what appears to me
to be mine, or to be me myself, but this compelling force only
becomes conscious of itself when it becomes a reality. It can thus
in no way be compared with a slight desire. Let us say that it is of
the order of "I will" and not of "I would like
.". I c^aiir^to be
a person in so fajr as J assume responsibility for what I do laid
what I say. But to whom am I responsible, to whom do I acknowledge my responsibility? We must reply that I am conjointly
responsible both to myself and to everyone else, and that this conjunction is precisely characteristic of an engagement of the person, that it is the mark proper to the person. We will not stay any
longer among abstractions where there is always a risk of becoming imprisoned by words. Supposing that I wish or feel bound to
put a certain person on his guard against someone else. I decide
to write him a letter to this effect. If I do not sign my letter I am
still as it were moving in a realm of play, of pastimes, and I might
readily add mystification; I reserve to myself the possibility of
denying my action; I deliberately maintain my position in a zone
as it were halfway between dreams and reality, where selfcomplacency triumphs, the chosen land of those who, in our
time, have made themselves the champions of the gratuitous act.
From the moment that I sign my letter, on the contrary, I have
taken on the responsibility for it, that is to say I have shouldered
ego either. It

.

.

the consequences in advance. I have created the irrevocable not
only for the other person but for myself. Of my own free will I

have brought into existence new decisions which

will

bear upon

22

HOMO VIATOR

my own life with all their weight. This, of course, does not exclude

the possibility that it was a reprehensible, perhaps even a criminal
action to write the letter. There is nevertheless a radical difference
of quality, or more exactly of weight, between this action and that
of writing a letter without signing it. Let us repeat that I tend to
establish myself as a person in so far as I assume responsibility for
acts and so behave as a real being (rather than a dreamer who
reserves the strange power of modifying his dreams, without hav-

my

ing to trouble whether this modification has any repercussions in
the hypothetical outside world in which everybody else dwells).
From the same point of view we might also say that I establish
myself as a person in so far as I really believe in the existence of
others and allow this belief to influence my conduct. What is the
actual meaning of believing here? It means to realise or acknowledge their existence in itself, and not only through those points
of intersection which bring it into relation with my own.
Person engagement community reality: there we have a
sort of chain of notions which, to be exact, do not readily follow
from each other by deduction (actually there is nothing more fallacious than a belief in the value of deduction) but of which the
union can be grasped by an act of the mind. It would be better
not to call this act by the much abused term of intuition, but by
one which on the contrary is too little used that of synopsis,
the act by which a group is held together under the mind's

comprehensive gaze.
As I hinted just now, one cannot strictly say that personality is
good in itself, or that it is an element of goodness: the truth is
much more that it controls the existence of a world where there
is good and evil. I should be inclined to think that ,the ego, so
long as it remains shut up within itself, that is to say the prisoner
of its own feelings, of its covetous desires, and of that dull anxiety
which works upon it, is really beyond the reach of evil as well as
of good. It literally has not yet awakened to reality. Indeed, it is
to be wondered whether there does not exist an infinite number
of beings for whom this awakening has never truly taken place.
There is no doubt that direct judgment cannot be applied to such
beings. I would go further: it seems to me that each of us, in a
considerable part of his life or of his being, is still unawakened,
that is to say that he moves on the margin of reality like a sleep-

EGO AND

RELATION TO OTHERS

ITS

walker. Let us say that the

23

by a sort of vague
fascination, which is localised, almost by chance, in objects arousing sometimes desire, sometimes terror. It is, however, precisely
against such a condition that what I consider the essential characteristic of the person is opposed, the characteristic, that is to say,
of availability (disponibilite).
This, of course, does not mean emptiness, as in the case of an
ego, as such,

is

ruled

available dwelling (local disponible), but it means much rather an
aptitude to give oneself to anything which offers, and to bind oneself by the gift. Again, it means to transform circumstances into

we might even say favours, thus participating in
the shaping of our own destiny and marking it with our seal. It
has sometimes been said of late, "Personality is vocation". It is
true if we restore its true value to the term vocation, which is in
must
reality a call, or more precisely the response to a call.
not, however, be led astray here by any mythological conception.
It depends, in fact, on me whether the call is recognised as a call,
and, strange as it may seem, in this matter it is true to say that it

opportunities,

We

from me and from outside me at one and the same
or
time;
rather, in it we become aware of that most intimate connection between what comes from me and what comes from outside, a connection which is nourishing or constructive and cannot
be relinquished without the ego wasting and tending towards death.
Perhaps we might make this clearer by pointing out that each
of us from the very beginning, appears to himself and to others as
conies both

a particular problem for which the circumstances, whatever they

may be, are not enough to provide a solution. I use the term problem absolutely against

seems to be quite inadJ^^coi^jder^the other person asja
exterior
to
sprt.QK3Le,cbanism
my own ego* a mechanism of which
I must discover tKe "spring oir manner of wording,* even supjgosing
I manage to take him to pieces in the pfocess, I stall never succeed in obtaining anything but a completely exterior knowledge
of him, which is in a way the very denial of his real being? We
must even go further and say that such a knowledge is in reality
sacrilegious and destructive, it does no less than denude its object
of the one thing he has which is of value and so it degrades him
equate. Is it

effectively.

my

will, for it

not obvious that

That means

ant to keep in view

:

if

and there is nbthing which is more importan individual being

that the knowledge of

HOMO VIATOR

24

cannot be separated from the act of love or charity by which this
being is accepted in all which makes of him a unique creature or,
if you like, the image of God. There is no doubt that this expression borrowed from the language of religion renders more exactly
than any other the truth I have in view at the moment. It is, however,

none the

less

necessary to

remember that the truth can be

actively misunderstood by each one of us at any time and that
there will always be something in experience which seems to pro-

vide an argument for him who, following in the footsteps of the
cynics of all time, claims to reduce his fellows to little machines
whose every movement it is only too easy for him to examine and

even to regulate according to his fancy.
It must be understood that these observations are just as directly
applicable to the relationship which binds me to myself, the

manner in which it is given me
indeed a fact that

I also

mechanism and make
as well as possible.

problem of

my

life

it

to apprehend my own being. It is
can conceive of myself as a pure piece of

my chief business to

control the

machine

From

the same standpoint, I can regard the
purely as a problem of tangible results- All

perfectly consistent. The simplest reflection, however,
shows that this mechanism must inevitably serve some purpose
which I am at liberty to choose and which is recognised and
established as a purpose by my own act. We know from experience, however, that this act can remain practically unsuspected
by the very one who has made it. If, indeed, I passively accept a
group of regulations which seem to be imposed upon me by the
circle to which I belong by birth, by the party to which I have
allowed myself to be attached without any genuine thought on
my part, everything goes on as though I were really nothing but
an instrument, a mere cog in the wheel, as if, in short, the
supreme human gift of free action had been refused me* Nevertheless, on reflection we see that all the time this presupposes the
act by which the person has failed to recognise himself, or more
exactly, has alienated that which alone could confer the dignity
which is proper to his nature.
What then is this principle which it is given him thus to fail to

that

is

recognise or on the contrary to guard and promote? It is easy to
discover it if we penetrate the meaning of the notion of availability to

which

I referred

a

little

way

back.

The being who

is

EGO AND

ITS

RELATION TO OTHERS

25

ready for anything is the opposite of him who is occupied or
cluttered up with himself. He reaches out, on the contrary, beyond
his narrow self, prepared to consecrate his being to a cause which
is

greater than he

Here, moreover,
tive fidelity

is,

but which at the same time he makes

it is

which

is

his

own.

the order of creation, of power, and of crea-

borne in upon

us.

We

go wrong when

we

confuse creating with producing. That which is essential in the
creator is the act by which he places himself at the disposal of
something which, no doubt in one sense depends upon him for its
existence, but which at the same time appears to him to be beyond

what he is and what he judged himself capable of drawing directly
and immediately from himself. This obviously applies to the case
of the artist and to the mysterious gestation which alone makes the
appearance of a work of art possible. It is not necessary to insist
on this. We must remember, however, that the creative process,
though less apparent, is none the less effective wherever there is
personal development of any kind. Only here what the person has
to create is not some work in a way outside himself and capable
of assuming an independent existence, it is his own self in very
truth. How can we help seeing that the personality is not to be
conceived of apart from the act by which it creates itself, yet at
the same time this creation depends in some way upon a superior
order? It will seem to the person that sometimes he invents the
order, sometimes he discovers it, and reflection will moreover
show that there is always a continuity between the invention and
the discovery, and that no line of demarcation as definite as that
ordinarily accepted by common sense can be established between
the one and the other.
If this i$ so, it must be seen that the personality cannot in any
way be compared to an object of which we can say it is there, in
other words that it is given, present before our eyes, that it is part
of a collection of things which can, of their essence, be counted,
or again, that it is a statistical unit which can be noted in the calculations of a sociologist employing the methods of an engineer.
Or again, if we no longer consider things from outside but from
within, that is to say from the point of view of the person himself,
it does not seem that strictly speaking he can say "I am" of himself. He is aware of himself far less as a being than as a desire to
rise above everything which he is and is not, above the actuality

HOMO VIATOR

26

in which he really feels he is involved and has a part to play, but
which does not satisfy him, for it falls short of the aspiration with

which he identifies himself. His motto is not sum but surswn.
We must be on our guard here. It certainly would not do to
underestimate the danger of a certain romanticism which belongs
to every age. This consists of sytematically depreciating that which
of some vaguely imagined and wished-for possibility,
is, in favour
of which the transcendent appeal seems to be bound up with the
fact that it is not and perhaps never can be fully realised. There
can be no question here of an aspiration of that kind, for such an
and not from the personaspiration really springs from the ego
of
form
a
mere
still
it
is
Here, and indeed
self-complacency.
ality,
everywhere as I see it, the necessity for incarnation must be given
an important place. What I have been trying to say is that the
it tends to become
personality is only realised in the act by which
incarnate (in a book, for instance, or an action or in a complete
the same time it is of its very essence never to fix itself
life), but at
itself finally in this particular incarnation. Why?
participates in the inexhaustible fullness of the being
which it emanates. There lies the deep reason for which it

or crystallise

Because

from

it

impossible to think of personality or the personal order without
at the same time thinking of that which reaches beyond them

is

both, a supra-personal reality, presiding over all their initiative,
which is both their beginning and their end. Here it would be
well, if I

had the time,

to

mark as clearly as possible the opposition,

not a strong enough word between this suprapersonal reality and its rivals, I should rather say its caricatures,
which are no more than idols, and have led to the incredibly
numerous false religions so prevalent, alas, in our time.
difference

is

Here comes the great question to which I would draw your
attention in ending this paper: What is the sign by which we can
discover whether the personality is indeed surpassing and transcending itself or whether, on the contrary, it is falling back in

some degree and sinking below

its

true level? This question

is

tragically acute to-day in presence of the fascinated and fanatical
multitudes who, taking their orders without a shadow of enquiry

or reflection, rush singing to their death. Can we really speak of
a transcendence in this case? Has that which is personal reached
its fulfilment in the
supra-personal? I do not think we can

EGO AND

ITS

RELATION TO OTHERS

2J

by a pure and simple yes or no to this question. Most
certainly there is as it were a promise or aspiration in this sacrifice which confers an undeniable nobility upon it and
places it
reply

above any conduct based on selfish calculations. Yet, at
the same time, we cannot avoid seeing that this sort of collective
heroism, in so far as it partakes of the nature of an intoxication,
looks most disquietingly like various kinds of sub-human behaviour, and as such falls outside the order in which any true values
find their expression. It seems to me that it is precisely from the
point of view of these values and of these values alone that the
indispensable discrimination, of which I just now pointed out the
necessity, can be made. It is the property of these values, however,
to be universal, and, if for the moment we do not consider the case
of the artist as such, for he must be judged by a special metainfinitely

physical set of rules, we shall notice that among these universal
values there are two which stand out above the rest. They are the
value of truth and that ofjustice. Equally, I dare to claim that any
"religion" which tends to obliterate them, even momentarily,
it is tending to be degraded into
need to insist upon the terribly concrete corolfollowing from these propositions, which bear the stamp of

proves by that very fact that
idolatry. I scarcely
laries

such harmless
cession

made

generalities. It is clear in particular, that every coneither to racialism or to the Nietzschean or pseudo-

Nietzschean ideology which grants the masters the supreme right
of treating facts like a plastic substance, easy to manipulate to suit
their will, it is clear, I repeat, that every step taken in such a
direction would be in no way a transcendence but a retrogression.
We cannot be severe enough towards those who at the present
time have thus confused men's minds.
Of course, you must not misunderstand these suggestions. There
is no question of returning to the dismal and bare rationalism
which, alas, has for some forty years formed our official gospel.
The claim of universality is impossible to define. True Christian
philosophy and theology have the imperishable glory, not only of
having never been mistaken about it, but of having honoured it
and established it in the indefeasible foundations of our being. It
is merely a question of incorporating this claim in the most concrete forms of human experience, without ever despising them,
but, on the contrary, recognising that the most humble of them,

HOMO VIATOR

28
if it is fully lived,

can go immeasurably deep.

You

will, I

know,

me to end this lecture with some words of Gustave Thibon
whom you heard in this very place only a few days ago, and who
seems to me to have admirably expressed the need for incarnation
allow

from which the personality cannot escape without betraying
true mission, without losing

itself

among

its

the mirages of abstrac-

without paradoxically reducing itself to one impoverished
indigent form of the very ego it falsely claimed to surpass in
every way.
"You feel you are hedged in; you dream of escape; but beware
of mirages. Do not run or fly away in order to get free: rather dig
in the narrow place which has been given you; you will find God
there and everything. God does not float on your horizon, he
tion,

sleeps in

your substance. Vanity runs, love digs. If you fly away
your prison will run with you and will close in
because of the wind of your flight; if you go deep down into

from

yourself,

yourself it will disappear in paradise."

LE PEUCH.
November,

To HENRI

POURRAT

SKETCH OF A PHENOMENOLOGY AND
A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE*
J.N

A STUDY SUCH

as the

can be no question of

one I am here undertaking there
from a particular definition and

starting

endeavouring to explain its content progressively, I propose rather
to appeal to a special experience which it must be supposed you
have. This experience, which is that of "I hope . .", must, like
.

the fundamental experience of faith, "I believe
.", be purified;
or, more exactly, we must pass from this experience in its diluted
or diffused state to the same experience, touched I do not say
absolutely conceived at its highest tension or again at its point
of complete saturation.
You must not therefore be surprised to find me starting from an
"I hope" of a very low order which will constitute a negative
point of departure.
"I hope that James will arrive in time for lunch to-morrow and
not just in the afternoon." This, of course, means that I hope so
because I should like to have James with me for as long as possible;
and I have reason to think that what I want will come about: I
know that he does not intend to return to his office and could
therefore catch an early train, etc.
can already detect two elements here which are always found
together: there is a wish and a certain belief. I am, however, right
in calling this a diluted condition, because in such a case I am
near to what we can term the point of indifference. After all, it is
not very important if James only arrives at five o'clock; there is
.

.

QWe

nothing there for me to take to heart notice this expression which
we shall need to remeinber. Moreover, I observe that the reasons
for hoping are here exterior to myself, they are outside my being,
far from having their roots in the very depths of what I am. In
am
reality it is merely a calculation concerning certain chances I
considering, a practical little problem of probabilities. Moreover,
1 Lecture
given to the Scolastieat de Fourvtir* in February, 1942.

HOMO VIATOR

go
if I find

James boring or

am

his visit is inconvenient, I might quite
for lunch,"

he will arrive in time
us suppose, on the contrary, that I

easily say: "I

afraid

am going through
Now let
a time of trial, eitiher in my private affairs or in those of the group
to which I belong. I long for some deliverance which would bring
the trial to an end. The "I hope" in all its strength is directed
towards salvation. It really is a matter of my coming out of a
darkness in which I am at present plunged, and which may be
or slavery. It is obviillness, of separation, exile
the "I hope" from a
ously impossible in such cases to separate
it
is
which
of
situation
of
certain type
really a part. Hope is
situated within the framework of the trial, not only corresponding
to it, but constituting our being's veritable response. I have used
the darkness of

the metaphorical term of darkness, but this metaphor has nothing
accidental about it. It is, indeed, true that throughout a trial of
the kind I have in mind, I find I am deprived for an indefinite
period of a certain light for which I long. In fact, I should say
that every trial of this order can be considered as a form of
captivity.

Let us try to get a closer view of the meaning of the word captivity, or rather let us examine the characteristics of any state
which can be described as "being a captive or prisoner." A special
kind of endurance is, of course, involved, but what are the conditions under which endurance becomes part of the experience of
captivity? Here we must emphasise the part played by duration.
I should consider myself a captive if I found myself not merely
it were pledged by external constraint to
a compulsory mode of existence involving restrictions of every
kind touching my personal actions. In addition, that which

precipitated into, but as

characterises all the situations

we

are evoking at the

moment,

is

that they invariably imply the impossibility, not necessarily of
moving or even of acting in a manner which is relatively free, but

of rising to a certainfullness of life, which may be in the realms of sensation
or even of thought in the strict sense of the word. It is quite clear, for
instance, that the artist or the writer who suffers from a prolonged
sterility has literally a sense of being in prison, or, if you prefer,
in exile, as though he had really been taken out of the light in

which he normally has
all captivity partakes

his being.

We

can, therefore, say that

of the nature of alienation* It

may be

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

31

in reality that, in tearing me out of myself, it gives me an
opportunity of realising far more acutely than I should have

done without

it,

to regain. This

the nature of that lost integrity which I now long
illustrated in the case of the invalid for whom

is

word health arouses a wealth of associations generally unsuspected by those who are well. -Yet, at the same time, we must
determine not only what is positive but what is illusory in this
idea of health which the sick man cherishes. A similar problem is
presented when the beloved being whose disappearance I deplore
seems to me more real and distinct now he is no longer with me
than when I was able to enjoy a mutual and direct relationship
with him.
I will not elaborate the details of the discussion which would
take us away from our subject. I will merely remark that this
method of reasoning does not seem to open the way for hope to
us: quite on the contrary it is likely to land us in an anguish
the

whence there is no escape, to make us prisoners of an experience
which tears our hearts, where fact and memory are endlessly
opposed and, far from merging together, are bound to contradict
each other unrelentingly. All that we can say is that this form of
reasoning brings into stronger relief the fundamental situation to
which it is hope's mission to reply as to a signal of distress. But, it
may be objected, are not some situations, where the tragic element
seems to be absent, of such a nature as nevertheless to encourage
or even to invite the exercise of hope? The woman who is expecting a baby, for instance, is literally inhabited by hope. It seems to
me, however, that such examples, and I would even include that
of the adolescent who anxiously awaits the coming of love, only
seem to' confirm what was said above. As a matter of fact, the soul
always turns towards a light which it does not yet perceive, a light
yet to be born, in the hope of being delivered from its present
darkness, the darkness of waiting, a darkness which cannot be
prolonged without dragging it in some way towards an organic
dissolution. And might we not say in passing that it is from this
point of view that such peculiarities as the aberrations frequent
in adolescents and expectant mothers are to be explained?

In reality, we should probably go a step further in this direction
and, interpreting the phenomena somewhat differently from
Plato and the leaders of traditional spiritualism, recognise that

HOMO VIATOR

32

quite a general aspect under which human existence
a captivity and that, precisely when it takes on this
as
appears
form, it becomes so to speak subject to hope. It would actually be

there

is

easy to show, and as we proceed we shall probably realise more
that there is also an ever-present possibility of degrading this
same existence to a state in which it would gradually lose all
capacity for hope. By a paradox which need surprise only the very
superficial thinker, the less life is experienced as a captivity the less the

fully,

soul will be able to see the shining

we

feel sure

of that veiled^ mysterious light) which,
without any analysis, illumines the very centre of

hope's dwelling-place. It

is

incontestable, for instance, that free-

thought impregnated with naturalism, however it may struggle,
alas with increasing success, to obliterate certain great contrasts
and to flood the world with the harsh light of the lecture hall,
however it may at the same time advertise what I have elsewhere
styled the category of the perfectly natural it is, I repeat, incontestable that such a dogmatically standardised free-thought
eventually runs the risk of depriving souls of the very rudiments
of secular hope.

But with what kind of hope are we really concerned? What
is its object?
It seems very important to me to stress here, in connection with
what I have just said about existence in general being a captivity,

exactly

by a nisus which is peculiar to it, tends inevitably to
transcend the particular objects to which it at first seems to be
attached. Later on we shall have to recognise clearly the metaphysical implications of this remark. But even now it is possible
to appreciate the distinction in tone between "I hope
*", the
absolute statement, and "I hope that
." This distinction clearly
runs parallel to that which obtains in all religious philosophy and
which opposes "I believe" to "I believe that."
The philosopher must also consider another point of an equally
decisive nature. It bears on the fundamental characteristics of the
CC
.". This subject is indeed in no
subject in I hope
way identical
with the "I myself
.", who is nevertheless present, or at any
rate is likely to come to the surface whenever there is a question
not of hope but of certainty or even doubt. Here I must refer back
to a group of ideas which I worked out a little while ago on the
subject of the Ego and Its Relation to Others. The ego, I said, very
that hope,

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

,

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

33

often, in fact almost invariably, needs to refer to some other person felt or conceived of as an opponent or a witness, or again

merely summoned or imagined as an echo or a rectifier. "You
have your doubts, because you are ill-informed or because you
lack inner stability, or for any other reason; as for me, I am sure
and (be it understood) I am proud of the fact." Or, on the contrary, "You are quite sure of this because you are simple, or badly
informed, or for any other reason; as for me, on the other hand,
I have a more critical sense than you, therefore I am in doubt."
Naturally, I do not mean that / am sure or / doubt inevitably
implies a position accentuated in this way; but what is certain is
that the underlying meaning which animates the / am sure or
/ doubt is not really distorted, it does not lose its actual nature
through such an accentuation. The case is quite different with
/ hope. Here there is not, and there cannot be the note of defiance
or of provocation which, on the contrary, so easily becomes essential to / doubt and / am sure. What is the cause of this difference?
It is surely due to the fact that "I hope" is not orientated in the
same way: there is no statement directed towards, and at the
same time against, some other person either present or imagined.
Of course there is nothing to prevent me from saying in certain
cases, "For my part, I hope, whilst you do not." But there would
be none of that suggestion of aggressive self-complacency which,
on the contrary, so often characterises "I am sure" or "I doubt".
This will be elucidated, I think, if we take the trouble to
examine the 'difference between hope and optimism. It is a difference which may seem to be more of a musical than a logical order
and which accordingly is easy enough to misunderstand. Its
importance, however, should not be overlooked.
The optimist is he who has a firm conviction, or in certain cases
just a vague feeling, that things tend to "turn out for the best".
This may concern some definite situation, some precise difficulty:
it may have to do with difficulties, conflict and contradictions in
general. It goes without saying that optimism can take very different forms. There is a purely sentimental optimism and an
optimism with pretensions to reason (which to tell the truth is perhaps merely a camouflaged sentimentality). There are some kinds
of optimism which maintain that they are based on practical
experience; others, on the contrary, claim to rest on meta-

HOMO VIATOR

34

physical or even religious arguments. I am inclined to think, however, that these differences are far less weighty than one might be

tempted

to believe at

first.

It

is

by no means

certain that optimism

does not always indicate the same disposition, the same habitus.
Perhaps such a thing as deep optimism does not exist. The metaphysics of Leibnitz are deep, no doubt, but not in so far as they
are optimistic, in so far as they are presented as a theodicy. When
we come down to a final analysis, the optimist, as such, always

upon an experience which is not drawn from the most intimate and living part of himself, but, on the contrary, is considered
from a sufficient distance to allow certain contradictions to become
relies

alternated or fused into a general harmony. The optimist does not
hesitate to extrapolate the conclusions which we are led to if only
we are willing to <e consider things" thoroughly, from a sufficient

distance

and over a wide enough

stretch. "It

always comes out

"; "We shall be bound to see
."; "If only
right in the end
we don't allow ourselves to stop too soon ..." such are the
.

.

formulae which constantly recur in the speeches of optimists.
Notice that the word "speechs" is important here. The optimist is

maker of speeches. There is in the natural and favourdirected
ably
development to which he so complacently clings
something which readily lends itself to oratorical sequences and
essentially a

written expression. In parenthesis we note that there is a pessimism which is the exact counterpart of such optimism. It is
oratorical in the same way, and there is no fundamental distinction between them. They are like the inside and outside of the

same garment.
To go on from what has already been stated, we should say that
this optimism (or, for the matter of that, this pessimism which
does not really differ from it) remains strictly in the province of
the "I myself." The optimist introduces himself indeed as a spectator with particularly keen sight. "If your vision is as good as
mine, you are bound to see
."; "As your eyes are not as perfect
.

.

do not hesitate to trust to my testimony and to my clearsightedness. ..." To be sure, the fact must be recognised that in
as mine,

the case of a given individual (seen in concrete reality and not
through the writings of a theorist, be he economist or metaphysician), optimism cannot always be separated from an indistinct faith which cannot be shared by the spectator as such: but

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE
what

is

important

for us here

is

optimism in

its

35
essence, that

is

to

say precisely in so far as it does not include the intervention of
faith, or even the direct participation, the engagement, which
conies into being as soon as life is regarded as something other

than purely external. But we have already seen, and we recognise
more and more clearly, that he who hopes, inasmuch as his hope
is real and not to be reduced to a mere
platonic wish, seems to
himself to be involved in some kind of a process; and it is only
from this point of view that it is possible to realise what is specific,
and, I should add super-rational, perhaps also super-relational,
in hope. For, to use once again the expression I have so often

employed, hope is a mystery and not a problem. We might point
out from the same point of view that hope is very difficult to
describe. Indeed, when I try to represent it to myself I am almost
inevitably led to alter its true nature and to consider it as presumption. It is thus that we come to substitute "to flatter myself*'
for "to hope". But in reality if we succeed in learning its meaning
more accurately or, which comes to the same thing, in imagining
vividly enough what hoping amounts to in one of the situations
described further back, we shall recognise that "I hope" cannot
ever be taken to imply: "I am in the secret, I know the purpose
of God or of the gods, whilst you are a profane outsider; and
moreover it is because I have the benefit of special enlightenment
that I say what I do." Such an interpretation is as unfair and
inaccurate as it is possible to be, it does not take into account all
that there is of humility, of timidity, of chastity in the true character
of hope. The difficult task of the philosopher is precisely to react
strongly against such an interpretation, and at the same time to
understand why it is so difficult to avoid making it. How can we
fail to

see that humility,

modesty or

never consent to be defined, that
their secret to the

is

chastity, by their essence, can
to say they will never deliver

mercy of rationalistic

investigation?

Hence the

clumsy inadequacy of the interto
fall back upon in seeking to
we
have
generally
pretations
understand what I term the mystery of hope. For instance, adopt-

fundamental

insufficiency, the

ing the realistic point of view, people are ready enough to say,
"Does not the hope of the invalid, the prisoner or the exile boil
down in the end to a sort of organic refusal to accept an intolerable situation as final? The amount of vitality which the

HOMO VIATOR

36

individual retains can be measured by this refusal, and do we not
find that, if he has been worn down to a certain point of exhaustion, he will become incapable of exercising the hope which

him

supported

in the

first

stages of his trial?"

must be acknowledged that the notion of vitality here referred
to is vague enough in itself. But what is extremely characteristic
is the tendency of the argument to belittle hope: "Let us have no
., etc." In this way its
illusions, hope is not anything but
It

.

.

disputed. It is a matter for reflection to discover
shall return to this
the origin of this anxiety to depreciate.
at
it is to be noted that withBut
on.
the
same
time
further
point
specific nature

is

We

out any doubt the soul can be in a state of drowsiness which tends
to paralyse every kind of reaction; it is quite clear, for instance,
that cold or hunger can reduce me to a state in which I cannot
concentrate my attention on any idea, or a fortiori use my powers
of reflection; it would be no less absurd to draw materialistic conclusions from this as to the nature of attention or thought. As it
happens, experience seems to establish that hope is able to survive
an almost total ruin of the organism; if then it is vitality in some
sense, it is very difficult to determine what that sense is, for it has
nothing in common with the meaning we attribute to the word in
speaking of the vitality of a healthy body. At any rate, the principle must be laid down that any physical theory of hope is absurd
appearances, contradictory; perhaps we
maintaining that hope coincides with the
spiritual principle itself. Thus we must be careful not to think that
we can understand it by psychological suppositions; these as a
matter of fact ,are always imagined a posteriori, to explain something which is an abiding mystery by its nature. To convince ourselves of this it is enough to observe that we are quite unable to

and, according to

might be

tell

before

resources

all

justified in

an ordeal what that ordeal will do
shall find we possess with which to

we

to us

face

and what

it.

The truth is that there can strictly speaking be no hope except
when the temptation to despair exists. Hope is the act by which
this temptation is actively or victoriously overcome. The victory

may

not invariably involve any sense of effort: I should even be
quite ready to go so far as to say that such a feeling is not compatible with hope in its purest form.
What then does it mean to despair? We will not stop short here

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

37

with symptoms and signs. What is the essence of the act of despair?
It seems as though it were always capitulation before a certain
fatum laid down by our judgment. But the difference between
capitulation and non-capitulation, though certain, is hard to
define. Let us suppose that I develop some incurable illness and
that my condition shows no improvement. It may be that I say of
myself, "I cannot be cured", or that it is the doctors who tell me,
with or without tact, that there is no possible prospect of my
recovery (they are, for instance, warning me in order to spare me
from disappointments which would wear me out to no purpose).
In the first case it seems as though I decide and defy any real or
possible contradictions. "You, who claim to know something

about

it,

say that

I

can get

better;

but

I myself,

who know how

and who have inner experience of all my symptoms, I tell
you that you are mistaken and that I cannot recover." In this
way, I pronounce my own sentence, and at the same time my
relations and my doctor will no doubt feel that I have made conI feel

my

constitution to put up
ditions as unfavourable as possible for
an effective resistance. Is there not now every chance that, discouraged by this sentence, it will feel obliged to confirm it? So it

comes about
I shall really

that, far from merely foreseeing my own destiny,
have precipitated it. Strangely enough, things may

very well happen quite differently in the second case we are considering. It may be that the verdict communicated to me, coming
from outside, will arouse in me not merely the strength to deny it,
but to prove it to be wrong in fact. At least we can say that in this
second case I do not appear in principle to be furthering my nonrecovery, unless I ratify and thus make my own the sentence
which has been communicated to me. But it remains true that a
certain margin is left me, a certain possibility of contradiction,
precisely because it was someone else and not I who declared my

recovery to be impossible.
However, it is still necessary here to distinguish between two
inner attitudes which are very different and which help to decide
the event itself. To capitulate, in the strongest sense of the word,
is not only, perhaps is not at all, to accept the given sentence or

even to recognise the inevitable as such, it is to go to pieces under
disarm before the inevitable. It is at bottom to
renounce the idea of remaining oneself, it is to be fascinated by
this sentence, to

HOMO VIATOR

38
the idea of one's

own

destruction to the point of anticipating this
To accept, on the contrary, can mean to

very destruction
hold on and to keep a firm hold of oneself, that is to say to safeguard one's integrity. Because I am condemned never to recover
from this illness, or not to come out of this prison I do not mean
to give up, I do not consent, from this very moment, to be the useless creature which my illness or my captivity may finally make of
me; I will counter the fascination which the idea of this creature
might have for me with the firm determination to remain what
I am. It may thus come about that by accepting an inevitable
destiny which I refuse with all my strength to anticipate, I will
find a way of inward consolidation, of proving my reality to
myself, and at the same time I shall rise infinitely above this
fatum to which I have never allowed myself to shut my eyes.
Herein without any doubt lies the power and greatness of stoicism,
itself.

it must be recognised that the stoic is always
He strengthens himself, no doubt, but
himself.
within
imprisoned
he does not radiate. I would go as far as to say that he affords us
the highest expression, the greatest degree of sublimation of the
"I myself". He bears himself and that means that above all he

but, at the

same time,

as though he had no neighbours, as
life
though he were concerned only with himself and had no responsibility towards anyone else.
It is obvious that in hope there is something which goes infinitely
further than acceptance, or one might say more exactly that it is
a non-acceptance, but positive and hence distinguishable from
revolt. Non-acceptance can indeed be a mere stiffening or contraction. When it is this it is powerless and can be, in the same way
as its opposite, abdication, a manner of working out one's own

controls his interior

defeat, of relinquishing control. The important question for us is
to know how it can take on the positive character. How, if I do

not accept can I avoid tightening myself up, and, instead, relax
my very non-acceptance? We might compare this with, the
supple movements of the swimmer or the practised skier. But our
difficulty is that it is very hard to conceive how there can be a
suppleness and grace in something which, on the face of it, appears
to be negation. We can begin to see the solution of this strange
problem by reflecting that tightening up or stiffening, on whatin

ever physical or spiritual level

we may be

considering

it,

always

A METAPHYSIC OF HOPE

39

suggests the presence of the same physical factor, which, if not
exactly fear, is at any rate of the same order, a concentration of

on the

the essence of which is probably a certain
introduce the element of patience into nonacceptance we at once come very much nearer to hope. It seems
then that there exists a secret and rarely discovered connection
between the way in which the ego is either centred or not centred
in itself, and its reaction to the duration of time, or more precisely
to the temporal order, that is to say to the fact that change is
the self

impatience. If

self,

we

A

simple expression borrowed from everyday
a help here: to lake one*s time. He who stiffens and
rebels does not know how to take his time. What exactly do these
words, so foreign to the vocabulary of technical philosophy, mean?
'Take your time", an examiner would say, for example, to a
flurried candidate. That means, do not force the personal rhythm,
the proper cadence of your reflection, or even of your memory, for
possible in reality.

language

is

6

if

you do you

will spoil

your chances, you

will

be

likely to say at

random the first words which come into your head. It may seem
that we have wandered very far from hope in the strict sense of
the word. I do not think so, and this is how I am going to try to
explain the analogy, or more exactly, perhaps, the secret affinity
between hope and relaxation. Does not he who hopes, and, as we
have seen, has to contend with a certail trial comparable to a
form of captivity, tend to treat this trial and to proceed in regard
to it as he who is patient towards himself treats his inexperienced
young ego, the ego which needs educating and controlling. Above
all he never lets it contract but, on the other hand, he does not
allow it to kick over the traces or take control prematurely or
unwarrantably. From this point of view, hope means first accepting the trial as an integral part of the self, but while so doing it
considers it as destined to be absorbed and transmuted by the
inner workings of a certain creative process.
Further back I spoke of patience with oneself; perhaps it is still
more instructive now to consider patience with others. This most
certainly consists in never hustling or being rough with another
person, more exactly, in never trying to substitute our own
rhythm for his by violence. Neither should the other person be
treated as though he lacked an autonomous rhythm, and could
accordingly be forced or bent to suit us. Let us say positively this

HOMO VIATOR

4-O

time that it consists in placing our confidence in a certain process
of growth and development. To give one's confidence does not
merely mean that one makes an act of theoretical acceptance with
no idea of intervention, for that would, in fact, be to abandon the
other purely and simply to himself. No, to have confidence here
seems to mean to embrace this process, in a sense, so that we promote it from within. Patience seems, then, to suggest a certain
temporal pluralism, a certain pluralisation of the self in time. It is
radically opposed to the act by which I despair of the other person, declaring that he is good for nothing, or that he will never
understand anything, or that he is incurable. That is, of course,
the same despair which makes me proclaim that I shall never be

cured, that I shall never see the end of my captivity, etc. It seems,
strangely enough, that, in hoping, I develop in connection with
the event, and perhaps above all through what it makes of me,

a type of relationship, a kind of intimacy comparable to that
I have with the other person when I am patient with him.
Perhaps we might go so far as to speak here of a certain domesticating of circumstances, which might otherwise, if we allowed
them to get the better of us, frighten us into accepting them as
a fatum. If we look no further than its etymological meaning,
patience appears to be just a simple letting things alone, or allowing them to take their course, but if we take the analysis a little
further we find that such non-interference is of a higher order than
indifference and implies a subtle respect for the other person's
need of time to preserve his vital rhythm, so that it tends to exer-

which

cise a transforming influence upon him which is comparable to
that which sometimes rewards love. It should moreover be shown

how here and there pure causality is utterly left behind. Of course
patience can easily be degraded; it can become mere weakness, or
mere complacency, precisely in so far as it betrays the principle of
charity which should animate

hope

likewise

is

it.

But can

liable to degradations of the

it

be overlooked that

same order, when,

for

found in the mere spectator who, without being in
the least involved in the game or race at which he is present,
hopes that one or other of the competitors will succeed, and at
the same time, in a confused sort of way, congratulates himself
that he is running no risk and has no direct part to play in the

instance,

struggle.

it is

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

To

4!

the truth, I have no doubt that the comparison I have
suggested will appear paradoxical and absurd. In the case of
patience there is question of a being, but here we are not dealing
tell

with a being but a situation which in its essence has nothing
personal about it. On reflection, however, the gap tends to
narrow, perhaps because I can hope or not hope in the being of
whom I am in a sense in charge, and we shall have to ask ourselves if "I place my hope in you" is not really the most authentic
form of "I hope '. But it is not everything; the trial affects me,
it attacks my being so that I am
likely to be permanently altered
it.
a
Thus
there
is
risk
that
illness will make of me that
by
deformed creature, a catalogued and professionalised invalid,
who thinks of himself as such and contracts in all respects the
habitus of illness. It is the same with captivity or exile, etc., and,
I should say, with every sort of misfortune. In so far as I hope,
I detach myself from this inner determinism which is rather like
a cramp, threatening, when the trial is upon me, to change me
into one of those degraded, abnormal, and in the end perhaps
9

hypnotised expressions of
despair, because it is above

We

come

human

personality produced by
things a fascination.
here, I think, to one of the vital centres of our suball

But immediately an objection presents itself which must be
squarely faced. It does not seem possible to consider hope purely
and simply as an inner action of defence by which I should be
able to safeguard my integrity when it is threatened by an obsession: or more exactly, it is not the actual safeguard which we are
aiming at; if this is secured by hope, it can only be indirectly.
Everything goes to show that hope does not bear upon what is
in me, upon the region of my interior life, but much more on
what arises independently of my possible action, and particularly
of my action on myself: I hope for the return of someone who
is absent, for the defeat of the enemy, for peace, which will give
back to my country the liberties of which disaster has robbed it.

ject.

If

it is

permissible to say, as I already implied above, that hope
fluid, it remains to be seen exactly

has the power of making things

how and upon what

this

power

is

exercised.

Let us again this time make use of an example. For a long time
a father has been without news of his son. The boy had gone on
a mission to a distant country, telling his relations not to worry

HOMO VIATOR

42

for some time, but his silence is unduly prorise
to the worst fears. Yet the father persists
and
gives
longed
in hoping. Each day he awaits the letter which would bring his
anxiety to an end. To despair would be to say, "I have been
if

he did not write

disappointed so many times there is every reason to expect that
I shall be again to-day"; it would be to declare this wound incurable, this wound which not only is inflicted by separation but
which is separation. "I shall never again be anything but the
wounded, mutilated creature I am to-day. Death alone can end
it will only do so by ending me myself. That is
able
to do for me destiny, that strange doctor
destiny
which can only cure the disease by killing the sufferer." The
despairing man not only contemplates and sets before himself the
dismal repetition, the eternalisation of a situation in which he is
caught like a ship in a sea of ice. By a paradox which is difficult

my

and

trouble;

all

is

to conceive,

he anticipates

this repetition.

moment, and simultaneously he has the

He

sees it at the

bitter certainty that this

anticipation will not spare him from living through the same trial
until the extinction which, to tell the truth, he antici-

day by day

pates likewise, not seeing it as a remedy but as a supreme outrage
to the departed for whom his mourning does at least ensure the

shadow of survival. Despair here appears as an enchantment, or
more exactly as a kind of witchcraft, whose evil action has a
bearing on all which goes to form the very substance of a person's
life.

Let us be still more precise. Each instant, my impressions, in
the very general sense which Hume gives this word, stand out
against a certain "background" in which reflection alone is able
to discern, somewhat imperfectly perhaps, what belongs to the
past or the future or what is only a horizon of floating possibilities.

Contrary to what one is often tempted to admit, it is not true
"background" contrasts with given facts, as
though it were merely imagined; it is also "given" in another

to argue that this

form, that for instance in which we anticipate the future, and
rejoice, grow sad or worry about a certain prospect. It is precisely because we place ourselves unwarrantably on the "ground
of facts" that we are led to formulate the principle that the future
is not given
and can therefore only be imagined. It would be

much

nearer the truth to say that in anticipating I receive, I

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

43

pocket in advance, I take a certain advance percentage, on a
given fact which is to come, and is quite literally credited to me.
does not greatly matter here

Actually

it

different

from the

What

rest

I just called

which we

if

these advances are

one day.
separated

shall effectively realise

the substance of

life

can

now be

from the act, almost impossible to describe, by which I am
aware of this substance at a given moment as one is aware of the
quality of a wine or the water of a precious stone. Reflective
analysis will no doubt here suggest the idea of a relationship
between the immediate, the anticipated and also the remembered
which we might say backs the operation. If we kept to the idea
of this relationship we should easily come to speak of a triangulation which each of us is making at every moment of his existence.
That, however, would only be a very imperfect approximation,
for by this triangulation I could never determine anything but
my position at a given moment. Now, the appreciation which is
here under discussion is something quite different from a simple
registration, indeed it tends at each moment to convert itself into

a global judgment, valid ubique et semper and thereby infinitely
transcending everything which is limited to the hie et num.
The truth is that it is impossible to rest satisfied here with an
interpretation expressed in terms of relationships. An amateur
psychologist, whose name I have unfortunately forgotten,
brought out in a paper, which I believe is still unpublished, the
importance of what he very aptly called "U entrain a la vie (enthusiasm for living)". The appreciation, or a fortiori the triangulation, of which I mentioned the possibility just now, is in reality
nothing but the intellectualised and inadequate expression of
that which is dynamically known to us as enthusiasm or ardour
for life. This term of ardour, unphilosophical as it may be, has
the merit of retaining and as it were incarnating a metaphor
which we cannot reduce to abstract terms without thereby condemning ourselves to miss the essential and inescapable connection which exists between life and a flame. In passing, how can
we help noticing like Dr. Minkowski, that certain metaphors
furnish us with settings for the human experience "to exist" to

we have the right to regard them as veritable
concrete categories. It is on this flame, which is life, that the
malevolent action of despair is exercised. We might say to put

such a point that

HOMO VIATOR

44

in another way that ardour renders soluble or volatile what
without it would at every moment tend to prevent existence. It
is turned towards a certain matter in the personal becoming which
it is its function to consume. Where, however, "the evil spell"
exists, this flame turns away from the matter which is its natural
food, to devour itself. This is what we express admirably when
we say of a being "he preys on himself". 1 From this point of
view, despair can be compared to a certain spiritual autophagy.
it

We must notice here, and keep in mind for all that follows, the
part played by the self, that action which consists not only of
reflecting but of making the self the centre.
Do these indications throw any light on our problem? In the
example we were considering that of the son of whom there is
no news it is clear that the disappointing fact, the arrival of
the postman who does not bring the longed-for letter, illustrates
what I was speaking of as something to be consumed or dissolved.
The term of liquefaction expresses the same process. But we must
not forget the criticism to which we have previously subjected the

We might say that a natural optimism
before
which
reflects
exists,
everything else the perfect functioning
of the organism, but which may also correspond to a thoroughly
egoistical desire to husband one's forces, to save oneself useless
confused notion of vitality.

anxiety for as long as possible; it goes without saying that this
natural optimism is not to be confused any more than theoretical
optimism with hope. The latter appears to us as inspired by
love, or perhaps more exactly by a combination of scenes which
this love conjures up and irradiates. But an objection at once
arises

which we must now face squarely and which seems
any metaphysical theory of hope.

likely

to ruin

The objection consists of questioning the value of the belief
implied in hope. If I wish ardently for a certain thing, it will be
said, I shall represent it to myself very distinctly, I shall realise
it in my imagination and immediately, by the same
process, I
is actually going to
happen. If this be so, must
not admit that hope implies an illusion of which critical
reflection at once exposes the mechanism? This is exactly the
illusion which makes us take our wishes for realities
our wishes
or our fears: the mechanism is obviously the same in both cases,

shall believe it

we

*

"Use consume."

A METAPHYSIC OF HOPE

45

We must now ask ourselves under what conditions it is possible
to save hope, that is to say to recognise a value in it which such
criticism cannot diminish, pertinent as it may be in a great

number of particular

cases.

here no doubt that we must remember the distinction
made above between "to hope" and "to hope that". The more
hope tends to reduce itself to a matter of dwelling on, or of
becoming hypnotised over, something one has represented to
oneself, the more the objection we have just formulated will be
irrefutable. On the contrary, the more hope transcends imagination, so that I do not allow myself to imagine what I hope for,
the more this objection seems to disappear.
It might, however, be asked whether that is not just an evasion.
Indeed, from the very moment that I am called upon to endure
some trial such as illness or exile, what all my wishes are bent
upon is my liberation. I may represent more or less precisely
the exact way in which it will happen, but in any case I realise it
intensely, and by that very fact I tend to believe in it: it seems
then that the psychological mechanism functions in the same way
even where my consciousness is not hypnotised by a certain
It is

precise image.

simplify

must be answered that in reasoning thus we arbitrarily
an interior situation which includes, as has been expressly

stated,

the essential element of temptation to despair.

But

it

stifling conditions which surround

and

as

it

The

were hedge us

in,

tend to appear unchangeable to us. We feel that there is no
reason to suppose that a miracle will transform them into conformity with our desires. Notice that here another psychological
mechanism is working in a precisely opposite direction from that
which was shown to bring about the illusion exposed at the
heart of hope. It must then be recognised that, in the situation
and trials we have in mind, consciousness has to contend with
two mechanisms which tend to work in opposite directions and
this observation, coming at the end of what we have already
noticed, leads us to recognise the secret connection between hope
and liberty. Both take for granted the overruling action of the

judgment.
Let us, for example, consider the example of the invalid; it is
obvious that he has set his mind upon recovering by the end of a

HOMO VIATOR

46
definite period;
appointed time.

he

is

it

he

not cured at the
special function of the
the time has passed without

likely to despair if

Here

is

would be the

to suggest that even if
the expected recovery taking place, there is, all the same, plenty
of room for hope. Here hope appears to be bound up with the
use of a method of surmounting, by which thought rises above
the imaginings and formulations upon which it had at first

judgment

been tempted to depend. But, in this example, it depends no
doubt on more than a question of dates. The very idea of recovery
capable, at any rate in a certain spiritual register, of being
purified and transformed. "Everything is lost for me if I do not

is

get well", the invalid is at first tempted to exclaim, naively
identifying recovery with salvation. From the moment when he
will have not only recognised in an abstract manner, but under-

stood in the depths of his being, that is to say seen, that everything
not necessarily lost if there is no cure, it is more than likely
that his inner attitude towards recovery or non-recovery will be

is

radically changed; he will have regained the liberty, the faculty
of relaxing to which we referred at length further back,
It really seems to be from this point of view that the distinction
between believer and unbeliever stands out in its true meaning.
The believer is he who will meet with no insurmountable obstacle

on

his

way towards

meaning of the

transcendence. Let us say again, to fix the
obstacle more precisely, that in so far as I

word

make my hope

conditional I myself put up limits to the process
could triumph over all successive disappointments.
Still more, I give a part of myself over to anguish; indeed I own
implicitly that if my expectations are not fulfilled in some particular point, I shall have no possibility of escaping from the
despair into^ which I must inevitably sink. We can, on the other
hand, conceive, at least theoretically, of the inner disposition of
one who, setting no condition or limit and abandoning himself
in absolute confidence, would thus transcend all possible disappointment and would experience a security of his being, or in
his being, which is contrary to the radical insecurity of Having.
This is what determines the ontological position of hope
absolute hope, inseparable from a faith which is likewise absolute,

by which

I

transcending all laying down of conditions, and for this very
reason every kind of representation whatever it might be. The

A METAPHYSICS OF HOPE

47

only possible source from which this absolute hope springs must
once more be stressed. It appears as a response of the creature to
the infinite Being to whom it is conscious of owing everything
that it has and upon whom it cannot impose any condition whatsoever without scandal. From the moment that I abase myself
in some sense before the absolute Thou who in his infinite condescension has brought me forth out of nothingness, it seems as
I forbid myself ever again to despair, or, more exactly,
that I implicitly accept the possibility of despair as an indication
of treason, so that I could not give way to it without pronouncing

though

my own

condemnation. Indeed, seen in this perspective, what is
meaning of despair if not a declaration that God has withdrawn himself from me? In addition to the fact that such an
accusation is incompatible with the nature of the absolute Thou,
it is to be observed that in advancing it I am unwarrantably
attributing to myself a distinct reality which I do not possess.
It would however be vain to try to hide the difficulties, from
the human point of view, of this position of which no one would
dream of contesting the metaphysical and religious purity. Does
not this invincible hope arise from the ruins of all human and
limited hopes? Must not the true believer be ready to accept the
death and ruin of his dear ones, the temporal destruction of his
country, as possibilities against which it is forbidden to rebel?
To go further: if these things come about, must he not be ready
to adore the divine will in them? We cannot be enough on our
guard against the softening processes to which some people have
recourse in order to reassure those whose faith might fail in the
presence of such terrible happenings. I have in mind particularly
the allegations of those who claim to calm us by observing that
the

infinitely good, cannot tempt us beyond our strength
us to despair which he has actually forbidden us. I
afraid that these are no more than verbal tricks; we know neither

God, being

by driving

am

the real extent of our powers nor the ultimate designs of God; and,
the arguments were really possible to accept, it would in the

if

long run amount to an implicit and as it were hypocritical way
of laying down conditions which would bring hope once more
within the limits of the relative. But then must it not be agreed
that the absolute hope to which we are invited tends to become
identified with despair itself with a despair however which it is

HOMO VIATOR

48

no longer even permitted for us to indulge in, and which is
perhaps no more than an infinite apathy?
On the other hand, it is to be wondered whether, in claiming
to establish himself beyond the reach of any possible disappointment in a zone of utter metaphysical security, man does not
become guilty of what might well be called treason from above.
Does he not tend to violate in this way the fundamental conditions
under which he is introduced into the world? To tell the truth,
in falling back upon the idea of what I have called absolute
I solve
hope, it seems that I elude my problems far more than
them and that I am juggling with the given facts.
But are we not then losing our way again in the inextricable?
Here I take the example once more of the patriot who refuses to
despair of the liberation of his native land which is provisionally
conquered. In what, or in whom, does he place his hope? Does he
not conditionalise his hope in the way which just now we decided
was unwarrantable? Even if he recognises that there is no chance
that he will himself witness the hoped-for liberation, he carries
his own existence the fulfilment of his desires, he refuses

beyond

being to admit that the darkness which has fallen
country can be enduring, he affirms that it is only an
upon
eclipse. Still more: it is not enough to say that he cannot believe
in the death of his country, the truth is much more that he does
not even consider he has the right to believe in it, and that it
would seem to him that he was committing a real act of treason
in admitting this possibility; and this is true whether he is a
believer or not. In every case he has made a judgment, which
lies outside all his power of reflection, that to despair would be
disloyal, it would be to go over to the enemy. This judgment
rests on a postulate which is actually very likely to remain
implicit but which we must examine. It consists in the affirma-

with

all his

his

tion that in hoping for liberation I really help to prepare the way
for it, and that, inversely, in raising a doubt about its possibility I

reduce the chance of it to some degree. It is not that strictly speakI impute a causal efficacy to the fact of
hoping or not hoping.

ing

The

truth

is

much rather that I am

conscious that

when

I

hope

I

strengthen, and when I despair, or simply doubt, I weaken or let
go of, a certain bond which unites me to the matter in question*

This bond shows every evidence of being religious in essence.

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

49

Here we come up, however, against a difficulty. Where the
matter in question is strictly speaking my own fate, can we speak
of a bond or indeed of religion? It is probably necessary here to
introduce a distinction which we have previously had occasion
to bring out. When I tremble for my own existence,, it may be
that I am giving way to the simple instinct of self-preservation:
very doubtful if one can legitimately designate by the word
"hope" the kind of organic attachment to myself which makes me
imagine final liberation in the midst of danger, even where the
future seems most threatening. It is different when piety towards

it is

oneself intervenes. By this I mean a reference to a certain spiritual
interconnection at the heart of which my existence can preserve
its meaning and its value. We are not dealing here with an
abstraction, an impersonal order: if I inspire another being with

love which I value

and

to

which

I

respond, that will be enough

to create this spiritual interconnection. The fact of the reciprocal
love, the communion, will be enough to bring about a deep

transformation in the nature of the bond which unites me to
myself. Where the matter concerns me alone, or more exactly
when I consider myself as though I were the only one concerned,
the question of .knowing what is going to happen to me may
strike me as practically without interest or importance. This,
however, will not prevent the instinct of self-preservation from
remaining active in me with all that it entails. It is obviously not
the same if I know that he whom I love is in some way dependent

on me, and that what happens to me will affect him vitally. We
might say in the manner of Hegel that my relationship to myself
is mediated by the presence of the other person, by what he is
for me and what I am for him. But it is of capital importance for
our subject that we see at the same time that this spiritual interconnection of which I have only examined the simplest example
here, invariably appears as veiled in mystery to him who is
conscious of having a part in it. Here again, let us be as concrete
as possible. To love anybody is to expect something from him,
,

something wKcETcan neither be defined nor "foreseen; if ITaFtKe
same time in some way to make it possible for 'Kini to iulfirffiis
expectation. Yes, paradoxical as it may seem, to expect is in some
to give: but the opposite is none the less true; no longer to
expect is to strike with sterility the being from whom'ho in6re

way

HOMO VIATOR

go

it is then in some way to deprive him or take, from
advance what is surely a certain possibility of inventing
or creating. Everything looks as though we can only speak of
who gives and
hope where the interaction exists between him
is the mark
which
that
is
there
where
him who receives,
exchange
of all spiritual life.
But perhaps, without sinning through excessive subtlety, it
of relationships
might be pointed out that this delicate interplay
In that
creation.
is
there
wherever
can exist internally
genuine
case we need only put outside the category of hope the blind
attachment which impels us simply to go on living, carrying out
day by day the functions, organic or otherwise, which are
exercised for ourselves alone without any superior object in view,
be it intellectual, moral or aesthetic. If this is so, the ancient
distinction of the Stoics upon which any critical examination of
hope is invariably founded, the distinction between things which
depend, and do not depend, upon ourselves, will lose a great
deal of its significance: Further, how can we fail to recall the
connection established above between hope and liberty? Not
is

expected,

him

in

only does voluntary action not presuppose an objective judgment
already formed by which I should see in advance what was in
my power to do and what was beyond it, but it must on the contrary be maintained that the authentic formula of willing is /
willy therefore / can; in other words, I decide that it is in my
power to do a certain thing, to obtain a certain result precisely
because it is my will (or because it is necessary) that this thing
should be done and this result obtained. Actually we only have
to remember that to act freely is always to innovate, in order to
see that there would be a contradiction in admitting that I
should be obliged in my willing to depend simply on the knowledge of what I had done before. It is, however only by starting
from such knowledge that I could proceed to an objective setting
of limits between what is in my power and what is beyond it*
It is not difficult to see how a positive philosophy of
hope can

We

be arrived at from these observations.
are actually going to
find that all our foregoing remarks will come together as into a
sheaf. When we said that hope was the very opposite of
pretension
or defiance,

we were ready to

and modest, that

it

bears the

recognise that it is essentially silent
mark of inviolable timidity except

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE
where

it

develops in the department of the

us,

5!
that

is

to say in

We

talk to each other of our common hope but hate
fellowship.
to express it before those who do not share it, as if it were really

and perhaps indeed

it is
a secret. If hope is not a defiance,
nevertheless
conscious
of appearing defiant or properhaps
vocative in the eyes of those who claim that they are established

it is

on the firm rock of experience: "It has always been seen that
."
on the contrary "It has never been found that
.". Hope
.

or,

.

.

.

with scandalously carefree grace undertakes to prove these
assertions false; by what right?
It seems as though hope is linked to

a certain candour, a
by experience. It belongs to those
who have not been hardened by life. We are impelled to introduce a notion here which, from the point of view of objective
knowledge, will appear to be devoid of sense: it is that of a
sullying or withering which is connected with experience. The
notion of experience itself is ambiguous. On the one hand there
is an established and catalogued experience in the name of which
certain virginity untouched

judgments are pronounced by the pronoun "one". On the other
hand there is an experience in the making which is only possible
precisely when all the other kind of experience has been set on
one side, even if finally and after having been duly desiccated,
it is given a place in the herbarium of universal wisdom. It is
quite evident that hope is intimately bound up with experience in
the second sense and perhaps it might be claimed that hope is
its spring. In the name of accepted experience people claim to

some kind of circle of Popilius round us; "There is no way
that is the formula to which the experts of established
experience fly. But postulated at the very basis of hope is the
non-validity of such assertions, the truth that the more the real

trace

out"

is

real the less does

it

lend

itself to

a calculation of

possibilities

quite simply does not
take any heed of this sum total. It might be said that in a sense
hope is not interested in the how: and this fact shows how funda-

on the

basis of accepted experience.

Hope

mentally untechnical it is, for technical thought, by definition,
never separates the consideration of ends and means. An end
does not exist for the technician, if he does not see approximately
how to achieve it. This, however, is not true for the inventor or
the discoverer who says, "There must be a way" and who adds:

HOMO VIATOR

5<2

"I am going to find it." He who hopes says simply: "It will be
found." In hoping, I do not create in the strict sense of the word,
but I appeal to the existence of a certain creative power in the
world, or rather to the actual resources at the disposal of this
creative power. Where, on the other hand, my spirit has been
it were tarnished by catalogued experience, I refuse to appeal
to this creative power, I deny its existence; all outside me, and
perhaps within me also (if I am logical) appears to me as simple

as

repetition.

We

have arrived then at the important conclusion that what
in hope is lost sight of if the attempt is made to judge
and condemn it from the point of view of established experience. It

is specific

misunderstands the teaching of such experience with insolent
ingenuity, though it is actually definite enough. The truth is
much more that hope is engaged in the weaving of experience
now in process, or in other words in an adventure now going
forward. This does not run counter to an authentic empiricism
but to a certain dogmatism which, while claiming to be experience, fundamentally misunderstands its nature, just as a cult of
the scientific may stand in the way of living science in its creative

development.
It is not difficult to see that hope thus understood involves a
fundamental relationship of consciousness to time which we

must now

try to analyse.

accept the perspective of established experience, we are
led to suppose that time will bring nothing new beyond an
illustration or an added confirmation, actually superfluous, of
the pronouncements engraved on the tables of universal wisdom
or merely of common sense. It is as much as to say that we are
here in a world where time no longer passes, or, which comes to
the same thing, where time merely passes without bringing anyIf

we

thing, empty of any material which could serve to establish a
new truth or inspire a new being.
can we help remembering

How

here the impression, rightly termed hopeless, which every child
and adolescent has received when his elders pronounce one or
other of those axioms which claim to express truths which are indisputable and duly established. Such axioms seem to strike out of
existence all the dreams, all the confused
aspirations of him who
not having had Air own experience refuses to
accept a so-called

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

53

proof with which he is in no way associated. We actually have
grounds for wondering by what strange optical illusion the
axiom which appears as hopeless and discouraging to him who
is supposed to be instructed by it, causes such vanity and selfsatisfaction in those who give it out. The reason is surely to be
found in the sense of superiority which, rightly or wrongly, fills
those people

who imagine

that they represent universal

wisdom

to youngsters whose wild presumption needs to be mortified as
much as possible.
see the antagonism between the older and

We

younger as an antagonism between someone who

is

trying to feel

who only
way
way
has a flickering light to guide him, and someone who claims -to
be at the other side of this same life (and of his own life as well)
in

his

and

to

life

as

we

feel

our

along a road, and

be able to give out, from some abstract

spot, truths

acquired at a great price. It goes without saying that this conflict is at the heart of what is often called the problem of the
generations

and that no

truly logical or rational solution

can be

because the antagonists are on different levels in
time, because they have no real communion with each other and
neither of them discusses with the other, but with a certain idea
a certain eidSlon of the other.
All then prepares us to recognise that despair is in a certain
sense the consciousness of time as closed or, more exactly still, of
time as a prison whilst hope appears as piercing through time;

found

for

it,

everything happens as though time, instead of hedging consciousness round, allowed something to pass through it. It was from
this point of view that I previously drew attention to the pro-

what

is

Of

course one cannot say that hope
happen; but it affirms as if it saw. One
draws its authority from a hidden vision of

phetic character of hope.
sees

going to

might say that it
which it is allowed

to take account without enjoying

it.

We

might say again that if time is in its essence a separation
and as it were a perpetual splitting up of the self in relation to
at
itself, hope on the contrary aims at reunion, at recollection,
reconciliation: in that way, and in that way alone, it might be
called a

One

memory

of the future.

cannot however disguise the impatience, one might say
the uneasiness, which such glimpses give rise to in spirits dominated by an anxiety for truth: "Is there to be nothing in these

HOMO VIATOR

54

may be asked, "which enables us to discern if
an illusion, if it is in any possible degree a
but
anything
hope
a
certain subsoil of things? And yet is not
thrown
upon
light
explanations",

it

is

this,

when we come down

which matters?

to the final analysis, the only question

55

To reply to such a challenge, it will be well, I think, to introduce the idea of a certain human condition which we cannot
hope to transcend by thought, for reflection shows that in trying
to rise above it we make it unreal and impoverish it. The unpardonable mistake of a certain rationalism has consisted precisely
in sacrificing the
place, to certain

human

as such, without anything to take

its

whose regulative value we certainly
should not think of questioning, but which lose all their meaning
if we attempt to make of them a world existing by itself where
55
"the human as such will be counted as nothing but dross and
rubbish. This general remark seems to me likely to throw light
on the debate, which arises between those who want to save
hope and those who on the contrary seek to banish it to the world
ideas,

of mirages.

The term "condition 55 is one which needs very careful definition.
Perhaps we should see in the human condition a certain vital and
spiritual order which we cannot violate without exposing ourof our equilibrium, but even of our
the
term condition may also be taken
As,
however,
integrity.
sometimes in a slightly different sense which is very nearly that of
selves to the loss not only

nature, we must recognise that it is a characteristic of man's condition in the second sense that he is able to fall short of his condition in the first sense. The condition-order implies a joint working which is always precarious between our nature and an
acquired wisdom, infused into our will a wisdom actually in no
way bound to be explicitly conscious of itself. Again we must of
course be careful not to confuse this wisdom with the
dogmatic
empiricism of which I have already pointed out the
sterilising

Perhaps the human condition is characterised not only by
the risks which go with it and which after all are bound
up with
life itself, even in its humblest
forms, but also, and far more
effect.

deeply, by the necessity to accept these risks
believe that it would be possible and, if we
analysis,

even an advantage

to succeed

in

and to refuse to
come to a final
removing them.

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

55

Experience teaches us, as a matter of fact, that we can never
refuse to take risks except in appearance, or rather that the refusal
itself conceals a risk which is the most serious of all, and that it is
even possible for us finally to condemn ourselves in this way to
lose the best of the very thing
intended to safeguard.

which by our avoidance we had

But

it must be noticed that the attitude of those who in the
of reason take up their position against hope is in all points
comparable with that of the people who claim to avoid risks. In

name

both cases what they want to avoid is disappointment. But perhaps it is of the nature of disappointment that we have no right to
anticipate it, as we do when we become preoccupied about its
prevention. Perhaps, on the other hand, we have not sufficiently
noticed that disappointment appears to him who undergoes it as
a sort of breach of confidence on the part of whom, or what?

The reply usually remains uncertain, but in every case we tend to
personify the experience which has failed to fulfil our expectations. I counted on such a thing
happening: it did not happen:

seem

to myself to be a creditor facing an insolvent debtor: why?
seems that in counting on I have given something, or I consider
that I have given something, of my own: literally I have given

I

It

credit

and the event or the mysterious source of the event has

its obligation towards me.
Disappointment will then
leave the soul all the more sore if in its depths it has had the presumption, or given way to the temptation, of somehow chaining

failed in

reality

down

in advance as one binds a debtor with the agree-

ment one forces upon him. But we have never ceased to insist that
presumption, is definitely foreign to hope which
never stipulates the carrying out of a certain contract (which is,
strangely enough, always a strictly one-sided contract). Perhaps
it is simply that hope shows the
originality and, I must add, the
of
never
claiming anything or insisting upon its
supreme dignity,
ng^tsTAnd it is permissible to consider the analogous situation of
a being who is awaiting a gift or favour from another being but
only on the grounds of his liberality, and that he is the first to
protest that the favour he is asking is a grace, that is to say the
exact opposite of an obligation.
Here the relationship which the words "hope in" express,
appears in its originality and, I should add, in its perfection. It
this claim, this

HOMO VIATOR

56

seems as though a philosophy which revolves round the contractual idea is likely to misunderstand the value of the relationadd that here, as everywhere for that
ship. I should however
tends to
matter, a certain slipping or degradation inevitably
then
"to
from"
"to
becomes
in"
come about. "To hope
expect
"to
and
on"
"to
count
to
is
that
to
finally
have due
say
me",
claim" or "to demand". The perpetually recurring difficulties
which a philosophy of hope encounters are for the most part due
to the fact that we have a tendency to substitute for an initial
relarelationship, which is both pure and mysterious, subsequent
more
the
at
same
time
but
more
doubt
no
intelligible,
tionships
and more deficient as regards their ontological content.
Furthermore, it must be owned that the evolution of mentalities
which we observe around us seems to follow the same slope, the
same line of degradation. Men in general seem less and less
capable of "hoping in"; it is indeed difficult to interpret as hope
the idolatry which immense, fascinated masses show for leaders
who have previously, by ceaseless propaganda, succeeded in parabut all true
lysing not only any critical spirit in their minions,
sense of values. All that we can say is that this idolatrous attachment is the miserable substitute, I should be ready to say the
toxic succedaneum, of the hope for which those same multitudes

no doubt

have a nostalgic longing in the depths of their
they show themselves actually incapable of exerTo be quite fair it must however be noted that

still

hearts, even

cising

it.

if

democracy, considered not in its principles but in its actual
achievements, has helped in the most baleful manner to encourage claiming in all its aspects, the demanding of rights and
indeed to bring a mercenary spirit into all human relationships.
I mean by this that the democratic atmosphere tends to exclude
more and more the idea of disinterested service born of fidelity,
and a belief in the intrinsic value of such service. Each individual
claims from the start to enjoy the same consideration and the

same advantages
tends to resolve

as his neighbour; and, in fact, his self-respect

itself into

an

but ever claiming rights from

which is not only defensive
Thus he considers it beneajji.

attitude
others.

not "to be dixped, not to allow another person to fa6"e"a3vantage

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

57

of his simplicity or his j^ood,, nature. But in this perspective how
can the spirit of mistrust mistrust not only of others, but of life
itself not tend to make the human soul less and less a
possible
dwelling place for hope, or indeed for joy? We seem here to touch
the metaphysical roots of a denaturalisation which seems almost

though it were coextensive with a certain type of civilisation.
may be said in passing that the very fact that a certain belief
in progress, far from arresting this evolution, has, on the contrary,
helped to precipitate it, suffices to show how far such a belief is
as

It

opposed to true hope, in spite of the fact that in its far distant
origin it may have been a confusedly rationalised derivative of it.
We should not however hide from ourselves that all these considerations would not yet be enough to convince those who, under
the influence of a stoicism or a more or less distorted form of the
philosophy of Spinoza, persist in refusing to allow that hope has

any metaphysical value. "Do you not", they say, "merely arrive
at the very insignificant conclusion, for which it is really superfluous to use such complicated arguments, that hope is a tendency
constitutes the inner spring of human enterprises because
calculated to stimulate usefully those who engage wholeheartedly in them?" This is as much as to say that in the last

which
it is

hope is only a subjective tendency, that by itself it would
never be able to throw any light upon the inner meaning of
things, and brings with it no guarantee that it will be realised.
But it must be replied that it is precisely such an opposition as
we have here imagined that we have to repudiate or to transcend.
Certainly there is no question of denying that this opposition has
a meaning where an enterprise with some material aim is under
consideration; the building of a port, or a pyramid; the hollowing
out of a tunnel, or the damming of a river. Just because it is
simply a question of producing certain material results, the inner
resort

or it would be better to say the instrucan and should be regarded as a contingent fact in relation
to the result to be produced. This in reality seems as though it
could well be arrived at by pitiless masters driving a multitude of
terrorised slaves with whips. But let us remember that such results
do not in reality involve any genuine creation, any love of the
thing created. Now it is precisely where such love exists, and only
where it exists, that we can speak of hope, this love taking shape
disposition of the agent

ment

HOMO VIATOR

58

in a reality which without it would not be what it is. When this
has come about it is untrue to claim that hope is merely a subthe contrary, a vital aspect of the very
jective stimulant, it is, on

by which an act of creation is accomplished.
is
"But", they will say again, "the hope we are discussing here
different from that which was previously defined

process

surely strangely
as a response to a situation

which entailed captivity?"

It

may be

taken that, in spite of appearances, this difference conceals a
fundamental identity. Do not let us forget that, as a matter of
his life appears to
fact, the general condition of man, even when
a
of
that
is
be
captive, by reason of the
normal,
always
quite

enslavements of all kinds which he is called upon to endure, if
of the
only on account of the body, and more deeply still because
We can be certain
night which shrouds his beginning and his end.
that all creative activity, whatever it may be, is bound up with
this condition, in the double meaning which we have given to the
word, and that it is in reality the only means given us of causing
this is
light to shine forth in our prison. It may be asked whether
not to make of creation a diversion as Pascal would have under-

stood it. I do not think so really, for the notion of Pascal involves
the idea of the utter solitude of the creature struggling with the
agony of his destiny, whereas we have seen, and we must return to
it

always associated with a communion, no
may be. This is actually so true that one
and
solitude are not at bottom necessarily
despair

again, that

matter

how

wonders

if

hope

is

interior it

identical.

From this point of view the essential problem to which we are
seeking to find the solution would be whether solitude is the last
word, whether man is really condemned to live and to die alone,
and whether it is only through the effect of a vivid illusion that he
from himself the fact that such is indeed his
not possible to sit in judgment on the case of hope without at the same time trying the case of love.

manages

to conceal

fate. It is

It

is

name

curious to notice that a purely objective philosophy, in the
it is claimed to denounce the mirage of hope, is so

of which

near as to become identified with the radical subjectivity of a
Proust, for whom love is a mis-knowing and resolves itself into
nothing but illusions of perspective. There is every reason to think
that it is by one and the same action that it is possible td free our-

A METAPHYSIC OF HOPE

59

from these two philosophies which are only opposed outwardly, that is to say in the formula given to them, but which
agree in their negative aims. For the rest, Proust himself puts us
on the way of truths to which he becomes more and more blind as
selves

work develops and as he comes to propose to himself an image
of life which is at the same time more systematic and impoverished.
The subjective conception of love, with the justification it confers
upon despair (since only the pure artist possesses the key of salvation) appears all the more unimpeachable as the being becomes
his

increasingly the prisoner of an obsession of which the other being
the object than the excuse, since he evades the grasp not
only of intuition but of all knowledge worthy of the name. I see

is less

a being so

much

the

less

the

more

I

am

this obsession itself

becomes

all

the

by him, for my
must be added that

obsessed

obsession tends to substitute itself for him. It

more

tyrannical the

more

I

claim to possess him, to monopolise him, the more obstinately
I set my mind to break all the bonds which unite him to other
beings, in the hope of making him totally mine. This is the illusion
of Arnolphe, and it is to be wondered whether Moliere did not
forestall and surpass Proust. One of two things must happen.
Faced with this determination to monopolise him, the other person either makes his escape by flight or lying, or else he loses his
own nature and becomes a nonentity. In either case it 'Yellows
inexorably that, because love has thus failed in its mission and
it consummates its own loss.
be asked whether a logical process of the same kind,
though far less clearly and easily discernible, is not working itself
out wherever the fundamental relationship uniting the human
soul and the mysterious reality which surrounds and at the same
time confronts it becomes perverted. This relationship, when
grasped in its truth, is a participation. This means that we do not
only become guilty of an usurpation but that, in spite of all

become
But

perverted,

it is

to

appearances, we become strangers to ourselves, in so far as we
treat the reality as something which can be won and placed at
our disposal.
might say again that this reality thus referred

We

and enslaved to selfish ends loses its true nature also, and becomes
a sham and an idol. But shams and idols always appear, to those
who view them with enough penetration, as milestones, marking
the road to despair.

HOMO VIATOR

60

we can now feel authorised to formulate a few general
of the observations we have
propositions which will sum up most
been able to make in the course of our all too winding journey.
In face of the particular trial, whatever it may be, which conPerhaps

fronts

me and which must always be but a specimen of the trial

of

humanity in general, I shall always be exposed to the temptation
of shutting the door which encloses me within myself and at the
same time encloses me within time, as though the future, drained
of its substance and its mystery, were no longer to be anything but
a place of pure repetition, as though some unspecifiable disordered mechanism were to go on working ceaselessly, undirected
by any intelligent motivisation. But a future thus devitalised, no
longer being a future for me or anybody else, would be rather a
prospect of vacancy.
systematised empiricism, crystallised into impersonal and
permanent formulae, would confer upon what is in truth only a
movement of the soul, a retraction, an inward disloyalty, the

A

theoretical (and fallacious) justification

in order to establish itself in

its

own

which such a step needs

eyes.

Against this combination of temptations there is only one
remedy, and it has two aspects: it is the remedy of communion,
the remedy of hope. If it is true that man's trial is infinite in its
varieties and can assume the innumerable forms under which we

know

it is no less certain that by a
but
inverted
each
one of us can rise by his
symmetrical
process,
own special path from the humble forms of communion which
experience offers the most despised, to a communion which is
both more intimate and more abundant, of which hope can be
equally regarded as the foreshadowing or the outcome.
"I hope in thee for us"; such is perhaps the most adequate and
the most elaborate expression of the act which the verb "to hope"
suggests in a way which is still confused and ambiguous. "In thee
for us": between this "thou" and this "us" which only the most
persistent reflection can finally discover in the act of hope, what
is the vital link? Must we not
reply that "Thou" is in some way
the guarantee of the union which holds us together, myself to
myself, or the one to the other, or these beings to those other
beings? More than a guarantee which secures or confirms from
outside a union which already exists, it is the very cement which

privation, exile, or captivity,

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

6l

binds the whole into one. If this is the case, to despair of myself, or
to despair of us, is essentially to despair of the Thou. Avowedly, it
is conceivable that there is some difficulty in
admitting that I
form with myself a real community, an us: it is, however, only on
this condition that I have my active share as a centre of intelligence, of love and of creation. This absolute Thou in whom I
must hope but whom I also have always the possibility of denying, not only in theory but in practice, is at the heart of the city
which I form with myself and which, as experience has given
tragic proof, retains the power of reducing itself to ashes. It must
be added that this city is not a monad and that it cannot establish
itself as a distinct and isolated centre, without working for its own
destruction, but that on the contrary it draws the elements of its

from what is brought to it along canals, often very badly
marked out, from friendly cities, of which however it often scarcely
knows the name or the situation. It is to a consciousness of these
reciprocities, of this mysterious and incessant circulation, that I
open my soul when I hope a prophetic consciousness, as we have
said, but vague and in danger of becoming obliterated to the

life

hope

seeks to pass itself off as second sight. If this is so, it
to hope, as we have already hinted, is to live in
instead of anxiously concentrating our attention on the poor

little

counters spread out in front of us which we feverishly reckon

extent that

it.

must be said that

up over and over again without respite, tormented by the fear of
being foiled or ruined. The more we allow ourselves to be the
servants of Having, the more we sKall let ourselves fall a prey to
the gnawing anxiety which Having involves, the more we sfiall
tend to lose not only the aptitude for hope, but even I should say
the very belief, indistinct as it may be, of its possible reality. In
this sense it is no doubt true that, strictly speaking, only those
beings who are entirely free from the shackles of ownership in all
its forms are able to know the divine light-heartedness of life .in,,
hope. But, as far as we can judge, this liberation, this exemption,
must remain the privilege of a very small number of chosen souls.
The vast majority of men are, as far as we can see, destined to
remain entangled in the inextricable meshes of Having, and there
are actually the gravest reasons for thinking that it is on this condition, burdensome as it may be, that humanity is able to discharge, ,well or badly as the case may be, the tasks, often so

HOMO VIATOR

62

and obscure, which have been assigned to it. A final
condemnation of Having would amount basically to the rashest
finite man himself. Such could
repudiation of finite existence by
an
excessive
without
not be uttered
humility which would look so
much like the most inordinate and blasphemous pride as to be
confused with it. What, however, we might perhaps dare to say is
that if, however feebly, we remain penetrated by hope, it can only
be through the cracks .and openings which are to be found in the
armour of Having which covers us: the armour of our possessions,
our attainments, our experience and our virtues, perhaps even
more than our vices. Thus, and only thus can the breathing of the
soul be maintained, but under conditions, alas, of irregular action
and a dangerous uncertainty often on the increase so that it is
thankless

always in danger of being blocked like the lungs or the bowels.
But in expressing ourselves thus, are we not led to make hope
appear too much as a natural faculty? To go still deeper, what
position should we adopt on the question as to whether it depends
upon us or whether, on the contrary, it is either the fruit of an
innate disposition, or a pure grace, and in final analysis the result
of supernatural help? I will take care here not to venture upon
theological ground. In the region of philosophic reflection, however, it seems as though it is equally true, and consequently
equally false, to say that hope depends or does not depend

upon me.
The meaning of this question does indeed become more obscure
when it bears upon that which is most intimately myself. Does it

me whether I am in love or whether I possess a
certain creative faculty? Certainly not, but precisely because it
does not depend upon me to be or not to be such as I am. Let us
depend upon

admit, on the contrary, without troubling about the philosophical
controversies on free will with which we are not concerned, that it

depends upon me whether
journey,

visit,

I

gesture, etc.,

We

take a certain step, or make a certain
which anyone else in my place could

are then led to the paradoxical conclusion
the very thing which does not form
part of me, which remains in a sense exterior (or indifferent) to
me. It must however be added that a gift, whatever it may be, is

equally well do.
that what depends

upon me is

never purely and simply
do but make a place for

by a subject who has nothing to
in himself. The truth is much rather

received
it

A METAPHYSIG OF HOPE

63

that the gift is a call to which we have to make response; it is as
though a harvest of possibilities had to be gathered from us,
among which we had to choose, or more exactly it is as though
we had to actualise those which accorded best with the urgency
interiorly felt which is, in reality, only mediation between us and
ourselves.
It is from this general observation that we must start if we
would recognise that it is both true and false to say that it depends
on us whether we hope or not. At the root of hope there is something which is literally offered to us: but we can refuse hope just
as we can refuse love. Moreover, we can no doubt deny hope, just
as we can deny or degrade our love. Both here and there the role
of Kairos seems to be to give our liberty an opportunity of exercising and spreading itself as it could never do if it were left to
itself a hypothesis which is probably contradictory, anyway.
We see from this why it is legitimate to consider hope as a virtue;
the truth is that all virtue is the particularisation of a certain
interior force, and that to live in hope is to obtain from oneself
that one should remain faithful in the hour of darkness to that
which in its origin was perhaps only an inspiration, an exaltation,
a transport. But there is no doubt that this faithfulness cannot be
put into practice except by virtue of a co-operation, whose principle will always remain a mystery, between the goodwill which
is after all the only positive contribution of which we are capable
and certain promptings whose centre remains beyond our reach,
in those realms where values are divine gifts.
Perhaps, if we would elucidate the nature of hope more completely, at least, as far as

such elucidation

is

possible,

we

should

now

tackle directly the question of the relationship connecting
hope with our reasons for hoping. It may be best to state the

problem in its most extreme form: can one hope when the reasons
doing are insufficient or even completely lacking?
Let us notice first of all that this question must inevitably be
asked by anyone who treats hope as an external phenomenon and
wonders under what conditions it can appear. I will call such a
one the observer in what is to follow.
Reflection soon shows us, however, that thinking in these terms
of hope is the very way to stifle it.

for so

First of all, the

meaning of the word

can

is

ambiguous.

HOMO VIATOR

64
(a)

Can

happen that anyone hopes without any
the other hand
to
hope where the reasons are insufficient
permissible
it

in fact

reasons for hoping?
(b) Is it

Or on

or lacking?
Let us notice

first that in both cases we admit implicitly that
the proposition "there is no reason, or at least no sufficient reason,
for hope", has some meaning. We must not however be taken in
by words; we cannot speak of the non-existence or existence of
such reasons as of the non-existence or existence of something
which could form part of anyone's experience. Here "there is" or

We

mean
"there is not" is necessarily related to a definite subject.
that in the eyes of
there is or there is not good enough reason
for hope. But in the statement of our problem what subject is

X

implied? Let us consider in particular question (a). Do we mean
"Can it in fact happen that someone hopes under conditions
which, for me who am asking the question, afford no grounds for
hope?" or "under conditions which for the subject himself afford no

grounds for

it?"

We must obviously answer the first question in the affirmative:
quite clear that the other can keep on hoping where the
observer considers that reasons for hope do not exist, that is to
say where they are invisible to him. This first question then is

it is

insignificant

and

idle.

more precise meaning? Can anyone, in fact,
where
he
himself
admits that the reasons are insufficient or
hope
lacking? But, if he truly recognises in all sincerity that these
reasons are non-existent or insufficient, he himself admits that he
does not really hope (unless, of course, he has succumbed to human
respect by granting to some interlocutor what he does not believe
in his own heart; but such a case is outside our hypothesis) Moreover, the use of the word "sufficient" implies a contradiction, for, if
the subject hopes, it would surely seem that the reasons for hoping
are sufficient for him, whatever the observer may think about them.
But in reality the question which the subject is supposed to ask
himself, and in this particular case to answer in the negative,
does not arise for him unless he detaches himself in some degree
from his hope. Actually, it comes into a different register and
springs from a calculating faculty of the reason which, with the
very approximate means at its disposal, proceeds to carry out a

Has

the second a

.

A METAPHYSIC OF HOPE

65

regular balancing up of chances. Without any doubt it may happen that, on consideration, hope gives in for a variable space of
time to those calculations of the reason; above all if the subject is
engaged in a discussion with someone whom he wants to convince: It is none the less true, however, that hope and the calculating faculty of reason are essentially distinct and everything

be lost if we try to combine them. On the other hand, in the
statement (), when we bring in the idea of a right to hope we are
entering precisely upon this very process of reasoning by computation which at bottom means a calculation of probabilities. It is as
though to hope were to argue in a certain way and as though there
were a possibility of enquiring into the validity of the arguments.
Looked at from this point of view, the answer to the question is
obvious. It is absurd to claim that it can be legitimate to hope without sufficient reasons for hope. But we must repeat once more that
here the meaning of the word hope has been completely distorted.
It seems as though we shall thus be led to an utterly negative
conclusion and that we shall have to deny that the words "reasons
for hoping" have any meaning whatsoever. If so, in this matter
we shall have to subscribe to an irrationalism or a radical fideism.
But faced with the facts of experience, such a thesis appears
nothing short of absurd.
Take, for instance, a mother who persists in hoping that she
will see her son again although his death has been certified in the
most definite manner by witnesses who found his body, buried it,
etc. Is not the observer justified in saying that there are no reasons
for hoping that this son is still alive?
However subtle and irritating in certain respects the distinction
I am going to introduce here may appear, perhaps we should
reply to the objection in the following way: In so far as the hope
of the mother is expressed as an objective judgment^ "It is possible
that John will come back", we have the right to say: "No, objectively speaking, the return must be considered as impossible." But
at the root of the mother's objective judgment, which, as such,
cannot be accepted, she has within her a loving thought which
repudiates or transcends the facts, and it seems as though there
was something absurd or even scandalous in disputing her right to
will

hope, that is to say to love, against all hope. More exactly, what is
absurd i$ the very idea of a right which we can recognise or dispute.

HOMO VIATOR

66

difficulties, however. Common
not permissible to identify hope and love
here. "Whatever may be the love which I feel for a certain individual, it cannot be admitted that in virtue of this love, I can
assume the right to exceed the limits of logic." It is a mere sophism
to say, "I cannot bear the idea that he will not come back, therefore it is possible that he will". But here again, hope is considered
from outside and entered in a register where it does not belong.

We

are not at the end of our

sense will retort that

it is

the simple affirmation, "You are coming
are coming back" is beyond the reach of
objective criticism. Such criticism could only deal with it legitimately if it were translated into the language of prevision or of a

What hope gives us is
And this "you

back

59

.

judgment based on probabilities.
It cannot be denied that each of us is exposed to the temptation
of carrying out such a substitution on our own account. We have
already seen how hope loses its true nature by the very fact that it
tends to offer itself for the approbation of the subject himself and
also of other people. In this way it loses its essential elasticity, but it
only loses it because it denies its own nature and this denial is a fall.
This, which at first appears very paradoxical, seems to me to be
elucidated if we keep in mind the fundamental distinction between
hope and desire and if we recall the observations which were
made further back. We might say that hope only escapes from a
particular metaphysical ruling on condition that it transcends
desire that is to say, that it does not remain centred upon the

subject himself. Once again we are led to draw attention to the
indissoluble connection which binds together hope and love. The

more

egoistical love is, the
tions it inspires should be

more the

alluringly prophetic declara-

regarded with caution as likely to be
literally contradicted by experience; on the other hand, the nearer
it approaches to true charity, the more the
meaning of its declarations is inflected and tends to become full of an unconditional
quality which is the very sign of a presence. This presence is
incarnated in the "us" for whom "I hope in Thee", that is to say

communion

of which I proclaim the indestructibility. No
doubt, as always, critical thought will immediately take up its
position against this assertion. It will invoke the evidence of
experience, and of the spectacle of endless visible destruction
in a

which

it

presents to us. But this evidence itself can only be chal-

A METAPHYSIC OF HOPE

67

lenged in the name of a certitude which we have already seen is
not based on established experience the certitude that all such
arguments are only true in a very fleeting sense, and that the
incessant changes to which critical pessimism claims to give so
much importance, cannot touch the only authentic reality. This
assertion is precisely what we discover when we reach the intelligible core of hope; what characterises it is the very movement by
which it challenges the evidence upon which men claim to challenge it itself.
We must add that this conception of hope is both symbolised and
supported by all experiences of renewal, not considered in their
philosophical or even physical processes, but in the infinite echo

which they awaken in those who are called upon either to live
through them directly, or to share sympathetically in the blessings
they bring. So what we said above about the relationship which
hope establishes between the soul and time is elucidated and com-

Might we not say that hope always implies the superlogical connection between a return (nostos) and something
completely new (Kainon &*)? Following from this it is to be wondered whether preservation or restoration, on the one hand, and
revolution or renewal on the other, are not the two movements,
the two abstractly dissociated aspects *of one and the same unity,
which dwells in hope and is beyond the reach of all our faculties
of reasoning or of conceptual formulation. This aspiration can be
pleted.

approximately expressed in the simple but contradictory words:
Here we undoubtedly
come once again upon the theme of liberation, for it is never a
simple return to the status quo, a simple return to our being,
it is that and much more, and even the contrary of that: an
undreamed-of promotion, a transfiguration.
as before, but differently and better than before.

Perhaps

after these considerations

we might

at last attempt to

give the definition which we would not allow ourselves to place at
the beginning of our analysis: we might say that hope is essentially
the availability of a soul which has entered intimately enough
into the experience of communion to accomplish in the teeth of
will and knowledge the transcendent act the act establishing the
vital regeneration of which this experience affords both the pledge

and the

first-fruits.

LE PEUGH.
January, 1942.

To

JULIEN

LANDE

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY*
I OWE YOU a few words of explanation concernwhich this lecture has been announced. I must
under
the
title
ing
admit that it is rather a surprising title, which may seem oddly
sensational. Why not have called our discussion "The Problem of
the Family"? For numerous reasons: first, the family does not
an infinity of problems of every
suggest just one problem, but
considered as a whole; you have
be
not
could
which
description
a
already heard several of them discussed with competence which
I lack. But it is above all because the family seems to me to belong
to an order of realities, or I should rather say of presences, which

CLEARLY

can only create problems in so far as we are mistaken, not so much
with regard to their special character, as to the way in which we
human beings are involved in them. I apologise for being obliged
to quote myself here; for I need to employ a distinction which I
attempted about ten years ago to introduce into the domain of
concrete philosophy and of which the importance still seems to

me

considerable.

can only be a problem for me where I have to
deal with facts which are, or which I can at least cause to be,
exterior to myself; facts presenting themselves to me in a certain
I said that there

disorder for

which

I struggle to substitute

an

orderliness capable

of satisfying the requirements of my thought. When this substitution has been effected the problem is solved. As for me, who
devote myself to this operation, I am outside (above or below, if

you

like)

realities

with which it deals. But when it involves
bound up with my existence, realities which

the. facts

closely

unquestionably influence my existence as such, I cannot conscientiously proceed in this way. That is to say, I cannot make an
abstraction of myself, or, if you like, bring about this division
between myself on the one hand and some ever-present given
principle of my life on the other; I am effectively and vitally
i Lecture
given to UEcole
Toulouse in 1942.

des Hautes Etudes Familiales at

Lyons and at

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

69

involved in these realities. This holds good for instance in the case
of the union of body and soul, or, in more precise terms, the bond
which unites me to my body. I cannot make of this bond a pure
idea to be placed in front of me and considered as an object, without misunderstanding its essential nature. Thus it follows that
every term by which I try to qualify it as a relationship or to
determine its function will invariably prove to be inadequate:
I cannot exactly say that I am master of my body, or that I am
the slave of my body, or that I own my body. All these relationships are true at once, which amounts to saying that each one of
them taken by itself is false, that it does not so much translate as it
traduces a certain fundamental unity. This unity is less a given
principle than a giving one, because it is the root from which
springs the fact of my presence to myself and the presence of all
else to me. Thus it encroaches upon its own data and, invading
them, passes beyond the range of a simple problem. It is in this
very definite sense that the family is a mystery, and it is for this
reason that we cannot properly and without confusion treat it
simply as a question to be solved. Anticipating what is coming
later, I want to point out right away that there is a deep similarity between the union of soul and body and the mystery of the
family. In both cases we are in the presence of the same fact, or
rather of something which is far more than a fact since it is the
very condition of all facts whatever they may be: I mean incarnation. I am not, of course, using this term in its theological sense.
It is not a question of our Lord's coming into the world, but of the
infinitely mysterious act by which, an essence assumes a body, an
act around which* the meditation of a Plato crystalled, and to
which modern philosophers only cease to give their attention in

have lost the intelligence's essential gift, that is to
the
faculty of wonder.
say
""
1 assure you that I am not proposing to introduce anything in
the nature of an exposition of doctrine here. I am dealing rather
with a series of enquiries leading us towards a point which thought
could not reach directly. Why? Because this point is situated at
the same time too close up to us and too far away to be found in
the strictly limited zone of objective knowledge. I have said too
so far as they

close

and too

far

to coincide here,

away, but, in

and

I

reality, these contraries are

found

am inclined to think that this coincidence

HOMO VIATOR

70

quite close and that which is infinitely far away
characterises every kind of mystery, even
is precisely
which
we are not dealing with here.
religious mysteries,
On the one hand, when I speak of my family, the primitive idea

of that which

is

what

this

word evokes

is

that of a certain pattern or constellation of

which, as a child, I spontaneously take it for granted that I am
I not the object of all those solicitous glances which
the centre.
sometimes touch me, sometimes overwhelm and sometimes irritate me, glances of which not a shadow escapes me for they all
seem to be aimed at me personally in the same way as the voices
whose inflections pass from gentleness to severity, from persuasion

Am

to threats. It

is

only

little

which bind these beings

by

little

that I discern the relationships

each other, thereby discovering that
each one has his own life, his inviolable relationships with all
the others, and also that for some of them I am a cause of
preoccupation and a subject of discussion when I am not
present, so that, I only receive a partial presentation, an
to

adaptation for my personal use, of the thoughts and feelings
I arouse in these beings of whom only one side, and that
always the same, is turned towards me. From this moment,
everything becomes strangely complicated, new relationships are
formed between them and me. If I have found that they are
hiding themselves from me, how can I avoid the temptation of
hiding myself from them in my turn? But at the same time strange
contours appear in my personal life, it becomes furrowed with

which

valleys

and

split

up

into

compartments as

well.

The

simple

first years becomes
unspoilt countryside of
complicated and
clouded over.
family draws away from me, while remaining
as near and as much a part of myself as ever: a tearing process?

my

My

Let us rather say a traumatisation as difficult to heal as
That is not all, it is not even the beginning. Under the
abstract words of paternity and sonship, I have gradually come to
guess at occult and forbidden realities which make my soul dizzy.
They attract rne, but because they attract me, and because I think
I should commit a sacrilege if I gave in to this attraction, I turn
away from them. At the very least, I come to believe that, far from
being endowed with an absolute existence of my own, I am, without having originally wished or suspected it, I incarnate the reply
to the reciprocal appeal which two beings flung to each other in
possible.

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

71

the unknown and which, without suspecting it, they flung beyond

themselves to an incomprehensible power whose only expression
the bestowal of life. I am this reply, unformed at first, but who,

is

as I

become

ment. Yes,
being what

am

I

am,

know myself to be a reply and a judg-

irresistibly led to make the discovery that by
I myself
a judgment upon those
have

am

me

into being; and thereby infinite
established between them and me.

called

be

articulate, will
I

who

new

relationships will

On the other hand, I have to recognise that behind the lighted
but much restricted zone which I call my family there stretches, to
infinitude, ramifications which in theory at any rate I can follow
out tirelessly. Only in theory, however, for in fact an impenetrable
darkness envelops this upstream region of myself and prevents me
further. I can discern enough, however, to
enable me to follow this umbilical cord of my temporal antecedents, and to see it taking shape before me yet stretching back

from exploring any

beyond my life in an indefinite network which, if traced to its
limits, would probably be co-extensive with the human race itself.

My family, or rather my lineage, is the succession of historical proby which the human species has become individualised into
the singular creature that I am. All that it is possible for me to
recognise in this growing and impressive indetermination is that
cesses

all

these

unknown

beings,

who stretch between me and my unim-

aginable origins whatever they may be, are not simply the causes
of which I am the effect or the product: there is no doubt that the
terms cause and effect have no meaning here. Between my
ancestors and myself a far more obscure and intimate relationship
exists. I share with them as they do with me
invisibly; they are
consubstantial with me and I with them.
By this inextricable combination of things from the past and
things to come, the mystery of the family is defined a mystery in
which I am involved from the mere fact that I exist: here, at the
articulation of a structure of which I can only distinguish the first
traces, of a feeling which modulates between the intimate and the
metaphysical and of an oath to be taken or refused binding me
to make my own the vague desire around which the magical
fomentation of my personal existence is centred. Such is the situation in which I find myself, I, a creature precipitated into the
tumult; thus

am I

introduced into this impenetrable world.

HOMO VIATOR

72

evoke the mystery of the family is then far less to attempt to
a problem than to try to recapture a reality and to awaken
the soul to its presence. The consciousness of this reality has
become tragically obliterated during several generations, and its
causes for the preclouding over has been one of the contributory
are
hell
where
the
into
men
struggling to-day.
they
cipitation of
But this evocation, which appears to be simple enough, is in
to accomplish. For a mysterious
reality extraordinarily difficult
for him who not only rediscovers
reality can only be made actual
of having rediscovered it,
consciousness
it but who has the sudden

To

resolve

simultaneously realising that previously he had entirely lost sight
of it. I have to strive then to make you aware of this negative
evidence, thankless as such an undertaking

may

appear.

Nothing seems to me to give more direct evidence of the blindness from which a great number of our contemporaries are sufferthe increasing
ing in the matters we are considering to-day than
number of controversies of a strictly spectacular order which
arose in the period between the wars, whether in the Press or in
choice
public meetings, in connection with marriage, divorce, the
of a lover, the practices of birth-control, etc. For whom, before
what sort of spectators, did this ceaseless and all too often poisonous controversial stream flow? Before idlers, more and more
incapable of living, I will not say their life, but a life of any sort,
who led a ridiculous and sinister existence on the margin of
reality, waifs

without knowing

it,

shipwrecked mariners

who

did

that their ship was lost. These puppets made no
effort to grasp a truth and derive nourishment from it, but they
had an unhealthy craving to hear what they called a discussion of

not even

ideas.

know

A discussion, that is to say a clash of ideas, not dealing with

experience, for all experience worthy of the

weight and value

name

has a certain

but professions of

faith, challenges, prosecuin this realm seemed to show

Everything that happened
and argumentation were the actual sign of a
total absence of experience and genuine thought. No doubt I shall
be stopped here: "Are you not tending" it may be asked "to
exaggerate arbitrarily the importance of discussions which have
never held the attention of the sane and healthy elements in our
country? The family is not an institution which has lost its meantions.

that a flow of words

ing, it

is still

a

living reality.

We

only need to look around us.

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

How many

families,

even during

this

73

lamentable period, kept

and preserved their unity!" I think that we must
stop here and fearlessly face some very painful truths. Certainly
there is no question of denying for one moment that a great number of people mainly but not exclusively Christians have preserved the meaning of family life in spite of the unwearied efforts
their vitality

of propaganda of every description which tried systematically to
weaken it. Nevertheless we cannot fail to recognise the seriousness of the crisis which has begun in our time, a dangerous and

perhaps in the long run a mortal

crisis,

as

is

proved by incon-

testable statistics: the

huge increase of divorce, the general spreadof
abortive
etc. These are facts which force us to
practices,
ing
penetrate deeper in order to expose the roots of these "social
facts", roots

more

which are

to

be found at the actual

level of belief, or

am

inclined to see a
cardinal principle of the spiritual biology of our era. These are
the roots which the philosopher has to discover with the cool selfpossession of a surgeon making an incision into a wound.
exactly, unbelief where, for

my

part, I

May I at this point be allowed a short digression, which actually
is

not a digression at

When

I recall

my

all?

experience as a member of the university
friends, I see that it had become increas-

and that of some of my

ingly difficult to deal with problems concerning the family before
a class of young students. I remember very well the embarrassI felt on a particular occasion when it fell to me to speak
of divorce, not simply as a recognised fact but as a practice which,
taken all round, is disastrous and blameworthy. I knew quite
well that I had in front of me the sons of divorced parents and
that there was a risk of their bringing all the weight of my judg-

ment

ments against their parents, unless they revolted, as indeed they
had a right to do, against strictures involving their most private
feelings feelings which indeed had to be respected. On these
grounds, what a temptation there was to maintain a prudent
reserve and to keep to vague and meaningless generalities! But
on the other hand how can we help seeing that if these great
are not approached
realities of marriage, generation, etc.,
directly and with fearless sincerity, they degenerate into nothing
but material for rhetorical arguments. Conventionality is thus
substituted for life, conventionality of which for my part I shall

HOMO VIATOR

74

never weary of denouncing the poisonous influence, for it will
never be anything but a waste product of thought, something
which cannot be assimilated. This then is the dilemma confronting so many of those responsible for education at the present
time. Should we, with no fear of appearing dogmatic, courageously tackle these questions while in so doing we risk upsetting
and scandalising impressionable young beings; or should we
confine ourselves to the hollowest of phrases or to historical or

and thus, in the latter case, help to
loose
the
relativity which has tended in our day to
encourage
weaken all real moral judgment so prejudicially? If I insist thus
so-called historical facts

on a

difficulty which only seems to affect specialists, it is because
I see in it a symptom revealing a state of things so grave that
we can no longer shut our eyes to it. If we took the trouble to

and sociology which for twenty
in favour with the high priests of official

consult the text-books of morals

years or

more were

we should see to what an extent they encouraged the
tendency to view problems in an almost exclusively historical
setting and to emphasise the changing character of family institutions ever destined to grow more flexible. This tendency cannot
be compensated for by what is at bottom no more than the wordy
and superfluous reiteration of a few general principles earmarked
by an out-worn rationalism. We might already notice at this
point, so that we can probably return to it later, that, by a
paradox worthy of our attention, these sociological moralists
came in the end to preach the most disintegrating individualism,
whilst all the time proclaiming and heralding the establishment
of a socialism which was to subordinate personal initiative, in
teaching,

every

field, to

State control.

be objected that I am referring here to a
period of our history which is happily passed and that for the
last two years a vigorous and healthy reaction has taken
place
concerning this point and a great many others in favour of what
we sometimes rather ingenuously term e right-mindedness". I
most certainly do not wish to underestimate the importance and
value of this reaction. It seems to me, all the same, that we must
It will doubtless

*

be careful to avoid an optimism which might have many disappointments in store for us. The multiplication of catchwords
and well-known slogans in official speeches and in the Press

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY
should not mislead
believe in

an

There

75

nothing there to lead us to
effective conversion of hearts and minds: it is
us.

is

certainly not by mere methods of publicity that we shall succeed
in reaching the most deep and hidden springs of individual wills.

even permissible to fear that there may be a serious
relapse and that the evils, from which we have already suffered so
much) will reappear later with increased violence.
What is needed first of all is that by reflection, the only weapon
at our disposal, we should project as clear a light as possible
upon the tragic situation in which so many are living. These
people are unable to explain to themselves a vital uneasiness, an
anguish of which it is only in their power to grasp the most
exterior causes or the most superficial symptoms. It seems to me
that we should indeed be setting to work in the wrong way if we
started merely from a moral crisis, from the increasingly deliberate repudiation of general principles which would have been
accepted without question up to a certain time in history. I
should prefer to say that these principles are in themselves
nothing but the approximate and imperfect expression of a
certain mental attitude towards life. It is in reality this attitude
itself which has been transformed. In order to make the meaning
of the words I am using more precise, I suggest that what has
come about is much more a vital weakening than a transgression,
or a denial. In a fine passage, recently quoted by Mr. Albert
It

is

Begum, the great Swiss author Ramuz, writing some years ago,
spoke of a certain sense of holiness "which is the most precious
thing the West has known, a certain attitude of reverence for
existence by which we must understand everything which
exists, oneself and the world outside oneself, the mysteries which
surround us, the mystery of death, and the mystery of birth, a
certain veneration in the presence of life, a certain love, and
(why not acknowledge it?) a certain state of poetry which the
created world produces in us". It is precisely this sense of holiness,
this

fundamental reverence for life and

for death, itself considered

phase of life, it is this state of poetry produced in
us by the created world which, during the last decades, and more
as the nocturnal

particularly of recent years, has given

way

to the pressure of

pride, of pretentiousness, of boredom and despair; and for
reasons, which will very easily appear on analysis, it is in the

HOMO VIATOR

76

domain of family reality that the dire consequences of this giving
way have first become apparent, actually threatening more and
more directly the integrity of the individual considered in his
structure and his own particular destiny.
He who refuses to face the danger goes on obstinately repeating
that the family exists. But the word to exist is here the most
equivocal and therefore the most deceptive of terms. If the
is a reality it cannot be simply expressed or objectively
established like a simple succession. Let us even insist that it is
infinitely more than what appears from pure and simple entries

family

in civil registers. It exists only on condition that
not only as a value but as a living presence.

A value first of all.

it is

apprehended

think that here we must make an attempt
way that we think it out and elucidate
it
an experience which was shared by most of us when we were
children, an experience which it is actually very difficult not to
distort when we try to express it, because it includes a certain
pride. This pride if we are not careful might seem to be confused
to relive

I

but in such a

with vanity, but this is a degradation of it. We are proud to
belong to a certain community because we feel that something
of its lustre falls upon us. Pride, as I recently had occasion to
write, is a certain response made from the depths of my being
to an investiture of which it behoves me to prove myself worthy
.

experienced on my own account. It in no way
aims at impressing some other person with the awe and fear

Such pride

is

flatter me. Thus it is a constructive sentiment,
helping to give me inner foundations on which to establish my
conduct. Vanity, on the other hand, by the very fact that it is
turned outwards towards the rest of the world, is essentially
sterile, or even, in the last analysis, disintegrating. But it is
through this sentiment of pride that we can trace in what way
the family is a value. It is a recognised hierarchy, and I do not

which would

merely have to integrate myself into it by recognising the
authority vested in its leader; I have actually been caught up in

origin. I am involved in it, my very being is rooted
This hierarchy cannot fail, this authority cannot be abolished without the family bringing about its own destruction as a
value. After that, in my eyes, it can no
longer be anything but a

it

in

from the
it.

net in which I feel I have been caught

by mistake and out of

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY
which there

is

nothing

left

for

me

but

to extricate

77

myself as soon

as possible.

In speaking of a presence, I introduce a somewhat different
shade of meaning here, which it will be as well to explain more
precisely. Again in this case each one of us must refer back to
his childhood memories which, when we are dealing with
realities of this sort, seem to me to
play the part belonging to
reminiscence in the philosophy of Plato. Each of us, with the
exception of a few rare and unhappy individuals, has, at least on

certain occasions, been able to prove by experience the existence of
the family as a protective skin placed between himself and a

world which is foreign, threatening, hostile to him. And there is
no doubt that nothing is more painful in the destiny of an
individual than the tearing away of this tissue, either by a
sudden or a slow and continuous process, carried out by the
pitiless hands of life or death, or rather of that nameless power
of which life and death are but alternating aspects. The similes
associated with and alas! abused by a feebly sentimental or
didactic kind of poetry, the similes of cocoon, nest or cradle are
those which most exactly illustrate what I should be ready to

term the downy element in the reality of the family.
But here by an analytical effort we must free ourselves from
metaphors themselves. We must make ourselves aware of the
primitive us, this archetypal and privileged us which is only
normally realised in family

life.

This us

is

in general inseparable

from a home of our own. It is certainly not by chance if all the
forces which have been working towards the destruction of the
family house have at the same time been preparing for the overthrow of the family itself. This privileged us cannot, even on the
humblest levels of this life of consciousness, be separated from a
permanent habitation which is ours and which in the course of
our existence has gradually become consubstantial with us. The
spontaneous and immediate consciousness of an always, a perpetual life, is associated with the familiar objects among which
we live, with the setting in which daily tasks are carried out,
with the feelings which can scarcely be formulated of a tutelary
presence incarnated in these things and in this background and
which, as it were, deepens and colours the daily outlook. All this
seems to

me in principle indissolubly bound up with the existence

78

HOMO VIATOR

of the family considered both as a fact and a value. I want no
other proof than the one (negative it is true) afforded by the
mental upheaval, and often the heartbreak, so frequently brought
It is
upon a child by the common enough event of a house-move.
if
he
adult
an
even
a child and often enough
upon

brought upon
has kept the childlike character, the tenderness of tissue which
all the battering and bruising
persists in some people throughout
of personal experience. But inversely we must recognise that all
which tends to destroy the sense of a habitation and of permanence in the surroundings of a being in process of formation will
contribute directly to the weakening of his consciousness of the
I am convinced that
family itself. In passing, I may say that
therein lies one of the chief causes of the disappearance of family
consciousness among the working population of the great indus-

where nomadic life, not of tent and caravan, but of
furnished rooms, is the order of the day. The
and
lodgings
to
tends
become simply an abstract idea instead of the
family
trial centres,

very essence of the atmosphere a

human

being almost uncon-

sciously inhales, an essence which imperceptibly impregnates
saturates his thinking, his appreciation and his love.

and

You may say that all these remarks only bear upon the outward and temporary conditions of life. But the more one strives
to understand the meaning of existence, the more .surely one is
led to the conclusion that the outward is also the inward, or
rather to the realisation that this distinction has no meaning

where the actual growth of a being

is

involved. It

is

moreover

obvious that the disappearance of the settled habitation, or rather
of the ho'me, is inseparable from the fading away of traditions.
Actually these traditions are to the inner man what the family
setting is to the visible one. We cannot just say they are his
environment; they help to form him. Without them there is a
risk of his becoming the plaything of every chance influence; his
development is exposed to all the dangers of incoherence. But
the traditions of which I am here thinking bear upon the continuity of the family itself: they are first of all the records and
examples which secure the bond between the generations. But
there is yet another thing: every family which has real vitality
produces a certain ritual without which it would be in danger
of eventually losing its solid foundations. It is all this delicate

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

79

which is compromised and which, for nearly a
has
been
century,
cracking. Why? The reasons for this decrepitude
appear to me to be very varied and to go very deep. Some are
obvious. They have to do with ideology, with the diffusion of a
mythology of which revolutionary spirits of every description
have made themselves the channels. Some of them can scarcely
be analysed. But we can say with certainty that the amazing

architecture

transformation of the material conditions of life brought about
industrial revolution tends to relegate to an almost legendary distance those who lived, thought and struggled before it.
This upheaval was in reality too complete, too massive to be

by the

understood by those very people who witnessed it, and who
its victims instead of
gaining anything from it. It was
first of all a change of rhythm. Men were not able to recognise it;
rather, they submitted to it by an inner adaptation, and this was
not effected without causing the most serious psychological
damage in many cases, and bringing about a real deterioration
of the mental fibre. It was inevitable that this extraordinary
acceleration of the rhythm of life should tend more and more to
prevent the slow sedimentation of habitus which seems surely to
have been from all time the essential condition at the origin of all
realities connected with the family. Still more, such an acceleration could not take place without a reckless waste of the reserves
slowly accumulated by living. Gustave Thibon in some illumina-

became

most marvellously this tragic
aspect of contemporary life. He denounces the fearful squandering of reserves which has taken place before our eyes; he points
out most clearly that we are in danger of causing the worst
ting passages has brought out

possible confusion by preaching the duty of improvidence; for it
is essential to make "the distinction between the improvidence

who

does not worry about the future because he has
of eternity and life, within him,
and the improvidence of the decadent man whose unstable soul
has become the plaything of the moment and of every passing
temptation, and who, equally incapable of waiting or of making
a decision, constantly yields to the immediate suggestions of an

of the saint
laid

up

his treasure, the source

egoism without sequence or unity. For the least economical
person is also the most selfish. To economise in the sane and
strict sense of the word means above all; to keep in order to give

HOMO VIATOR

8O

more effectively. No doubt there is a foresight which is miserly
and self-contained, which is opposed to true human exchanges.
But

its

legitimate child, absolute improvidence.,

is

perhaps even

more the enemy of giving and communion. In the material
order, as in the spiritual, liberality and munificence are only
possible for him whose strict vigilance has been able to create
large reserves within and around himself. Such virtues have died
out to-day."
Let us here notice that the great contemplative, in whom
reflection and vision have become fused, is capable of unlocking
doors which are hidden from the vulgar gaze. Technical progress,
considered not in itself, not of course from the point of view of the
principles which made it possible, but as we see it incorporated
into the daily life of individuals, has not been effected without
the loss of human substance. This loss is indeed its none too easily
detected counterpart. It is on the plane of craftsmanship that
this loss of substance appears most clearly. But where it is a question of secret relationships between people, the ravages brought
about by the technical revolution are harder to recognise and to
understand. It is certain that they are due in great measure to
the growing standardisation of individuals for which the first
responsibility is to be laid at the door of far too uniform an
education, having much too little respect for local customs and
peculiarities. Then there is the Press, whose degraded character
can never be denounced resolutely enough. In addition there is
a close connection between the acceleration of the rhythm of life
and the appearance of a humanity which is inwardly more and

more impoverished, more and more interchangeable. A metaphor, or rather an analogy will show what I mean. To take some

Region full of an inner soul, such as Brittany, for example; is it
not noticeable that when we cross it rapidly it seems to be
emptied of this spiritual quality, this mystery, which however we
rediscover if we take the trouble to go through the country in a

manner? The phenomenon which I have in mind here
of the same order, but it touches on human reality where
being and appearing can never be truly separated. Moreover,
even the mystery of places always conceals a human presence,
maybe diffused; things are impregnated with the feelings they
once awoke in souls. It is from the point of view of a philosophy
leisurely

is

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

8l

we can succeed in understanding the unity, I
so far as to say the identity, of two phenomena
superficial observer appear at first to be distinct. I

of duration that

would even go

which, for a
mean to say on the one hand the depopulation of the country,
and on the other the dissolution of the family. I think then that
I shall not be wandering from my subject, if I try to expose the
tragic inner reality of which these two phenomena are but two
inseparable aspects.
Let us notice, first of

all, that existence in towns makes a
any rate implicitly, of triumphing over the
which living beings are subject. The towndweller strives, without the slightest success be it well understood, to inaugurate an order of life wherein there are no seasons.
It is a lamentable and ridiculous application of the fateful

certain pretension, at
laws of alternation to

sentence, eritis sicut dei: you shall be as gods, you shall be set free
from the vicissitudes to which the animal world is subject. The
large American cities are, as it were, the prototypes of a world
where preservative processes, forcing and fakes are employed to
provide specious satisfactions for the need we have developed to
escape from the cosmic rhythm and to substitute for it I know
not what inventions caricaturing the eternity for which we still
yearn nostalgically. But hard experience seems to show that this
exclusively human rhythm tends in fact to become that of a
machine or an automaton, for it is a rhythm which is not superorganic but sub-organic. Thus the danger arises of a most fatal

disorder invading the very heart of existence, for the man who
apparently striving to become a machine is nevertheless alive,

is

although he ignores more and more systematically his condition
The inexpressible sadness which emanates from
a
dismal
sadness which belongs to everything that is
cities,
great
devitalised, everything that represents a self-betrayal of life,
appears to me to be bound up in the most intimate fashion with
the decay of the family. This sadness is sterility, it is a disavowal
felt by the heart; a disavowal which, as we shall see more and
more clearly, concerns the very conditions of life. It is really a
as a living being.

question of what we might be tempted to call the very colour of
existence; but yet we must understand that a colour can be
looked at and as it were absorbed by the eye, whilst what we are
dealing with is lived experience as such. In order to make my

HOMO VIATOR

82

clearer I will ask you to think of those changes, at first
almost imperceptible, which tend to weaken the ties between us
and our near ones. Each of us knows from experience how an
intimacy can lose its transparency, how the current bearing two

meaning

beings and uniting them dynamically can lose its fluidity, so that
the individualities, which a moment ago still felt themselves to
be fused and enveloped in the bosom of a tutelary and vivifying
element, are now separated, colliding with each other in a succession of instantaneous clashes, each as brutally hurtful as a
blow. I cannot help thinking that during the last centuries of our
civilisation a dislocation of the same kind has taken place
between man and life, and it is related to the obscure and organic

misunderstandings in which so many married existences come to
ruin. Thus the family has been attacked in the double spring
whence it derives its special vitality: fidelity and hope.
The idea which I want to bring out here is difficult and from
the rational point of view almost impossible to grasp, so, in order
to avoid expressing it in academic terms which might distort it,
I propose to say quite simply how it was recently borne in upon
me in a concrete form.
We had just been through one of those almost completely
depopulated villages which are to be found in hundreds in the
woman with whom we had
departments of the south-west.
exchanged a few words had complained to us of the quietness of
the place, of the monotony and lack of amusements. Suddenly
my thoughts were concentrated on everything which this word

A

amusements stands for. "Assuredly", I said to myself, "it is
above all the search for amusements which sends the villagers

away

to the towns.

On

the other hand, as these out-of-the-way

become more and more empty, life in them becomes more
and more boring so that in a way the exodus creates its own
justification. But in reality what do we mean by amusements?
Amusement is diversion, a turning away, but what from? And
how does the need for diversion show itself? This is the real
problem. It is only too clear that the town with its 'amusements'
has exercised a regular power of suction over the country districts; we might also say that the town dweller has brought about
a gradual contamination of the peasant. But all the same, the
places

soul of the peasantj

which held out

so long against this infection,

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

83

had

to become open to it. It is said, not without reason, that the
uncomfortable conditions which are so frequent in the country,
the lack of air and of light in the cottages, etc., have helped to
depopulate the fields. But why have the inhabitants not devoted
their energy to

improving their rural dwellings as in certain
such as the Orisons or the Tyrol? It is not
to
here
of a certain natural laziness, there had to
enough
speak
be a preliminary disaffection before this disastrous diversion
could take place. And once more the question confronts me with
an irritating persistency; diversion? Why do they seek it, from
what do they turn away? How can we help seeing that the question is identically the same as that which confronts us when we

mountainous

districts

enquire into the causes of the breaking up of the family?"
Immediately, however, I saw the answer with a clarity which
since that time has never been eclipsed. The need for amusement,
as each of us knows from his own experience, is bound up with a
certain ebbing of life's tide. But this is still insufficient and even
ambiguous. It may indeed happen that vitality decreases without
the manifestation of this need, and on the contrary this decrease
may even result in the disappearance of all curiosity: indifference
settles down on the soul, the being reacts less and less, he gives
himself over to debility, he covers himself with veils. The ebb of
life of which we are thinking here is quite different in character.
The being imagines he regains his life by seizing every occasion
of experiencing violent sensations of no matter what order. But
these so-called stimulants afford but precarious protection
against boredom. What then is this boredom? One of the most
intelligent men of our time who held an important post in the
government until these last weeks, said to me shortly before the
war: "France is suffering from a metaphysical malady: she is
bored." It was a diagnosis which went deep and which I have
never forgotten a diagnosis which has been tragically confirmed
by our misfortunes. At the origin of diversion, of the will to be
diverted or amused at any price, there is an attempt to escape,
but from what? It can only be from oneself. The ego is without

any doubt faced with a dilemma:

to fulfil itself or to escape.
does not attain fulfilment, it is only conscious of itself
as of an unendurable gaping void from which it must seek protection at any price. Anyone who is absorbed does not know this

Where

it

HOMO VIATOR

84
void; he

is

as it

were caught up in plenitude,

life

him

envelops

protects him. Boredom, on the contrary, is not only bound
up with inaction but with a dismantling process. Thus we can
very well understand that in the country the woman is far more

and

subject to it than the man. If it is true to say that she suffers
more than he does from discomfort and inconvenience, it is
because she has more time to think about such things, unless she
is continually taken up by the incessant occupations of motherhood, which actually means that these tasks are not only a
burden but a support for her. "One is borne along only by one's
responsibilities", Gabriel Seailles said most excellently.
start from this point we can understand the causes of the

of

life

we

or rather of consciousness, wherein this consciousness

comes gradually

What

If

ebbing

then are

its

repudiate its fundamental commitments.
commitments? Here we are coming down to

to

essentials.

It seems as though it were necessary to postulate the existence
of a pact, I should almost say a nuptial bond, between man and
life; it is in man's power to untie this bond, but in so far as he

denies the pact he tends to lose the notion of his existence.

What

exactly to be understood by this bond? I may be accused of
being led away by a metaphor, of unduly exaggerating abstrac-

is

tions. But however we interpret this fact philosophically, we
must recognise that man is a being and the only one we know
capable of adopting an attitude towards his life, not only his
own life, but life in itself. He is then not a mere living being,
he is, or rather he has become, something more, and we might
say that it is through this faculty for adopting an attitude that
he is a spirit. M. Jean Lacroix in his fine book Personne et Amour
very rightly reminds us that one of the essential characteristics of

man is his ability to expose himself voluntarily to death. This is,
however, only a particular expression, the most striking of all, of
a much more general truth the truth of his transcendance over
life and death. A human act, whatever it
may be, presupposes it.
It is this which makes it really possible and even
legitimate to
speak of man and of life as of two realities which are not confused or which have ceased to be confused. From this it follows
that in speaking of a pact between man and life we have in
the one hand the confidence which man promises life

mind on

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

85

and which makes it possible for him to give himself to life, and
on the other hand the response of life to this confidence of man.
But

it is

precisely the family, considered in relation to the act
it is constituted, which shows us the
working out of

by which

this pact, for it is in fact the pact's incarnation. And it is
inversely in the acts by which families are disunited that the
breaking of this same pact takes place before our eyes. It
is

not

difficult to illustrate this

very general idea by concrete

examples.

The

which constitutes marriage is obviously not
and simple mating which is only a human act, common
alike to men and animals; it is not just a momentary union, but
one which is to last; it is something which is established. A family
is founded, it is erected like a monument whose hewn stone is
neither the satisfaction of an instinct, nor the yielding to an
essential act

the pure

impulse, nor the indulgence of a caprice. From this point of view
we should probably not hesitate to say that there are innumerable
false marriages (of course, I am not using these words in the
sense of "faux menages"). I

am

thinking here of those unions

which are perfectly legal, but where there is nothing in the
inward depths of character, nothing in the very centre of the
will which corresponds to the socially binding form or even, alas,
to the strictly sacramental character of the union entered into. It
more than probable that in a society where divorce is not only

is

many circles as a more or less normal
a
must
time
inevitably come when the irresponsicontingency,
bility with which so many unbelievers lightly and heedlessly get
married, is communicated from one to another until it infects
even those who by tradition, human respect or some remnant of
faith are still impelled to take a vow of fidelity in the presence of
God, only to find out too late that by this contradiction they are
themselves caught in a trap from which it is not possible to
escape except at the price of a scandalous renunciation or
dishonourable subterfuge.
Here we must also touch on the difficult question of knowing
whether the bond of marriage can really be compared with a
simple contract. I must own that on this point the opinion of
jurists matters little to me, for it seems very probable that reflection should here be free of the categories which they employ*
accepted, but regarded in

86

HOMO VIATOR

Indeed, the more marriage is regarded as a simple contract, the
more one must logically come to admit that it can be renounced
by common accord, that it can even become no more than a
temporary promise. The more one forms an exclusively rational
idea of marriage, the more one is led, not perhaps theoretically

but in fact, not only to admit divorce as, at the most, a possibility
in exceptional cases, but to incorporate with one's notion of the
marriage bond the idea that it can be revoked. Or alternatively
one may proclaim that in the interests of society the individual
should be sacrificed in this as in many other matters to the
agonising pressure of convention. But this solution which may
perhaps satisfy the legislator or the sociologist has the serious
defect of setting up the most tyrannical heteronomy in the realm

where the individual person seems most justified in claiming his
inalienable right to be an exception.
The only condemnation of divorce which can be justified, at
least in theory, in the eyes of those very people who suffer most
under it, is the condemnation which they must recognise as
being pronounced in the name of their own will a will so deep
that they could not disown it without denying their own natures.
If one postulates that in principle the conjugal union finds its
consummation, and even its sanction, in the appearance of a new

being in which the husband and wife fulfil and pass beyond
themselves, it becomes obviously absurd to consider it quite
natural that this same married couple should become free again
whenever the sentiments which prevailed at their union change
for some reason or another. They are no longer simply united by
a reciprocal act which by common accord they can annul, but
by the existence of a being for whom they are responsible and
who has rights over them which cannot be set aside unless we
are cynically to argue from the fact that in the animal species
there comes a moment when male and female lose all interest in
their offspring because it no longer needs them. One can scarcely
deny, I fear, that the innumerable human beings who to-day
invent for themselves the most loose conception of the married
state, argue from the example of the animals to justify themselves. Moreover it is worth noticing how easy it is to slide from
what professes to be a completely rational notion of marriage to
the grossest form of naturalism which claims to remove all lines of

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

87

demarcation between man and other living creatures, in order
that he may enjoy all the licence which goes with the natural
state. But we know only too well the aberrations people can
fall into when they claim to draw positive conclusions
concerning
what can and should be considered natural and consequently
justifiable, particularly in matters of sex, from their observations
of animal habits.
We can in reality be certain that where the mind oscillates
between an abstract formalism and an animalism with pretensions of a pseudo-scientific or poetically mystical nature,
it condemns itself to lose sight of the unity apart from which it is
impossible to think of the mystery of the family. "The heads of
those great adventures of the modern world", said
Peguy. What does this mean except that a family is not created
or maintained as an entity without the exercise of a fundamental

families,

generosity whose rightly metaphysical principle must be exmust, of course, leave on one side the man who

amined.

We

by chance, who produces his offspring like the animals
without accepting the consequences of his act. He does not
found a family; he produces a brood. In the true head of a
generates

family, the

and the

life

harmony which
force

accessible to us

by

is

attained between consciousness

established in a sphere which is not easily
analysis. Perhaps there is even a danger that

is

such a method might prevent us from understanding how
this harmony is possible. As is so often the case, our thought
has to work negatively and can only reach its objective by
exclusion.

obvious on the one hand, as we have seen, that where the
family is conceived as a reality any idea of marriage as a mere
association of individual interests must be ruled out. It seems as
though the marriage must in some way regulate itself in relation
to the offspring, for whose coming preparation has to be made;
but it is not less certain, and this observation is of the greatest
importance here, that a marriage concluded simply with a view
to procreation is not only in danger of degeneration because it
does not rest on a firm spiritual basis, but, still more, it is an
attack upon what it most worthy of reverence in the specifically
human order. There is something which outrages the very dignity
of the person when the joining of two beings is envisaged merely
It

is

HOMO VIATOR

88
as a

means of reproduction. The operation of the

flesh

is

thus

degraded and terrible revenge is in process of preparation for the
time when the misunderstood and stifled powers in the depths of
the human soul shake off the yoke which has been tragically
imposed upon them. So it is certainly not true to say that procreation is the end of marriage. We must rather admit that both
form complementary phases of a particular history which each
one of us has to live out and through which he accomplishes his
destiny as a creative being. The meaning of this word "creative"
is very precise here: it denotes the active contribution each soul
is at liberty to bring to the universal work which is accomplishing
itself in our world and doubtless far beyond it. In this connection
the condition of a human being of whatever kind is not essentially
different from that of the artist who is the bearer of some message
which he must communicate, of some flame which he must
kindle and pass on, like the torch-bearers of Lucretia. Everything
seems to happen as though on the human level the operation of
the flesh ought to be the hallowing of a certain inward fulfilment,
an out-flowing not to be forced since it springs from an experience
of plentitude. Perhaps I should make myself better understood
by saying in a way which actually is not exclusively Christian
that the operation of the flesh loses its dignity and degenerates
its true nature if it is not an act of thanksgiving, a creative

from

what a deep difference
between husbands and wives who prudently
secure for themselves an heir to succeed them, an heir who is
nothing but a representative or a substitute for them and those
who, in a sort of prodigality of their whole being, sow the seed of
life without ulterior motive by radiating the life flame which has
permeated them and set them aglow.
These observations, which actually should be infinitely shaded,
make it possible to catch a glimpse of the meaning of the sacred
bond which it is man's lot to form with life, or, on the other
hand, to stretch to a breaking-point after which he remains
alone in a darkened and defiled universe.
There is assuredly a sense in which it is absolutely true to say
that in such a realm all generalisations are deceptive. It is not
even enough to remember that there are only particular cases.
The truth is rather that there are no cases at all, each soul, each
testimony. But, from this point of view,

we must

establish

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

89

individual destiny constitutes a microcosm, governed by laws
which, at least to a certain degree, are only valid for that soul.
Hence it follows that in questions concerning particular people,

such as a certain childless couple, or a family centred upon an
only child, we have no right to judge. We never know it is not
our business to know what disappointments, what secret trials
underlie that which

we might

be tempted to condemn as
And indeed we can
be glad of it, for in principle it is intolerable and undistinguishable
from the most odious pharisaism that any of us should invade the
privacy of others with our judgments. We regain our right to
judge, however, in matters concerned with realities of a social
order, such as the increase of divorce, the spread in the use of
contraceptives or the practice of abortion. We can above all
exercise our judgment with full knowledge and complete justice
against an abominable propaganda which aims at making such
methods appear rationally justifiable.
But from my own point of view, it will be understood that the
question is not really one of proclaiming the immoral or antisocial character of any action or conduct. I have rather to discuss
the symptoms in such action or conduct of a disaffection of beings
from Being which, to tell the truth, does not imply the denial of
an explicitly formulated promise, but the drawing back by which
a spiritual organism dwindles, shrivels, cuts itself off from the
universal communion in which it found the nourishing principle
of life and growth. But what we should notice here is that by a
selfishness,

at

first

cowardice or voluntary

serious perversion of the

mind

sterility.

this sclerosis

is

interpreted as

an

emancipation, this atrophy as a blossoming. This is the unforgivable sin of which a certain ideology has been guilty; they
imagined that they were liberating the person when all the time
they were suffocating it. To borrow the famous comparison of
Kant, I should say that thinking to lighten the weight of the
atmosphere which presses upon human souls, they have transported them into a rarefied medium, where it is not possible for
them to breath normally. But what is tragic in the world of the
soul is that there is no clear indication of mortal dangers as on
the physical plane, where unmistakable symptoms or sufferings
afford the most imperative of signals and force the organism to
react.

Here,

alas! the

coma

of the dying can last for generations

HOMO VIATOR

go

without the patient, misled by his physicians, realising his condition even in his death agony. Actually this expression is not
strong enough, for the threat here is not merely that of death,
which after all is essentially a purification, it is one of degradation
and perversion under the innumerable forms possible to human
nature, and these forms, by the very diversity of their character,
are the counterpart or countersign of the dignity and vocation

of man.

Perhaps we shall now be able to discuss why the mystery of the
family can truly be said to be a mystery of fidelity and hope.
Analysis shows that the crisis in our family institutions can be
traced to a deeper and deeper misunderstanding of the virtues
through which the unification of our destiny both terrestrial and
super-terrestrial is consummated.
First of all a fundamental error or illusion

concerning

fidelity.

must be disposed of

We are too much inclined

mere safeguard, an inward

resolution

to consider

it

as

which purposes simply

a
to

preserve the existing order. But in reality the truest fidelity is
creative. To be sure of it, the best way is to strive to grasp the

very complex bond which unites a child to its parents. There we
have a relationship which is always exposed to a double risk of
deterioration. Some, professing a strict and narrow traditionalism, tend to consider the child as entirely in the debt of those

who gave

it life; others, on the contrary, minimising this debt, if
not
do
actually deny it altogether, will tend to treat the
they
child as the creditor, for they view life not as a blessing but a
crushing burden which the parents in their heedless selfishness
have placed on the shoulders of an innocent creature. I have
already had occasion to remark that the phenomena of the breaking up of families which is increasing so rapidly at the present

probably connected with

this systematic depreciation of
advocates of birth control claim more or less sincerely
that it is out of pity for their possible descendants that they refuse
to give them the chance of existence; but we cannot help noticing,
all the same, that this pity which is bestowed at small cost, not

day

is

life.

The

living beings but upon an absence of being or nothingness,
found in conjunction with a suspiciously good opportunity for
indulging the most cynical egoism, and can scarcely be separated
from an impoverished philosophy which measures the value of

upon

is

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

gi

by the pleasures and conveniences it provides. It is no less
certain that pure traditionalism presents an inacceptable position
here as elsewhere. Life, as it is transmitted in the act of procrea-

life

tion,

is

a blessing nor a curse in
an opportunity, a chance for good or

really neither

possibility,

itself.

evil.

It is

But

a

this

only achieved in so far as the being to whom it is
granted appears from the moment of his birth as a subject, that is
to say as able to enjoy and above all to suffer, and capable of one
day attaining to the consciousness of what he has at first only felt.
This being has to be armed in such a way that the two-sided
possibility which has been given him appears to him as a precious
possibility

is

opportunity when, on reaching the stage at which he adopts his
own attitude to life, he can appreciate it. It is, then, the sacred
duty of parents to behave in such a way towards their child, that
one day it will have good reason to acknowledge that it is in their
debt. But if ever they are to be justified in considering that they
have a credit here it will be exclusively in so far as they have
succeeded in discharging a debt themselves, which to tell the
truth cannot be likened to a payment of account but rather to
the production of a work of art where their only share is the
laying of the foundations. This amounts to saying that the debt
and credit are strictly correlated and connected together on the
child's side quite as much as on that of the parents. But is not
this to recognise implicitly that such categories are too narrow,
that they are no longer applicable except where the mystery of
the family has been somehow desecrated from within by beings
who have ceased to share its life and have transported themselves
onto a plane where each one demands his due? In the same
order of ideas it is very interesting to notice that though these
notions of credit and debt tend sometimes, alas, to be accepted
in limited families where a special function seems to be vested
in the child by his parents through a pseudo-agreement in which
he will always be justified in saying he has had no part, they will
be found quite inapplicable to large families where the husband
and wife, with no niggardly calculations and no pretensions to
dispose of life as of their savings, have generously given themselves up to the creative spirit which penetrated them. It is still
necessary, of course, that the children should share in the spirit
of the family. Unfortunately, it does not always follow that they

HOMO VIATOR

92

do. If they allow themselves to become infected with the prevalent individualism they will be tempted in many cases to pose as
the victims of the blameworthy thoughtlessness of those who

brought them into the world. So then in the end everything comes
back to the spirit which at the same time is to be incarnated or
established,

and

it is

and maintained,

beyond the self;
expressed by the words

the spirit spreading

precisely this spirit

which

is

"creative fidelity". The more our hearts as well as our intellects
keep before them the idea of our lineage, of the forbears to whom
we are answerable because in the last analysis it is from them
that we receive the deposit which must be transmitted the more
this spirit will succeed in freeing itself from the shroud of selfishness and cowardice in which a humanity, more and more cut off
from its ontological roots, is in danger of becoming gradually
enveloped. Inversely, the more the sense of a lineage tends to be
lost in the fading consciousness of a vague and nameless subsoil,
the less the human soul will be able to discern its ultimate responsibilities and the more the family will tend to be reduced to an
associatipn with common interests, a sort of limited company of
which it is lawful and even normal that the constitution should

become

increasingly flexible.

indispensable here to stress the fact that
am trying to define depends in no
the acceptance of any special religious belief, although

I think that it

is

creative fidelity such as I

way upon

Christian dogma gives it
infinitely to its splendour.

a transcendant justification and adds

We must,

I think, recognise on the one
that there exists a form of Christianity, heretical no doubt
but all the same unimpeachable, which, by the predominance

hand

given to the eschatological side can dangerously weaken or even
undermine the soul's love of life. This love of life I should readily
call the ethico-lyrical impulse which controls the human swarm.

Many souls under Jansenistic influence have no doubt succumbed
to the temptation of abjuring what is human and deserting the
earth, without perhaps getting much nearer to heaven by so
doing. But, on the other hand, I should be quite disposed to
think that a religio exists of which the pagans themselves have
left us admirable signs, a reverence for the dead and for the
gods

presiding over the home which apart from any essentially
Christian spirituality gives evidence of the pact between man and

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

93

the life-force to which I have so often had occasion to refer: and
it is only too easy to understand that where this
religio has given
way to the pitiless pressure, not of technics but of a mentality
fascinated and unsettled by the progress of technics, we see
as at the present time an increasing number of violations of that
natural morality and order still recognised as such by our forefathers. I am tempted to think that it is this religio which we must
first restore and that unfortunately a Christian
super-structure,
which only too often is nothing but a camouflage can very well
disguise how fatally it is lacking. Unquestionably this point seems
to me the most important in the whole tangle of considerations
I have tried to set before you to-day. The men of my
generation have seen carried out before their eyes with extraordinary tenacity a work of systematic subversion which is no
longer directed against revealed doctrines or principles hallowed
by tradition, but against nature itself. Man, whatever brainless
biologists may think about him, will never be on the same level
as the animals. Wherever he is truly himself, wherever he is faithful to his vocation, he is infinitely above them. Wherever he
deliberately renounces his true calling, he falls infinitely below
them. As for the humanism for little Voltaireans on the retired
list, offered by those who advocate a return to the just mean,

which

average virtues, to prudent calculations and methodical
precautions, we now know with tragic certainty that it is the
tremulous forerunner of the worst individual and national
to

disasters.

This is not all: if so many souls to-day seem to be deaf to the call
of creative fidelity, it is because these souls have lost all sense of
hope. I must here briefly recall the fundamental ideas which I
developed a few weeks ago on this theological virtue, the mysterious source of human activity. I said that hope cannot be
separated either from a sense of communion or from a more or
less conscious and explicit dependence on a power which guarantees this communion itself. "I hope in Thee, for us", such is the
authentic formula of hope. But the more this "for us" tends to
confine itself to what concerns the self instead of opening onto
the infinite, the more hope shrivels and deteriorates, and, in the

domain of die family, the more it tends to degenerate into a shortsighted ambition and to fix its attention on ways of safeguarding

HOMO VIATOR

Q4

certain Having which actually need not take a
But I added that it is only by breaking
form.
material
grossly
that
hope can effect an entrance into our soul.
through Having
I
did not mean exclusively the visible possesterm
the
Having
By
sions of which each of us can make an inventory, but rather the

and increasing a

armour of good or bad habits, opinions and prejudices which
makes us impervious to the breath of the spirit, everything in us
which paralyses what the Apostle calls the liberty of the children
of God. Perhaps in this connection it would be well to follow the
example of one of the greatest thinkers of our day and to concentrate our attention on a central fact in the psychology of contemporary man; I mean anxiety, and particularly the anxiety
which is less the result of bitter experience than a mortifying
like the premature decay of
anticipation, the anxiety which is
is indeed scarcely one of the
There
lived.
never
have
who
those
collective influences of this age which has not tended to mark the
foreheads of our adolescents with the sign of this decay; school,
the Press, forms of entertainment even, have helped to impair the
youthful freshness, the candid voice, the limpid gaze, the purity

of heart, without which youth ceases to be a quality and a grace
and becomes no more than a title, a dimension entered on an
identity card. It would be unpardonable to undervalue the
reaction which has been taking place for the last few years in
movements which are, or hope to be, the prelude to a renaissance

country. But there is no disguising the fact that
crushing and is far beyond the power of the movements
in question. The atmosphere is still saturated with germs of decay
which can only be swept away by an entirely new spirit. I think
it is clear that on the one hand such a renewal can only spring
from a religious principle but that on the other it cannot surely be
the work of Christians alone, if by that we mean those who are

in our

unhappy

the task

is

regular members of a definite church. Finally, I am persuaded
that though we certainly do not want public authorities to be
patrons, since this only too often compromises a movement, we
can at least ask them not to paralyse the initiative of people of all
complexions, as they unite in a common effort to stimulate and

much

to be feared, indeed, that the
of whose organs have been successively over-developed, will tend finally to kill everything which it
revivify society. It
State, the

modern

is

very

State, all

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY

95

claims to sanction or foster in the human being, for it is beyond
its power either to give life or to reveal and
recognise it.
Life: I confess that I have doubtless misused this word, the

ambiguity of which I am the first to acknowledge and deplore.
But whatever may be the confusion to which this ambiguity
exposes loose or untrained processes of thought, it none the less
has the special positive merit of revealing to us, like a drop of
water in the

desert, the existence of the

mystery of incarnation to

The family, inasthe matrix of individuality, is really the meeting
place of the vital element and the spiritual. Still more it is an
evidence of our inability to separate them, unless it be when we
which

I

much

as it

drew your attention

at the beginning.

is

claim to abide by the wager of a purely speculative reason which
with an arrogant disregard for the conditions which
follow from its introduction into the world of beings, to throw off
the shackles proper to the state of a creature. In the last analysis
it is on this elementary yet generally misunderstood notion of the
state of a creature, the condition of a creature, that we must here
place the decisive accent. By a paradox which well deserves our
attention, the more man, misled not by science but by a certain
elementary philosophy of science, comes to regard himself as a
mere link in an endless chain, or as the result of purely natural
causes, the more he arrogates to himself the right of absolute
sovereignty in all that concerns the ordering of his personal conduct. The more he is theoretically humiliated by a materialistic
philosophy which claims to deny any special identity to himself or
his actions, the more does he actually develop a practical pride
which impels him to deny the existence of any human order to
which he might owe obedience. It is natural that under such conditions the family should be choked between the claims of two
systems apparently opposed, but actually converging and reinforcing each other. In fact, it only assumes its true value and dignity
through the functioning of a central relationship which cannot be
affected by any objective causality and which is the strictly
sets out,

whose mysterious and unique expression is
found in the words divine fatherhood. Certainly this analogy may
seem very far from a natural fatherhood, which is established by
methods belonging to positive consciousness. The analogy, however, is not simply a spiritual way of looking at things. It is of a
religious relationship

t

HOMO VIATOR

96

We

are here approachconstructive character; it provides a key.
all
the
underwhich
truth
a
metaphysical
upon
paradoxical
ing
standing of the family depends. Far as we may be from claiming
that theology arbitrarily transposes natural relationship into the

sphere of divine realities, we must undoubtedly recognise that,
inversely, all the so-called natural relationships which, as we have
seen, can never be reduced to simple experimental data, not only
symbolise transcendental relationships towards which they direct
our devotion, but they also tend co weaken and dissolve precisely
in so far as these relationships are misunderstood and denied. In
other words, contrary to the persistent humanistic illusion, we
to assert that family relationships, like human
matters in general, afford no consistency, no guarantee of solidity.
It is only when they are referred back to a superhuman order,
which here below we cannot grasp apart from its signs and
indications, that their truly sacred character becomes apparent.
Accordingly, as events have gone on showing for the last quarter

have good reason

of a century, wherever man betrays faith in man, wherever
treason becomes a habit and then a rule, there can no longer be

room

but insanity and ruin. It can scarcely be
wherever the claim is made to establish a way of private

for anything

different

which disregards the vow of fidelity. The truth is that
humanity is only truly human when it is upheld by the incor-

life

ruptible foundations of consecration without such foundations
decomposes and dies. Do not let us say, however, that it returns

it

to nothingness. If this word has any meaning, which is not certain, it is on a level of reality far below the human structure.

When man, by denying the

existence of God, denies his own, the
are
which
dissociated by his denial keep their
spiritual powers
primitive reality, but disunited and detached they can no longer
do anything but drive the beings of flesh and soul back against

each other in a despairing conflict those beings which, had their
union been safeguarded and preserved, would have gone forward
towards eternal life. What all this amounts to is that if, as is certain, we have to recover to-day the sense of a certain fundamental
reverence towards Me, it cannot be by starting from below, that
is to say from a biology of racialism or eugenics infected with illwill. On the contrary, only an affirmation which reaches far
beyond all empirical and objectively discernible ways of living

THE MYSTERY OF THE FAMILY
can gain

97

for us a sense of life's fullness and, besides this, set the

upon the perpetually renewed act of creation, that
the
which
whole family preserves its being and grants to
by
the soul, which it forms and guides, the fearful power of com-

seal of eternity

act

pleting or, alas, of repudiating

it.

LE PEUGH.
March May, 1942.

To JEAN DE FABREGUES

THE CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF
FATHERHOOD^
THE THOUGHTS WHICH

I

want

to propose for

your con-

sideration to-day follow directly from those I put before you last
year at Lyons and at Toulouse in my lecture on the Mystery of the

Family.

One might

even say that in the

last analysis I

am

only

presenting an application of the general idea which formed as it
were the framework of that lecture. I think therefore that as this
idea can serve as a guiding thread through the sinuosities of the
developments which are to follow, it will be useful to place it in
abstract outline at the head of my talk. To-day, experience seems
to show us clearly that the unbeliever is indulging in an illusion
when he imagines that he only has to make a clean sweep, that is
to say to demolish what he regards as the superstructures of
religious consciousness, and he will have at his disposal a clear
field, or let us say arable ground in which all he need do is to sow

the good grain distributed by reason in order to see rich harvests
of natural morality spring up before his eyes. In reality everything
goes to show that the crumbling away of religious beliefs, which
has been going on for the last century and a half in vast sectors of
the western world, brings as its consequence a weakening of the

on which these beliefs had grown up. The philfaced witfy a fact of such dimensions, is obliged to
seek an explanation and to wonder if the principle of these foundations does not contain a certain piety clearly religious in essence.
This we might without any offence call sub-Christian, for it is the

natural foundations

osopher, when

under structure upon which authentic Christianity is built. It is
this understructure, or foundation, which is
being destroyed
before our eyes to-day, so that the work of reconstruction, of
which all recognise the need, has to be carried out, not on the
ground level, as is ordinarily imagined, but in an underground
region which has to be examined and cleared. On this point I can
only express my agreement with two of the most vigorous and
1

Lecture given to the Ecole

des Hautes Etudes Familiales at

Lyons, July, 1943.

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD

99

penetrating minds of our time, two men who might appear to be
opposed by temperament and formation, but who from their different standpoints reach identical conclusions with equal lucidity
as they face the spectacle of a fallen world. They are Marcel

Legaut, the author of
Chretienne,

nature

whom

service of

Prieres

d'un

Croyant

and La

Condition

gifted observer of human
tried vainly to enlist in the

and Gustave Thibon, the
an

certain people have

official doctrine.

The simplest reflection is enough to show that fatherhood cannot be considered as a mere given fact, or even as an objectively
determinable relationship between beings united to each other by
laws which can be compared to those governing natural phenomena. Thus, to take only one example, it would be obviously
absurd to conceive of fatherhood as a mode of causality or, for the
matter of that, of finality. My child cannot be considered as an
effect of which I am the cause, nor, though it is a little less absurd,
I say that he is the end in relation to which I must appear to
myself simply as the means. The truth is much rather that fatherhood, like all the realities underlying the natural order, starting
with incarnation, that is to say the fact of being united to a body,
contains within it innumerable aspects which analysis can bring
out only at the risk of unduly isolating and thus distorting what is
organically united, thereby appearing to misunderstand the concrete unity with which it is concerned. If we try to define fatherhood in strictly biological terms, we are really not talking of it at
all, but of procreation. If we introduce considerations of a judicial
or sociological order, we expose ourselves to no less a danger; it is
that of allowing fatherhood to be absorbed in a conception which
is completely relative. From this point of view, it could only be
defined in relation to a given historical civilisation whose religious
and judicial institutions are purely transitory. But in an age such
as ours should we not, on the contrary, resist as deliberately and
persistently as possible the deadly fascination of relativism for
intellects which are already uprooted, and should we not strive
to recognise a constant element which can doubtless be covered
up or misunderstood, but only at the cost of serious consequences
for the whole spiritual economy. It is precisely for this constant
element, considered, be it well understood, as a demand rather

can

HOMO VIATOR

100

than a law, that I am here proposing to seek. The fact of living in
a time of crisis and transition affords obvious advantages for such
an investigation. Here, as always in life's domain, exceptions and
anomalies are likely to guide our reflection and to help us to discern an order which we should be less likely to notice and of
which we should not so easily understand the implications if it
presented a more even and strictly regular character and thereby
became more thoroughly incorporated in our consciousness. We
have to insist tirelessly that this order not only presupposes the
collaboration of a natural determinism whose detail escapes us,
and of all that is most deliberate in the human will, but also, at
the very root of such collaboration, an impulse 6f which the principle itself is metaphysical and evades our scrutiny. It belongs to
faith alone, under whatever form it may attain consciousness, not
indeed, and this by definition, to achieve knowledge of this principle, but to sense its mysterious efficacy and to bow to it humbly.
This actually amounts to saying that, certain conditions being

granted, or on the contrary eliminated, it is extraordinarily easy
and tempting for man to start by ignoring it and then to deny it.
Let us at the same time add that in a world where such ignoring

and subsequently such denial have become systematic, it is only
at the price of an heroic and seemingly desperate effort of reflection that what hi other periods appeared as an evident fact, less
to be considered than lived, can be regained as it were at the
sword's point.

My

aim here

will

be

to

mark what

I think are the successive

stages of this recuperative reflection reflection of the second
degree to which the thankless but indispensable task falls of

remaking, thread by thread, the spiritual fabric heedlessly torn by
a primary reflection, a reflection not only unable to distinguish
the universal implications of life, but further, and above all,

and respect for what is sacred in
any order whatsoever. From this point of view the words piety
and impiety words well-nigh forgotten by philosophy for lack of

obstinately opposed to gratitude

A task such as the one
undertaken here is only conceivable under the sign
of piety; but it goes without saying that I am not taking the word
here in the vague yet narrow sense which is given it in the expression "works of piety" (ouvrages de ptitt}. Piety means neither
use

will regain their irreplaceable value.

we have

all

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD

IOI

devotion nor edification. No, we are here concerned with reverence, with the spirit of piety, or rather, to go more deeply, with
a piety in knowledge, united to a notion which really concerns the
hallowing of the real. It is the province of the most metaphysical
thought to give its true value to this term, and it must be recognised that a second-rate intellectualism has helped with all its
power to eradicate the notion of it from our minds. Moreover, it
goes without saying and I say this categorically to prevent any
fatal mistake
that this piety in knowledge, if it is not to degenerate into a caricature of itself, not only permits, but demands the
most lucid examination of the anomalies, or even the aberrations
which a misunderstanding of his own particular condition entails
for

man.

Perhaps the best method of treating the problems which are
going to engage our attention would be to start, not from human
facts considered in their almost inextricable complexity, but from
the facts of revelation, and in particular the dogma of the Trinity,
seen once more in its amplitude and in the unfathomable wealth
of its concrete manifestations. Indeed, contrary to what a human-

own metaphysical implications
supposes, there is every reason to think that the relationship
between God the Father and God the Son is not in any way the

ism incapable of understanding its

product of a sublimation of strictly

human relationships.

It

seems

much

rather that these relationships themselves, in the course of
history, have been deepened and renewed under the action of a

transcendental idea, without which what we call our nature
would never have been able to evolve fully. I own, however, that
I did not consider that I had the right, or perhaps I simply did
not feel able to adopt this method, so that I have chosen to proceed as usual to a phenomenological examination of concrete
situations of which it seems to me thought cannot make abstraction without a danger of being lost in words. I will then take as

my point of departure a very simple remark concerning what is
fundamentally paradoxical, one might almost say absurd or scandalous, from the point of view of logical reasoning, in the way the
act of procreation

is

accomplished.

The

act of procreation: it

would seem theoretically that this should be the very act above all
others by which it is given to the creature if not to equal the

HOMO VIATOR

102

Creator, at least to accomplish in his sphere a reflection, an
analogy of the divine act without which he himself would have no
being. Experience, however, seems to show us that this is not the

can be, we
If, in order to catch a glimpse of what creation
or
less direct access,
more
have
we
to
the
to
which
domain
go
only
that is to say to the realm of art or of thought, we shall be obliged
case.

to recognise that to procreate

is

not in the least to create. In the

what is required of the male is not really an act, it is
which can be performed in almost total unconscious-

last analysis

a gesture,
ness and which, at least in extreme cases,

nothing but a letting
When we say
go,
that in generation the active part belongs to the man, it is only
true if we play upon the word active to some extent, giving it the
impoverished and vague meaning which it commonly bears in the
natural sciences, instead of the full meaning which is associated
with it when we are speaking of human action and its special
value. There is no idea of disputing that a natural dynamism is
introduced here by which extraordinarily powerful energies are

an emptying of something which

is

is

over-full.

That would be absurd. What I want to say is that it is quite
possible for this dynamism not to come to the surface on the plane

freed.

of consciousness of effort or trial. The gesture of procreation can
be accomplished under such conditions that the man only has an
indistinct recollection of it and is able to wash his hands of all its
consequences since they will take place outside him, in another
it were, a world with which he has no direct communication. It must be well understood that I am here making abstraction both of social institution and of the demands of the affective
side of our nature; but really these institutions are so imperfect
and the demands are in many cases so vague that man can claim
the privilege in this matter of a fundamental irresponsibility; a
privilege, be it understood, in respect of the egoistical individuality
which confuses liberty with the absence of obligations. Moreover,
all this only takes on a
meaning if we evoke in contrast the part
which falls to the woman, a part, humanly speaking, so much

world as

more

active: gestation,

manner, not as
all, it is

world.

it

in

which symbolises creation

itself,

in so direct a
but as we are able to imagine it. After

alone, who brings children into the
without
goes
saying that from the biological point
would be absurd to put too strong an accent on her

the

And

of view

it is

woman, and she

it

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD

103

onerous privilege. But this only shows that human perspectives,
which are all that interest us here, in no way coincide with those
offered for our consideration by an objective study of life. We
shall assuredly have to return later on to this non-agreement, this
asymmetry which will certainly be enough to prove the impossibility of establishing a "biological morality". The sole object of
these preliminary remarks is to bring out the elementary fact, too
often hidden under words and prejudices, that the experience of
fatherhood, whatever it may be, or rather become, whatever its
special characteristics and its almost innumerable varieties,
develops from what must certainly be called a nothingness (neanf)
of experience. It is exactly the contrary of what is true of motherhood. Let us, however, notice in passing that everything here is
still unavoidably complicated by the existence of strictly sexual
facts. I am thinking here not of biological but of human sex, that
is to say of the way in which man and woman react as conscious
human beings to the act by which they are mated. It is only too
clear that the intimate reaction of the woman to gestation and her
feeling towards the child she bears can be determined, in certain
painful cases, by the servitude and humiliation in which she conceived, and in others, on the contrary, by the exaltation of total
self-giving which consecrates happy unions. It might actually happen in the first hypothesis that the child was cherished all the same
as a compensation and a return or on the other hand detested as
the permanent evidence of an insult and a defeat; and it might
also happen in the second hypothesis that the child should awaken
feelings of adoration because love found in it an extension and
consummation or else, on the contrary, feelings of bitterness and
resentment because this same love fretted against it as a permanent hindrance. As always in the psychological realm, any of
these possibilities may occur. But what we can perhaps be right in

saying
tions

is

that in general there is a network of much closer connecdelicate innervation in the woman than in

and much more

the

man

the

woman,

strictly sexual modes of experience and the
of
emotional
activity opened up by the existence of
special aspects
the child. In this respect we should be tempted to say that the man
is perhaps more naturally detached than the woman; or, more
exactly, detachment which generally is of a morbid character in

between the

is

on the contrary almost normal in the man,

for in

HOMO VIATOR

104

him it comes down to the originally distinct existence of modes of
experience which can, and even, in a last analysis, should harmonise without encroaching on each other.
These preliminary observations will help to give our investigations an axis and a direction. If, as we have seen, the experience
of fatherhood develops from a nothingness (neant) of experience,
ask ourselves not only how this development can take
place and work itself out, but, going further and deeper, whether
beyond this initial blank we have not to discover, at least in the
man who is truly a man, to borrow the words of M. Blondel, a
secret motion of the will which prepares for the initiative he is to
take in the future. It will indeed be well to face the central question squarely. Why and under what conditions can a man wish to

we have to

have children? And, secondly, how can it come about that this
wish becomes weakened or even destroyed in him?
Let us first notice, and this is of capital importance, that the
question does not suggest itself to man's consciousness during
periods of great vitality any more than does the question of why
he himself is in the world. It really only arises where, as in our

own
the
find

age, there

is

an ebbing of life's
has come

moment when man
it

quite natural, he

tide.

We must add that from

to ask this question and to
tends almost inevitably to establish a

a way of living, which makes life more and
more agonising and continually diminishes the possibility of

state of affairs,

finding a satisfactory or even a satisfying solution for it. It
might be said that the question tends to become more difficult
to answer from the very fact that we ask it. To search our minds

here for the why is not, as in other matters, simply to formulate
a question which had already arisen before we put it into words.
It is much nearer the truth to say that this question had not
previously arisen, and that consequently it did not need an answer.
But man's inner attitude towards life, that is to say both towards
the life which he has received and the life which he has to
transmit, has undergone a deep change.
Some people will not fail to have recourse here to a theme which
has been very thoroughly exploited by Malthusian propaganda.
Is not this change of inner attitude
simply the emancipation of the
poor human race which has at last understood that it must itself
shake off the despotic yoke of vital force and put this force to the

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD
service of far-seeing

and

deliberate thought?

From

the

105

moment

when, by means of a carefully elaborated hygiene and scientific
methods based on reason, we find it possible to discipline those
obscure powers which for such long ages held our ancestors in
bondage, it seems to be normal and even indispensable that
we should ask questions which it would have been useless to
ask so long as we were helplessly at the mercy of the tyranny of
sex.

We

can leave a preliminary point which only interests hison one side. There is every reason to think that the use of
contraceptive practices is nothing new in the history of mankind.
There is therefore no reason to speak of a decisive point which has
been reached in the history of the emancipation of our species.

torians

What is far more important is to ask ourselves how far this destruction of the fundamental relationship between man and life really
corresponds to an effective liberation. It will be as well to begin
closely the meaning of the word why in the
question under consideration: we shall thus be led towards the
profound views of Bergson on the transcendence of life in relation
to the world of causes and ends. As a matter of fact, the more circumscribed an action is, the more it consequently belongs to the
order of those actions which can either be reproduced by the

by examining very

agent himself in identical circumstances, or imitated by others
the more it is obviously legitimate to wonder why it is performed,
or in other words what calls for it. On the other hand, the more
totally an action involves the personality of the agent, the more it
is of the nature of a vocation, and the more it is unique by its
essence so that there can be no question of the agent repeating it
or of others imitating it from outside, the less the question under
consideration can be asked without absurdity. Let us say more
exactly that the answer does not appear to the questioner as
capable of informing or instructing him; it therefore seems as
unsatisfying as the terse "Because . .", with which we reply to a
question we think tactless or idle. This means that the act performed by vocation seems essentially gratuitous to him who judges
it from outside, whilst on the other hand the subject himself
.

experiences it as something absolutely necessary, as overmotivated and, indeed, too necessary to be explained or justified.
But, from the

moment when man

asks himself

why

it is

that he

HOMO VIATOR

106

can possibly want to have children, we can say that he is establishing between his reflective consciousness and the living being he
still remains in spite of everything, the same order of systematic
incomprehension which prevails between the man who is animated from within by a vocation and the one who questions this
vocation from outside and at bottom challenges it.
It will no doubt be retorted that it is not legitimate to compare
the genetic instinct to a vocation. But this association only seems
arbitrary if one forms an anaemic and colourless idea of vocation.
If it were no more than an inclination or an aptitude it is clear
that the comparison would not hold good. But if it is really a call
the case is quite different. Here and there an individual is in some
way commanded to immolate his immediate personal aims, or
again to make a clean sweep of all the arrangements which might
seem most in harmony with common sense and the demands of
reasoning calculations. It would never enter anyone's head to
claim that vocation, precisely because strictly speaking it cannot
be justified by the very person who intimately recognises it as his
own, is situated outside the realm where motives are expressed
and formulated. Experience shows distinctly that the more
imperious it is, the less easily can it be explained by some aim
ordinarily recognised as
security, fame, etc.).

vocation

is

good (money,

for instance,

power,
transcendence of the
with the presence of a generosity

We might say that this

always bound up

which cannot be confined by any possible self-interest:
ticularly clear in vocations

such as that of the

this is par-

priest, the artist,

the
doctor or even the soldier, and is less so for that of the technician
in whom the vocation tends to be confused with the exercise of a
strictly specialised function. It is evident that to refuse to follow
a vocation, whatever the motive and however reasonable the

may be, is in no way to emancipate or free oneself. It is
exactly the opposite, and we cannot dispute the fact except in the
name of a conception which amounts to the admission that wisrefusal

dom for each of us consists in planning all our actions to fit in with
some object which can be

readily accepted

by public

opinion.

But we see only too clearly to what actual degradation we should
thus be exposed. The kind of plebiscite to which we should, virtually at any rate, be making our appeal would mark the triumph
of a certain mediocrity and would consecrate a standardisation,

,

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD

IQJ

bearing not only upon the externals of existence, but even upon
our inner experience of it. Where we dared to speak of emancipation we should have to become able to discern the progressive
narrowing of the human horizon, or, in other words, the systematic levelling of the vital soil on which a human existence is
built up.

Thus

on the obscure question of the why, one is
have some sense of the junction
occur in a centre which is beyond our reach,

in meditating

led, if not to recognise, at least to

which tends to
between what I shall call for the sake of simplification the infra
and the supra, the intermediate space being that in which our
interests are asserted and our calculations worked out. This middle
zone is the one where understanding, that is to say a certain
limited and repetitive experience, articulates with emotions which
are reduced to their simplest expression, and it is centred on the
satisfaction of the appetites. It is instructive to observe that the
spontaneity of subconscious life as it spreads out beyond a world
where the Calculable triumphs, corresponds to a vow which only
becomes conscious of itself infinitely above this sphere, in a zone

where thought, disengaging

its special essence,
proves to be pure
or
utter
disinterestedness.
generosity
It would of course be absurd and really scandalous to suggest
from all this that we have any grounds for exalting, or indeed for

approving, or even for merely excusing the man who gives free
rein to his progenitive instinct a Restif, for instance, boasting
that he has peopled the whole of France with his bastards. It is
simply a question of recognising that in performing this gesture,
which at bottom he is incapable of understanding, man does at
least place himself at the axis of his destiny, that is to say that he
adopts a position in which he can face one of the essential tests he
has to satisfy in order to be master of his own life. On the other
hand, in opposing this instinct with the timid objections of calculating prudence, he avoids the test and tends to convert his life
into a prison however well-appointed and comfortable it may be.
In any case, in order to face the test it is still necessary that he
should recognise that he is responsible for his child. We might
even go so far as to say that the words "his child" only acquire a

meaning which can be accepted when this responsibility is fully
recognised and shouldered. It is precisely here that we see the

HOMO VIATOR

IO8

abyss opening which separates procreation from fatherhood, and
responsibility whose nature we now have to elucidate.
It is quite clear that in a legally constituted family this responsibility of the father is of an objective character. It exists whether
he is conscious of it or not. At least in principle he incurs definite
penalities in so far as he avoids it. This is the case theoretically
at least, for in fact each of us has probably known careless or
even unnatural fathers who have never been proceeded against
it is this

way and who have perhaps gone on living right up to the
end without any suspicion of their own unworthiness. But the
question which concerns us here is not really to know whether,
in a civilisation such as our own, a father is obliged to see that
his child is fed and educated, etc. What matters to us is rather
to know what such an obligation can inwardly correspond to for
him, when, as we have seen, the carnal bond which unites him

in any

found to be almost non-existent. "But",
it not absolutely natural that
in the presence of this being, who without me would not exist,
a feeling
I experience a feeling of tenderness and compassion
later to change its nature, becoming transformed into a lasting
affection as a precise consciousness of the duties which are
incumbent upon me develops?" It is, however, well to be careful
here to avoid a moral optimism which is so often flatly contradicted by experience. In reality, this tenderness, even .where
it is genuinely felt, is very likely to be superficial and passing,
and the feeling which in many cases has every chance of triumphing is a growing irritation in the presence of a mewling, unclean
creature who demands ceaseless attention and exercises a veritto his descendant

is

someone will be sure

to exclaim, "is

able tryanny over its relations. Conjugal love in the frequent
where it is only an egoism in partnership is likely, at any
rate in the man's case, to turn against the child and to degenerate
into a sort of organic jealousy, that actually one would loathe to
admit because it is so unreasonable. It would certainly be going
much too far to generalise and to disregard the humanising part
often played here by a family spirit which is actually almost
cases

impossible to analyse, but

it is still

more necessary

to recognise

how this family spirit is jeopardised by the conditions of life which

tend to prevail in an industrialised society, and we should be
exposing ourselves to the worst disappointments by treating this

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD

IO9

family spirit as something unchanging, able to assert itself everywhere and always, and normally ensuring an atmosphere of

mutual understanding and
children.

The

truth

affection

rather that

between parents

and

men

in general are so incapable of sincerity towards themselves and are still so dominated
by prejudice that is to say, by the idea of what it is fitting to
is

that they are not even conscious of the inadequacy of what
they so ingenuously call their natural feelings.

feel

Actually, to be sure, nobody would deny that ordinarily a
sort of habit or familiarity creates strong enough bonds. But here
again a definite question arises which cannot be avoided; it concerns the special character of the sense of fatherhood and the
grounds on which the father can have authority over his children.
Moreover, I must insist that we are not here concerned with the
objective basis of this authority and with the powers which, it
can be admitted, have been as it were delegated to him by

No, what is in question here is the consciousness of a
whether he uses it or not, to exercise special authority

society.
right,

over the child, at least when
claim to control its

starts to

it

reaches the age of reason and
as it chooses. This question

life

more since we cannot help noticing
growing disorder in this matter. It seems to me that we
are becoming increasingly familiar with the case of a father who
develops something amounting to a bad conscience, because he
sees the authority, which in theory he knows to be vested in him,
more and more in the light of arbitrary coercion. In general I
have a sense of disorder when I have to face a situation on which
I have no hold; let us suppose further that with the situation
comes the perception of a special call which I feel clearly is
being made to me but which it is beyond my power to reply to
directly: yet I cannot take it upon myself to ignore it: some kind
of vague human respect, some indistinct scruple prevents me. It
follows that I have nothing left but to indulge in some kind of
ineffective gesticulation, which I have not the courage to keep
up for too long because in my heart I feel that it is inane and
ridiculous. Thus I am reduced to just hoping that things will
somehow arrange themselves; but all the time the call I heard
remains in my consciousness, not as a distinct idea but rather as
a sense of uneasiness. I cannot succeed in persuading myself that
deserves our attention all the

signs of

HOMO VIATOR

110
it

caine to

notice of

me by mistake and

it.

I therefore

that I

am therefore free

to take

go on being worried and obscurely

no

dis-

with myself. Moreover, this dissatisfaction is liable to
change into irritation with the other person, or to degenerate
into a sort of diffuse metaphysical bitterness of which we see only
too many examples around us.
I do not think I am mistaken in suggesting that many fathers,
if they were clear-sighted enough, would find that what has just
been said about the general disorder is directly applicable to
their relations with their children.
I will describe for you a definite example, that of an artist I
used to know, who, without being an unnatural father, lived as
it were outside his children's world, showing no interest in what
satified

they said or did, treating them like creatures of another species
whose behaviour one observes with a short-lived curiosity.
Without his knowing it, his daughter suffered deeply from this
detachment which she could not understand. One day she made

up her mind to write to him asking the reason for his attitude
and telling him how much she wanted to come nearer to him.
She wrote the letter, made sure that it was delivered, and vainly
awaited an answer.
Certainly that is a special case from
I would not dream of generalising. What remains true,
however, is that for reasons which I do not think have been
fully elucidated, fatherhood nearly always presents the character
of a more or less hazardous conquest, which is achieved step by
step over difficult country full of ambushes. At any rate it is
like this (and I shall deal with the subject at length further on)
wherever the child has not been really wanted, wherever its
presence is regarded as an abuse of confidence on the part of
hidden life-forces towards the two conscious beings who had
intended to regulate their existence secure from such intrusions.
Would it not bring us nearer to a solution of the problem
which concerns us, to observe that man tends to compensate
for what we called his initial ntant of carnal experience by forming for himself a preconceived idea, not so much of the individual
being who is to be his child as of the part he is called upon to
play? Moreover, this is above all true in the case of a son, and
more essentially still of an only son. In a civilisation like ours the
son normally appears to the father as his heir, as the one who is
.

which

.

.

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD

III

to continue the succession, or at any rate this was the current
idea in the society of yesterday. And where the father does not

expect his son to take his place and carry on his work, he often
him to succeed where he himself has failed, to carry
off the palm of victory which an unkind fate has refused him.

requires of

Hence very

often a sort of tension

is

created on both sides, the

father distrustfully watching over this new being, concerning
whom he has very definite views, but who appears to be possessed

and incomprehensible will, capable
and long-cherished plans to nothing; the son,
on the other hand, unless he is a model of docility, or too stupid
to be moved by anything, almost bound in the end to feel a dull
irritation when he understands that his future is as it were
mortgaged by his father's plans. All this, I repeat, is specially
true for an only child, and still more for people in modest circumstances, where a good education calls for onerous sacrifices
and where a more or less quick return is expected. Now I have
no hesitation in saying that where the creditor-debtor point of
view influences the relationship between father and son, this
relationship is hopelessly compromised and loses its true character. I recall here, as an analogy, a play in which I once porof a will of his own, a strong

of bringing his wise

trayed a

woman,

deserted

by her husband,

sacrificing herself, or

thinking she was sacrificing herself, for her only son, but actually
using the most odious form of sentimental blackmail against him.
In a case of this kind a disastrous transfer is made in favour of the
mother who thus acquires the double rights of herself and of the
absent defaulter of a father. Because of her son she refuses to be
married again to a man she thinks she loves, and in this way she
adds still more to the weight of the debt oppressing the child.
It is indeed to be doubted whether so unhealthy, so fundamentally
perverted and destructive a relationship could ever exist between
a father and son. Everything actually happens as though the
carnal intimacy between mother and son here turned against
itself, weakening the soul of the adolescent at its foundations and
disintegrating it. It is none the less true that misunderstanding
between father and son can also bring about the most fatal of

consequences.

To be

sure, there are cases which appear to be quite the
and
which have gone on increasing as family ties have
opposite

112

HOMO VIATOR

tended to become weaker and our way of life softer; cases where
the father's chief aim is to enable his son to enjoy the fruit of his
own labours to the full, and to spare him the hard toil which he
formerly had to endure. Without even recalling the mythical
figure of the elder Goriot, it is enough to think of all those fathers
who, having suffered the greatest privations in their youth, doubtless find a compensation for their past hardships in the fact that
they can give generously to their child what was pitilessly denied

We know well enough what ingratitude often
a
liberality which takes the form of adulation, and it is
repays
worth asking ourselves whether this ingratitude has not a deep
meaning, whether it is not life's ironical and cruel reply to an
improper complacency by which the father has, without knowing it, undermined the austere rule which it was really his duty
to maintain. "Idolatry", Gustave Thibon says very strongly, "is
only a projection of individualism; it wears the mask of love but
knows nothing of love. For it is not enough to love (everybody
loves somebody or something); we have to know whether the
beings and things we love are for us doors leading to the world
and to God, or mirrors which send us back upon ourselves.' * And
he denounces with admirable clarity "a state of mind where the
child is simultaneously adored and repulsed and can only be
treated as a god or an enemy" (Retour au RSel, pp. 77, 81).
Two additional remarks are necessary here. First it must be
noted that on the whole the father's feeling for his daughter is
probably more likely to become intimate and to spread out in
to themselves.

except in the tragic cases, perhaps less numerous
than
to-day
they used to be, when the unmarried daughter is
deliberately treated as an unpaid servant and practically enslaved. But it is to be thought that where she has every chance
of leading her normal life as a woman she is generally more
capable than the son of inspiring the father with a feeling whereby
he forgets and consequently passes beyond himself. And this
happens without any need for introducing psychoanalytic references to unfulfilled incest which have been so wearisomely misapplied for the last quarter of a century. We only need to remember that it is, alas, quite in accordance with human nature for the
father, without actually admitting it to himself, to see his son
not only as his successor or heir, but as the rival fatally destined
generosity

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD
to eclipse him.
lies

Hence comes an ambivalence whose

at the very heart of our condition.

Why

113

principle

should not

many a

domestic enmity originate from this hidden jealousy a jealousy
which takes root in the very essence of time and at the core of
our existence?
The second point is infinitely more important. We can state
without hesitation that the limitations and deformations to which
the fatherly feeling is liable seemingly tend to disappear in large
families, and one might say that this is like the reward, the
immanent sanction, of the act of prodigality by which a man
generously sows the seed of life, instead of sparingly doling out
the smallest possible number of descendants compatible with his
need of survival. In this matter it would be impossible to exaggerate the extent of the difference which separates a large family
from a family of one or tvyo children: a difference comparable to
that which in the philosophy of Bergson separates the Enclosed
from the Open. It is a difference of atmosphere in the first place:
that which exists between fresh air and the air in a confined

We

must, however, go much further. By the multiplicity,
the unpredictable variety of the relationships which it embraces,
the large family really presents the character of a creation, there
is a direct relation between the persevering and often literally
space.

heroic effort

by which

it is

built

up and the new wealth, the

wealth of life which it receives. It must of course be understood
that a reservation previously formulated must be again made
here: wherever the parents, and specially the father, are oblivious
of their duties and their responsibilities, the large family, which
in this case is scarcely more than a brood, can degenerate into a
veritable hell. Here as elsewhere: nature only gives its best fruits
if an upright way of thinking and a courageous will succeed in
directing it without forcing it by violence, in short, if a way is
found to govern and to serve it at the same time.

"The fathers of families, those great adventurers of the modern
world." These words of Peguy, which I have already quoted last
year, come naturally to one's mind here. We should fail to go to
the bottom of things if we did not at this point remember the
acceptance of risk which the establishment of a large family
involves and the horror of this very risk which prevails in an
ever-increasing fraction of a country oil the way to progressive

HOMO VIATOR
devitalisation.

The adventure

which scarcely

here really implies a state of
attains to distinct consciousness and which

mind
is

for

that very reason hard to describe in precise words; it is at bottom
an essentially religious state of mind, which can actually, though
this is relatively rare, survive the loss of positive beliefs, but which

can also be lacking where the practice of a faith is being sincerely
maintained. It is certainly not enough here to speak of love of
life. The Malthusian couple who go to the cinema twice a week
and treat themselves to an expensive meal every Sunday at
Pontoise or at Bourgival can no doubt claim that they love life,
and it is precisely in order not to spoil it for themselves that they
take such care, and if necessary efface the consequences of their
amorous frolics without a scruple. But nothing brings out better
ht>w hopelessly ambiguous the words "life" and "loving life"
are. "Those were the good old days; life was worth living then",
exclaim innumerable French people of both sexes as they sigh
for the era of the

tandem and the Simca

8. It

would be possible
and stored

to say that they nursed in the depths of their being,
up for the time to come, the pretension of acquiring

life

as

one

puts electricity or central heating into a house. Life really seems
to them like an element to be used in order to obtain a few patent
satisfactions, without which the world would be nothing but a
prison. But is it not clear that for the "great adventurer of the
the relations between man and wife are precisely
the opposite? For it behoves him to place himself at life's disposal and not to dispose of life for his own purposes.
We must however recognise that the man of to-day tends to
establish, as far as he can, an order of things in which the words

modern world"

"to place oneself at life's disposal" have literally no meaning.
This is true above all in so far as he asserts the primacy of technics
and technical knowledge. As this may not be immediately evident,
perhaps I may be permitted to insist upon it. Technics are seen
as all the systematised methods which enable man to subordinate
nature, considered as blind or even rebellious, to his own ends.
But it must be noted that the point at which man's powers of
wonder are applied is thus inevitably shifted: what now seems
worthy of admiration is above all technical skill in all its forms, it
is no longer in any way the
spontaneous course of phenomena,
which has on the contrary rather to be controlled and domesti-

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD
cated, somewhat as a river is by locks. This admiration is tinged
with a shade of defiance of a truly Luciferian character, it can
hardly be separated from the consciousness of a revenge taken by
emancipated humanity upon Nature whose yoke it has borne so
long and so impatiently. This is particularly clear with regard to
living nature; without even receiving a scientific grounding
worthy of the name, men's minds are so saturated with naturalism
that they tend to see human life as a particularly complicated and
baffling case of the nature of living beings in general. As a result,
without any given reason, they agree to regard life itself as a "sale
blague" (rotten humbug), or at least as the rumbling of threatening possibilities against which it would be impossible to take too

many precautions, whereas formerly it was hailed as a revelation,
or at the very least a promise and pledge of a marvellous and
unlimited renewal. It is perfectly clear that the obsession concerning possible illness and the preventive measures to be taken against
it has in the last century become far more virulent than ever it
was in the days when the science of prophylactic medicine was
practically non-existent. It is to be noticed in passing that the
development of prophylactic methods and of systems of insurance,
because at bottom these correspond to analogous inner tendencies,
have helped to foment in souls a spirit of suspicious vigilance,
which is perhaps incompatible with the inward eagerness of a
being who is irresistibly impelled to welcome life with gratitude.
Let us consider this word for an instant. We feel gratitude for a
gift we have received; but from the moment when we are no
longer at all sure that we have literally received anything, when
we wonder whether we have not rather been enticed into the trap
of existence, and moreover that this does not result from the
decision of some superhuman will, but from the play of blind
forces with no possible consciousness, there can really no
longer be any question of gratitude. Gratitude? To whom? For
what?
It seems very much as though this radical and generally
unformulated pessimism constitutes the foundation on which an
ever increasing number of existences are building themselves up
should, moreover, take our analysis further and ask
to-day.
ourselves under what conditions an existence can justify itself, by
which I mean recognise that it is worth the trouble it costs.

We

HOMO VIATOR

Il6

Trouble here stands

for the ceaseless

and thankless

effort

by which

we daily climb the slope which it would be so tempting to let ourselves slide down towards a total relinquishment and death. I am
inclined to think that those people are becoming ever more
numerous whose existence coagulates round a few satisfactions
which from outside seem almost incredibly petty: the daily bridge
party, the football match, some recreation connected either with
love or food. They would not miss these pleasures for anything in
the world. If for some reason or another they have to do without
them, existence itself becomes a desert, a blank night of gloom.

of course, the most direct relation between the
exaggerated value which is given to them and the insipidity
which characterises the general substance of life an insipidity

There

is,

which can in an instant become nauseating. In every department
the passage from what is insipid to what is unendurable is imperceptible. We must not forget that a man's work ceases to have any
attraction or even any meaning for him in so far as he has lost his
relish for life. Normally it is in our work and through it that we
become aware of this relish which all the same does not rule out
of existence the halo of leisure and holidays without which the
daily prospect would become hard and gloomy. But the conditions of life deteriorate to the point of perversion when, as
Thibon has said, that which was only the aureole tends to become
the heart.
I should like now to gather together the conclusions
reached in the course of our wanderings. Fatherhood,

we have
we have

by any means be restricted to procreation which,
speaking, can hardly be considered as an act. It only
exists as the carrying out of a responsibility, shouldered and sus-

seen, cannot

humanly

But on the other hand we see that it degenerates as soon
subordinated to definitely specified purposes, such as the
satisfaction of ambition through the medium of the child treated
as a mere means to an end. It utterly denies its own nature when
it is the mere blind generation of a
being not only incapable of
tained.

as

it is

providing for his progeny and guiding their spiritual development,
but of realising and acknowledging the obligations he has undertaken towards them. It is probably in contrast with such inertia
and blindness that we can best understand what the pure act of
fatherhood should be. By that I mean a self-spending which can

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD

HJ

be compared to a gift, because it prepares and requires an engagement and because without this it is nullified. This pure act is
inconceivable without what I propose to call the vosu createur. But
here a preliminary analysis is necessary, the notion of the vosu
being one which very often contains a confusion, sentimental in
its

essence.

When we say to
recovery",

anyone, "I

am making des vosux for your wife's

we merely mean that we wish for

would please

this recovery,

that

it

There is no active participation on our part, we
are not involved. But here, on the contrary, the vosu cannot be
reduced to a simple wish, it is an engagement. We must further
notice that an engagement made in the presence of a transcendental authority is always liable to be degraded in so far as it takes
on the character of a bargain and by so doing imposes conditions.
"If you grant me this favour, I undertake to accomplish such and
such an action calculated to please you." But this really copies to
the same as saying: "To get this action you want out of me, you
must agree to grant me the favour for which I am asking. The
vosu is seen here as a bribe. But of course bribery is quite impossible
in the religious order, or more exactly that which is genuinely
religious is to be recognised from the very fact that it is essentially
us.

9'

opposed

to

any attempt of such a kind. Suppose that

I

undertake

when

I eventually receive it, by an
gratitude, this visible action should only

to respond to the favour,

action which proves my
be the sign of the invisible act by which I consecrate myself to the
power which has helped me. There is still something equivocal,
however, in this interpretation. Does it not actually seem as

will only consecrate myself to you on condition
that you first give me this proof of your benevolence towards me"?
Thus the defective reaction denounced above still persists here.
I should not even say: "If you reveal yourself to me by granting
this favour, I will consecrate myself to you in return." But rather:

though I said "I

"If you reveal yourself to me, you will give me the strength to
consecrate myself to you." Or again: "The act by which I shall
respond to the favour you grant me will be, as it were, the pledge
of the revelation I receive, not so much of your special benevolence towards me as of your essence which is pure liberality."
The best formula for the vosu would then be to offer it as a
prayer: "I beg you to reveal yourself to me, to

make your

HOMO VIATOR

Il8

for me to conpresence real for me, so that it will be possible
in my present
since
a
full
with
secrate myself
understanding
state I can only see you through the clouds of uncertainty
which encircle me. Moreover, I do not claim that you should
attach any value on your own account to this consecration

which can add nothing to what you are; but if you love me, if
you consider me as your son, it seems to me that, not for your
own sake, of course, but for mine, you must want me to know and
serve you, since, if it is not given to me to know and serve you,

am doomed

to perdition."
me to be the significance of this appeal which is
of the very essence of the vceu.
easily see that this appeal has a
in
relation
to a certain process of inner
function
here,
mediatory
I

Such seems

to

We

creation which actually can never be understood if we approach
as a matter governed by the will alone.
the other hand, it seems to me essential to notice that, in

it

On

spite of appearances, the vceu does not in any way imply a dogmatic theory, nor, a fortiori, any definite idea of the power to
offered. If we reflect upon aesthetic creation, parthat
of the novelist and the dramatist, we shall realise
ticularly
this. The vcsu only takes shape after the artist has as it were been

which

it is

by some form of reality which is revealed less by sight
than by a sort of inward touch: but reality thus apprehended
appears to him at the same time (and this is a paradox and a

possessed

mystery) as independent in relation to his personal will and as

by which he makes it pass into
no other than the fiat by which I

nevertheless subject to the act
existence.

The

decide to put

vcsu createur is

all

my

energies at the service of this possibility

which is already imposing itself upon me, but only upon me, as
a reality, so that I may transform it into a reality for all, that is to
say into an established work. This means that the vcsu, far from
being reduced to a mere wish, has the character of an engagement and a decision. But this engagement or this decision is not

made

simply within

my own being, something transcendent is
my consciousness of it may as yet be.
if I am not mistaken, we can discern

involved, however indistinct
At the root of fatherhood,

something which

is obviously
analogous to this vceu crtateur, and it
alone
that
fatherhood
can be considered as a human
by
act, or even as an act at all, and not as the special term given to

is

this

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD
the biological process of procreation. It must however be added
that this vceu createur cannot here by separated from a general
attitude taken by man as he faces life or, to be more exact, the
operation of life. This attitude is, first and essentially, an acquiescence by which man adopts and makes his own the words at
the opening of Genesis: "God saw all that He had made, and

behold

it

was very good." Moreover, we must be careful not to

interpret this acquiescence purely as a judgment of worth. It
would be better to recognise that judgment of worth is an intel-

and for that reason an imperfect translation of somewhich
is much more like admiration or
thing
simple wonder. It
is this reaction, originally
from
the
which
consciousness,
springing
is expressed in the father's act as he falls in adoration before his
lectualised

child. It goes without saying, of course, that this
always in danger of degenerating into sheer idolatry,
and that when this degradation comes about fatherhood loses its
special essence. I insist on the paradox expressed by these words.
In the order of concrete philosophy the essence is always liable
to be defective. It has nothing in common with those entities,
those unalterable ousiai, which classical metaphysics fixed in the
pure heaven of speculation, thereby putting itself outside the conditions which alone can enable us to understand human existence
and the place which failure in all its forms occupies in it.

newly-born
adoration

is

these conditions, as we have already suggested, we must
certainly recognise that a shaking of the metaphysical order, a
severing of what last year I called the nuptial bond between man

Under

life, is at the root of the crisis in fatherhood and paternal
authority which is apparent even to the most superficial observer.
But in our perspective to-day it seems to me still easier to explain
what we should understand by this bond. It is at bottom a ques-

and

tion of spontaneous confidence in life which can almost equally be
regarded as a call or as a response. It is this, and this alone, which
enables man to establish his roots in the universe and to develop
to his full stature. We should moreover be mistaken if we spoke
here of optimism, for we are dealing, as we have seen, with a far
more fundamental tendency which lies hidden, as it were, deep
below the work of the intellect. But from the moment when this

confidence becomes dissolved in the poisonous secretions of superthought, aroused by the sight of suffering and failure, it is

ficial

HOMO VIATOR

ISO

attitude to adopt
quite clear that man no longer knows what
is continued in other beings who
he
which
act
the
by
regarding
would not exist without him. This act is less and less wished for,

considered as the troublesome and theoretically avoidable
complement of an act with quite another object an act which
takes and at the same time, if possible, gives pleasure without
looking beyond the mere enjoyment of the moment. From this
point of view, I repeat, the child tends to appear as an accident
which has acquired shape, which has acquired not only a body
it is

the kind of pity tinged with remorse which will
in the presence of the child by him who engendered it without any idea of a vceu createur. This means, I repeat
once more, without the slightest consciousness of participating in

but a

soul.

Hence

probably be

felt

a work of life, infinitely beyond him and yet requiring his contribution as an essential element which nothing can replace. Let us
reiterate that he who wants a child to take his place or to make
up to him one day for his personal inconveniences, cuts himself
off by this very fact from all idea of transcendence, for this child is
nothing for him but an element, or let us say a trump card, in the
closed system which he has formed with himself. The situation is
transformed from the moment when he really understands that
what he has been allotted is in truth nothing but the reflection,
the likeness of a creative gift which could not belong to him as

no more give existence to someone else that I can to
and there is an obvious connection between these two

such. I can
myself,

impossibilities. But in so far as I refuse to allow myself to admit it,
I
exposed to a double temptation. The first consists of organ-

am

life as if I myself were the author of it, as if I did not have
ising
to answer for
actions to any person or thing; the second, of

my

my
my children as

though I had produced them, as though,
they were there for me, as though I had the right
to decide what they were to become. That is precisely what is
incompatible with the vceu crtateur as I have tried to define it.
Negatively this vw, or this call, signifies that our child no more
belongs to us than we do to ourselves and that accordingly, he is

treating

strictly speaking,

not there for our sake, nor, to go a degree further, is he there for
own sake either. It signifies, moreover, that for this reason he
must not be brought up as though one day he would have to assert
that in his turn he was responsible to no one but himself. It would
his

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD
indeed be contradictory on

121

my part to admit for him what I deny

he should one day be guilty of
what on my own account I regard as an infringement of the deep
law of life. Only one way remains open. We have to lay down the

for myself; I could not agree that

principle that our children are destined, as
render a special service, to share in a work;

we are ourselves,
we have humbly

to

to

acknowledge that we cannot conceive of this work in its entirety
and that a fortiori we are incapable of knowing or imagining how
it is destined to shape itself for the
young will it is our province to
awaken to a consciousness of itself. We can see clearly enough that
the VQSU createur implies the combination of a deep personal
humility and an unshaken confidence in life, conceived of not as
a natural force but as an unfathomable order, divine in its principle. Now it is exactly the opposite combination which tends
most often to be effected before our eyes, that is to say a maximum
of personal pretension associated as we have seen with a radical
agnosticism concerning

life, its

value and

Here we must emphasise the

its

meaning.

which binds
fatherhood not only to a special conception of love but to a
definite way of experiencing and desiring it. Where love is
degraded, fatherhood is degraded also. This degradation of love
close relationship

can take on two precisely opposite forms, according to whether
the union of the couple is relaxed until it is no more than an
engagement of short duration when no diversion is barred, or
this same union becomes hardened and opaque, and is
same time sterilised so that everything threatening to
upset the routine of pleasure or simply of comfort, which eventually is the only law it knows, is excluded. Here again the only
way of salvation is found in a transcendence which can alone
prevent the couple from degenerating into an enclosed system.
I will add that we can not give an opinion a priori on the idea
of this transcendence which consciousness is able to form in any

whether
at the

particular case. All one can assert

is

that the conception of the

work of life which we attain to in the light of Christ frees us most
surely from illusions and ambiguities. It is to these illusions and
ambiguities that thought is still exposed when it claims to interpret this operation, either as a function of cosmological metaphysics, or, and for stronger reasons, of a racial, national and
class philosophy,

which in a

last analysis invariably

degenerates

HOMO VIATOR

122

But this must not prevent us from recognising that
quite possible for the Christian idea of the operation of life
only to attain to an imperfect and relatively indistinct consciousness of itself, quite dissociated from any dogmatic profession of

into idolatry.
it is

faith,

without losing

its

genuine and stimulating value on that

account.

Do all these considerations enable us to get a glimpse of how
to set about solving the ethico-religious problem which here
towers above all the others: the problem of knowing to what
extent the father can and should regard himself as invested by
God himself with the authority which he is bound to exercise
over his own children? It seems as though the idea of the vosu

can help us to avoid the excesses of a fatherhood orientated
in a theocratic direction. I will show you how.
In a profound study published in 1942 in the Recherches de
createur

Father Fessard drew attention to the fact that
the formula omnis potestas a Deo is dangerously equivocal if taken
by itself. "Most of the time", he says, "we only see in this union
the relation of the human power to do all things to the divine
power of the Almighty. Authority appears thus to be delegated
from outside without any consideration of its special nature, as
is the authority of a prince who confers all or some of his power
to his lieutenants without reference to any law except his own
good pleasure and, following from it as a sequel, theirs. So long
as one remains at this feeble degree of reflection one can draw
conclusions from this formula as contrary as possible to the
essence of authority and of the common good.
Because the
All-Power of God is only extended to bring about the rule of
justice, a second degree of reflection leads to a recognition of
authority not only as power which is fact, but as power which is
righteous, and to make the universal ideal of Right the necessary
end of all authority. Hence all power is required to tear itself
away from its selfish ends and to reach out towards the universal
in order to prove its divine origin." Yet, right or equity remaining
still an indeterminate idea here, the
conception of authority
Sciences Religieuses,

.

.

.

comes up against endless contradictions of fact and right,
which our reason perceives between the
absolute power and the absolute justice of God. It is thus neces-

parallel with those

CREATIVE VOW AS ESSENCE OF FATHERHOOD

123

sary that between fact and right the link should appear which
forms the basis of their distinction, which gives meaning to their
conflict and makes its end clear. In order that the contradictions
of the Ail-Powerful and All-Just may be reconciled before our

the All-Merciful has to be manifested. Through Him
are permitted to call the Ail-Powerful: Father, the All-Just
Son and Word, whilst He finally reveals Himself as the Spirit of
eyes,

we

Love.

From a great height, too great for my liking, these dialectics
illuminate the concrete situations which I have striven this
morning

to

make

clear to you. I think that personally I should

prefer to express myself as follows: the father, as we have seen,
is almost irresistibly inclined to treat his child as
being for him,
as being obliged to fill the place which he is reserving for him in a

scheme of which one can easily say he is still the centre, since it
he who claims to establish its principles. A mortifying experience teaches him, however, in so far as he is capable of learning
the lesson, that this scheme is as precarious as his own existence,

is

only because the son has the advantage of being likely, in the
normal course of things, to outlive him and to have the power one
day to upset the plan which he himself has worked out. Under
these conditions, the father can reach such an excessive degree
of humility that he treats himself as the mere means to an end,
which he persuades himself lies beyond him and is incarnated
in the autonomous will of the heir. Better thinking, however,

if

him to transcend this double relationship, and to discern
an organic unity where the imperfect and deceptive sequence
which takes shape in the succession of generations is no more
than the phenomenal and misleading expression of a substantial
union which itself can only be consummated in eternity. In the
last analysis it is in relation to this constitution of an organism,
spiritual no doubt, but carnally rooted in the eternity of God,
and in relation to this alone, that the vosu crSateur can be defined,
in so far as thereby a fidelity which is itself creative, the fidelity
to a hope which transcends all ambition and all personal claims,
takes a body. Yes, this word eternity, to which it is so difficult to
give a positive, conceivable meaning, and which we can hardly
translate into understandable language without becoming
involved in insoluable difficulties, yet remains the key word here.
leads

124

HOMO VIATOR

Without it the whole human

edifice will crack

and

in the

end

fall

to bits in the horror of absolute absurdity.
It will be well to state here, explicitly and with force, that, as
I have already suggested, fatherhood is not a mere function which

carried out blindly in order that a certain objective continuity
should be secured. After all, there is no apparent reason why,
taken by itself, the continuity of a progeny should have more
ontological value or dignity than the life of a forest or a plantation. But it is quite different if this continuity of a human family
is

is

in truth one of the approaches by which the super-conscious
super-historical union of all in all is to be attained the

and

union in which alone creation can find its full meaning.
Let us notice something here, which, although it is only stated
in passing, has very great importance in my eyes. It is that in
this perspective it becomes possible to understand the metaphysical foundation of adoption, and to recognise that it is not
merely a pale and bloodless copy of real fatherhood, but that it
can be a means of grace, destined to make up for the deficiencies
of biological filiation. Would there not, indeed, be something
intolerable in having to admit that a purely accidental defect
should utterly and inevitably deprive the human being of what
perhaps the most substantial of his attributes? But reflection
shows us none the less clearly, that adoption must always be
exceptional, that a society in which it became very frequent
would be in danger of devitalisation, for it can only be a graft
on the tree of life, sometimes marvellous and sometimes, alas,
is

abortive.

From this general point of view, and probably from this point
of view alone, it becomes possible to understand the fundamental
nature of the vceu createur> wherein we believe we have found the
essence of fatherhood to lie. It is the quivering anticipation of a
plenitude, of a pleroma in the bosom of which life, no longer an
endless improvisation of disappointing variations on a few given
themes, will be satisfied, concentrated and reassembled around
the absolute Person who alone can give it the infrangible seal of
unity.

LE PEUGH.
June-July, 1943.

To BERTRAND D'ASTORG

OBEDIENCE AND FIDELITY*
ITSEEMSTOME

impossible to consider the spiritual decadence
for more than half a century in our

which has been going on

own country, among others, without being led to emphasise the
increasingly flagrant disrepute in which the value of fidelity has
been held. It is therefore indispensable for anyone who wants to
start

upon the immense work

of moral reconstruction

which

is

necessary, to strive to re-establish this same value in the place
which rightly belongs to it that is to say in the very centre of

human

life, of life no longer degraded, alienated or prostituted,
but lived in all the fullness of its true significance. As a matter
of fact the code of ethics which is beginning to take shape in
many places above all, of course, in youth movements is
necessarily based on fidelity.
But there is no doubt that if we want to avoid dangerous

and fatal confusions we must analyse the closely
connected notions of obedience and fidelity as thoroughly as
possible; otherwise an abuse is likely to be made of them by
those who find it useful to exploit for their own ends a good
will, degenerating little by little into a systematic docility and
finally into a passivity of belief and intention.
I think it would be well to point out first of all the essential
difference which separates obedience and fidelity: a difference
simplifications

in fact tends to become obliterated by the somewhat
vague use ordinarily made of the verb to serve.
Let us begin by noticing that the very meaning of the word
serve is ambiguous, and that we must not forget the difference
of spiritual level between servir (to serve) and seroir d (to be
useful). If I come across a tool or machine of which I do not
know the purpose, I ask: "For what does that serve?" In this

which

t

context it is only a question of instruments used by beings
endowed with a will, people working for the realisation of
definite ends. There would, on the other hand, be something
1

The publication

of this article in a review was forbidden

by Vichy in

1942.

HOMO VIATOR

126

rather shocking about asking a human being, "For what do you
serve?" This is precisely because it would be treating him as
though he were a thing. Let us notice at this point that to represent the human being as an instrument inevitably leads at last
to extreme consequences, such as the pure and simple doing

away with

old people and incurables: they no longer "serve any

useful purpose", hence they are only fit for the rubbish heap:
why should we take the trouble to keep up and feed machines

which are past use?
There would, on the other hand, be nothing in any way
shocking, at any rate if a certain degree of intimacy had been
reached, if we asked the same human being, "Whom or what do
you serve?" And if he took exception to such a question he would
actually prove, by that very fact, that the deeper meaning of life

had escaped him. It is clear, indeed, that all life is a service.
This does not of course mean that it has to be devoted to some
particular individual, but only that it is its essential nature to be
consecrated to God, or some high purpose such as knowledge or
art, etc., or even to some deliberately chosen social end. To serve
in this second sense is to put oneself at the service of. Moreover
here the accent should be put on the word "oneself", the reflective
pronoun.

To

live in the full sense

of the word

subsist, to limit oneself to existing or subsisting,
oneself over, to give oneself.

is

not to exist or

but

it is

to

make

unhappily too clear that these two meanings, of such dishave tended to become confused for
minds more and more misinformed, or deformed. A crazy idea
has taken possession of an increasing number of misguided indiIt is

tinctly different orders,

viduals, the idea according to which to serve has something
humiliating about it for him who serves. The person, considering

himself more and
as

"I, for

about

my

more

part

his rights

and

.

.

as

a centre of claims and demands, such

.",

has thus hypnotised himself not only

prerogatives, but further about the feelings
the advantages with which others seem to

of envy inspired by
him to be unduly favoured. "Why him?, Why not me?" Resentment has without a doubt been constantly at work beneath a

whose roots a detestable set of psychologists
have too long omitted to expose. This has brought innumerable
minds to reject the notion of any hierarchy whatever and to
levelling process

OBEDIENCE AND FIDELITY

127

rebel against the idea of having to serve anyone at all. It is only
just to add that those among the leaders or rulers who have

allowed the sense of their responsibility to waste away in the
depth of their being, have helped to an extent it is impossible to
exaggerate to prepare the way for this crisis in the idea of service.
What however is certain is that this anarchism, not violent but
ill-tempered and full of sneering hatred, has terribly impoverished
souls, and, even on the biological plane itself, has paved the way
for France's devitalisation. The general lowering of the human
tone, above all of course since 1918, probably constitutes the
most outstanding fact of our recent history, the one perhaps
which best explains our disaster. We must re-learn how to serve,
but this does not simply mean we must re-learn how to obey,
for to obey is only one way of serving. There are others.
Here a very simple remark will help to direct us. It is often
said of a child that he is, or he is not, obedient. It would clearly
be unfitting or even absurd to judge an adult in the same way.

Why

is this so? It is because the child has not the experience or
the powers of reasoning which would enable him to decide for
himself what has to be done, so that it behoves him to obey his

parents, his teachers, in short all those who are qualified to
make decisions about his daily existence. It follows that obedience is a virtue in the child, it is the mark not only of a way of

behaviour but of an inner disposition which corresponds with
his condition as a child. It is obviously different for the adult, if
we consider his existence as a whole. An adult who was obedient
in his whole manner of living, in all his acts, no matter whether
they were connected with sexual or civic matters, would be
unworthy of the name of man. One could consider him only as
a being degraded to a state most adequately to be described as
infantile.

But it is no

less clear

that in certain special departments

of his existence, the adult finds that he also has to obey. Only
here, to obey does not mean to be obedient, it is the act by which
he has to reply to the act of the chief, which is that of commanding. The function of the chief is to command, the function of the
subordinate is to execute orders, that is to say to obey. I have
said it is a function, hence the duty of obedience does not fundamentally and necessarily involve the being of him who obeys.
This obligation only affects the definite actions which he is

HOMO VIATOR

128

required to carry out, or from which he is required to abstain,
whatever his personal feelings or his judgment may actually be.
There could be no sense in claiming that on the level of feelings
or judgment he is obliged to approve of the orders he has received.
All that we can say is that he must not allow himself to show
these feelings or this judgment, otherwise the obedience will be

no more than a pretence, a sham obedience. We are not actually
concerned at the moment with knowing whether the way the
orders are given in any particular case is wise or not, or whether
the prescribed action is good or not, neither are we wondering
whether there are not some circumstances in which the refusal
to obey would be justified. That is quite another problem which
is quite outside the framework of these reflections. Here the
question is solely to decide what the limits are within which the
expression "to owe obedience" makes sense.
I should then be inclined to believe that obedience as such

is

given to the chief as chief, that is to say to the function. It is not
given to the chief as a man, in so far as he is one man rather than
another.

Where

the

human

quality of the chief is introduced it is
it goes without saying that in con-

a question of fidelity. Moreover,
crete experience

for instance, in a fighting unit

obedience and

fidelity are very difficult to distinguish from each other; no doubt
it is even highly desirable that this distinction should not reach the

level of consciousness.

reflection

it is

None

the

well to formulate

less,

from the point of view of

We

as clearly as possible.
might
a certain statute, whether explicit

it

add that obedience bears with it
or not, defining the sphere in which

it

can be claimed. The more

the frontiers of this zone of application tend to become obliterated,
the more obedience is liable to be debased and to become confused with a general servility of which the degrading character

ought not only to be recognised but proclaimed.
Fidelity presents problems of quite another order, which in the
last analysis only the highest philosophy is capable not only of
resolving, but of stating with exactitude.
In saying that obedience can and should be required (under
certain conditions) and that fidelity on the other hand should be
deserved, we are preparing to discuss the originality of this virtue
so discredited at the present time or so generally misunderstood.
Let us observe to begin with that when we use the words to be

OBEDIENCE AND FIDELITY
faithful

129

possible that we mean simply to conform to (a profor instance, or an intention), or negatively, not to swerve

to, it is

gramme,

from (an allotted path).

We only find here an impoverished mean-

ing, obtained by diluting a far richer experience
try to grasp in its palpitating life.

which we must

Immediately the question

arises: in the last analysis to what, or
exactly to whom, am I to be faithful? Must we not grant to
idealism that the other person, as such, must always remain
unknown to me and that consequently I cannot foresee what he

more

how under such conditions could I bind myself directly
him? Would it not be better on that account to recognise that
the only true fidelity is fidelity to myself, and that it is by such
fidelity alone that I can give proof of what is incorrectly regarded
as fidelity to another? In other words, I may make it a point of
honour to perform certain actions which are to the advantage of

will be:
to

another person, but in the
is

last analysis

my

only real obligation

to myself.

Let
here.

us,

however, notice that

we

are starting from a postulate

We take it as a matter of course that fidelity to oneself is not

only justifiable but that it is clearly discernible and that we know
exactly of what it consists. Is this really so? In the first place, what
is this self to whom I undertake to be faithful?
To take the case of the artist a case to which it is always useful
it presents us with a strictly identifiable datum,
work: in what sense or under what conditions can the artist be
said to be faithful to himself? Supposing that he conscientiously
sets to work to imitate himself, that he strives to reproduce certain
processes which enabled him to obtain the "effects" to which he
owed his first successes. Should we say that he is faithful to himself? Certainly not, because really, in so far as he labours to reproduce these same "effects' , he ceases to be himself. Instead of an
artist, he becomes a manufacturer. He loses his identity among
the patented productions which he sets out to deliver to his customers in as large quantities as possible. Notice in passing, that if

to refer because
his

3

become merged in
work and to identify himself with it temporarily, he is none the
less bound to detach himself from it in some sort when it is accomplished. This does not in any way mean that he disowns it;
between him and it there will always be a sensual bond, a bond of

in the actual act of creation, the artist tends to
his

HOMO VIATOR

130
affection

and

pain. Nevertheless, he will only continue to be him-

self on condition that

he breaks

free

from

it

to

some

extent.

From

appears that to be faithful to myself is
to respond to a particular inner call which enjoins me not to be
hypnotised by what I have done, but on the contrary, to get clear
of it, that is to say to go on living and thus find renewal. There is
no doubt that outsiders are inclined to express surprise and to take
this privileged case, then, it

exception to this renewal. The artist had been catalogued as a
painter of still-life, why does he now paint seascapes or portraits?
And why has he changed his style which it was so gratifying to
recognise at the first glance? What treason! All this comes to the
same as saying that in such a case fidelity is difficult to appreciate
from outside. Only the artist himself can know whether he has

responded to the inner call or whether on the contrary he has
remained deaf to it. Even he can only know this to a certain
degree; for here it is not just a question of good intentions or a
good will. It is only by an always imperfect comparison between
the accomplished work and the indistinct consciousness of the
work to be accomplished that he can decide whether he has been
faithful or not.

In spite of appearances, the question is not very different for
in general. If I admit without discussion that to be faithful
to myself means to be faithful to certain principles which I have
adopted once and for all, I am in danger of introducing into my
life as foreign, and we can even say as destructive, an element as
the artist who copies himself does. If I were absolutely sincere I
should have to compel myself to examine these principles at frequent intervals, and to ask myself periodically whether they still
correspond to what I think and believe. How is it possible not to

man

mistrust the natural laziness which prompts me to place these
principles above all possible discussion? In this way I spare myself
the always disagreeable test of a revision of my opinions. It may

quite well happen that these principles or these opinions end by
covering up and stifling my own special reality; in that case, how
am I to be faithful to myself? I am no longer there, I do not exist

any more. I have really been replaced by a machine. Moreover,
the action of social life helps to further this substitution of the
automatic for the personal. I am known, I am classified as professing such and such an opinion, and thus I am sure of having my

OBEDIENCE AND FIDELITY

131

special place on the social chess-board. In upsetting the accepted
judgment of myself, however, I should be regarded as inconsistent, people would no longer take me seriously. Now I like
people to attach importance to what I say, I want my opinions to
have weight. Thus society, with which a whole section of myself is
in league, tends to deter me from proceeding with this inner
revision, though I should consider myself bound to proceed with it
if I did not contrive to lose contact with myself. Moreover, it goes
without saying that the spirit of contradiction, which sometimes

me

to defy other people's opinion and to disconcert
deliberately, is no better than this mediocre conformity.

impels

them

So, then, everything obliges us to recognise that fidelity to oneboth difficult to achieve and to discern. In order to be faith-

self is

is first of all necessary to remain alive, and that is
what
it
is not so easy to do. The causes within and withprecisely
out us which militate in favour of sclerosis and devitalisation are
innumerable. But these words are not perfectly adequate; it would
be better to say that I tend to become increasingly profane in relation to a certain mystery of my self to which access is more and
more strictly forbidden me. I should add that this unquestionably
comes about in so far as the child that I used to be, and that I
should have remained were I a poet, dies a little more each day.

ful to oneself it

This profane self is a deserter, having adopted the point of view of
"the outsiders". For such a self fidelity tends to be reduced to a
stubbornly maintained agreement between myself and certain

ways of living, to which I have fixed the label
agreement is only maintained at the expense of a
certain intimacy, now broken and lost.
expressions, ideas,

mine.

But

this

If, however, we make an honest enquiry, experience will force
us to the paradoxical conclusion that the more I am able to preserve this intimacy with myself, the more I shall be capable of

and by neighbour I do
whose jeers and censure I fear, but the particular human being I met at a definite
time in my life and who, even though I may never see him again,

making

real contact with

not

mean one of those

has

come

depersonalised others

good into the personal universe which, as it were,
round my spiritual atmosphere, which, perhaps I
take with me in death. But, inversely, the more I become a

wraps
shall

my neighbour,

for

me

profane outsider to myself, the more I condemn myself to nothing

HOMO VIATOR

132

but the falsehood and mockery, beloved of comic authors, in

my

relations with others.
It is therefore well to remember that contrary to what might
have been expected, my self-presence (presence a moi-mme} is not a
fact which we can take for granted. The truth is rather that it is
liable to be eclipsed and must constantly be reconquered. You
may ask what this presence is, and what is the self to which it is so
difficult to remain faithful. The reply would have to be that it is
the particle of creation which is in me, the gift which from all
eternity has been granted to me of participating in the universal
drama, of working, for instance, to humanise the earth, or on the
contrary to make it more uninhabitable. But when all is said and
done, such definitions are bound to be fallacious; whoever has
loved knows well that what he loved in the other cannot be
reduced to describable qualities and in exactly the same way the
mystery of what I am in myself is the very thing about me which

only revealed to love.
There is then no valid reason for thinking that fidelity to oneself should be more intelligible than fidelity to another and should
clearly come first. It seems much rather that the opposite is true.
I am undoubtedly less immediately present to myself than is the
person to whom I have given my word. "Yet", you may say,
"does not my fidelity to another person inevitably come down to
the fidelity which I have vowed to a particular idea I have
formed of him, and is not this idea simply myself once more?" We
must reply that such an opinion has been arrived at a priori., and
that experience distinctly disproves it. Does it not happen everyday that one being remains faithful to another, although he has

is

been forced

to

admit that he had formed an idealised representa-

we say in this case that it is because of his
pride that he determines to be faithful in spite of everything, so
that no one can say that circumstances have been too much for
tion of him? Should

him? Such an

interpretation, although

it

may be right in

certain

cases, does not account for genuine fidelity. Is it not true that the
most faithful hearts are generally the most humble?
can-

Fidelity

not be separated from the idea of an oath; this means that it
implies the consciousness of something sacred. I give you an undertaking not to forsake you, and I regard this undertaking as increasingly sacred in proportion to the freedom with which I give it,

OBEDIENCE AND FIDELITY

133

added to your own lack of power to use against me should I break
I know, moreover, that from the very fact that I have thus
bound myself absolutely, the means will be surely given me to keep
faith; for although this oath in its origin and essence is my act, or
to go deeper, because it is my act, it has become the most unyielding obstacle there could possibly be to everything in me which
it.

tends towards weakening or dissolution.
I have not, however, the right to bind myself thus except in very
rare cases, on the basis of an intuition by which it is given me to

recognise that I ought and I wish to place myself at your disposal,
not only without lowering myself in my own eyes, but, on the con-

honouring and as it were exalting myself by this very act.
Fidelity then and the oath which seals it cannot be coined, they
cannot be vulgarised. Perhaps it should further be said that in fact
fidelity can never be unconditional, except when it is Faith, but
trary,

we must
though

add, however, that

it

aspires to unconditionality. It

is

as

my oath were accompanied by this prayer: "May heaven

grant that I shall not be led into temptation, that is to say that no
event shall cause me to think myself authorised to deny my
promise on the pretext that the implicit conditions on which it
rests have been changed in a way I could not foresee when I made
it." I cannot perhaps go beyond this prayer without presuming
too much on my own strength: but still it must be really sincere,
and I must maintain within myself the will to fight against this
temptation if ever it assails me.
It is true in a general way to say that the quality of a being can

be recognised and proved by the fidelity of which he is capable.
Yet we might well add that there are probably indiscernible
fidelities, and that not one of us is authorised to assert that another
person is entirely unfaithful. Moreover, fidelity cannot be humanly
exacted, anymore than love or life. I cannot force another to reply
to me, I cannot even force him in reason to hear me, and it will
always be possible for me to think that if he does not reply it is

because he has not heard me. In such a domain prescriptions cannot go beyond the as if (comme si), and only deal with behaviour.
I charge you to behave towards me as though you had sworn
fidelity to me. But it is impossible not to recognise the fragility of
such a fiction. It is because fidelity is creative that, like liberty
itself, it

infinitely transcends the limits of what

can be prescribed.

HOMO VIATOR

134

when

genuine, it is so fundamentally and in every
the
way,
possesses
mysterious power of renewing not only the
who
person
practises it, but the recipient, however unworthy he
may have been of it to start with. It is as though it had a chance

Creative
for

it is

it is

it

certain that there

is

nothing

final

here

to

make him

at long

last pervious to the spirit which animates the inwardly consecrated soul. It is in this way that fidelity reveals its true nature,
which is to be an evidence, a testimony. It is in this way, too, that

a code of ethics centred on fidelity is irresistibly led to become
attached to what is more than human, to a desire for the unconditional which is the requirement and the very mark of the
Absolute in us.

LE PEUCH.
March) 1942.

To JEAN GRENIER

VALUE AND IMMORTALITYi
IN REPLY TO THE

invitation you so kindly gave me I have
been
led
to
examine
the nature of my journey ever since
naturally
that far-off time where I first fearlessly addressed myself to the
struggle which in the end all philosophy must involve. A journey
implies both a starting point and a point of arrival. Now, although
upon reflection I may to some extent manage to reconstitute the
conditions under which my quest began and thus to mark the
approximate point of my departure, I find on the other hand that

me to state precisely, not only to
but to myself, where I hope to arrive. There is nothing in
my case which can be at all compared with that of a scholar whose
researches follow a fixed line, who has drawn up a programme
and is conscious of having reached a definite point in it. The truth
is that the words point of arrival have no longer any
meaning for
me, and moreover it would probably be possible to show that
there is also an illusion in picturing a point of departure. The
really important thing is to rediscover what means one had at
one's disposal, what equipment, and also what "the idea at the
back of one's mind" was on setting out: but how can this be
it is

absolutely impossible for

others,

accomplished?
In reality here, as indeed everywhere, we have to get free from
the claims and pretensions of an imagination which views everything in terms of space, and to recognise that on the philosophic
plane at any rate (though probably wherever we have to do with
creation) we must regard the image of a journey as misleading.
Since we can hardly dispense with an introductory metaphor, I
greatly prefer to ask you to imagine a certain clearing of the
ground which takes place on the spot, which is indeed only
effective on that condition, but of which the successful results can
never be considered as finally consolidated. There is always a
risk that

weeds

will spread in the furrows

laboriously ploughed, there will always be
1 Lecture
given in 1943 to the

which have been so
swarms of pestilent

members of the Enseignement Catholique of Lyons*

HOMO VIATOR
Hence comes the necessity for
be relaxed without comprocannot
which
constant vigilance
that this comparison takes us
claim
not
do
I
mising everything.
it does at least have the obvious advantin
eyes,
but,
my
very far,
for what is really at issue.
age of not substituting a pseudo-idea
We can never eradicate pseudo-ideas too resolutely or too
to see with what regularity,
methodically. It is extraordinary
and I should be prepared to say with what cynicism, they take
insects to threaten future harvests.

time that research of genuine propossession of the field every
second stage that of publication,
fundity reaches the perilous
I
involves
often
which only too
exploitation and vulgarisation.
notion of
confused
the
of
for
very
instance,
here,

am

thinking

existential philosophy which has become current.
I was saying that I can manage to form a retrospective idea of

the initial conditions under which I began my inquiries. There
are two points about which my memory is specially precise. I
remember very clearly my exasperation when, in studying the
that the German
thought of Fichte, I came to the conclusion
the
deduce
empirical self from the
philosopher was claiming to
or what a
an
"What
self.
illusion", I thought,
transcendental
lie! Perhaps at a pinch it might be possible to establish that the
self should figure as the empirical self in its own eyes, but in this
case it could only stand for the empirical self in general. Now the
exists and what counts
empirical self in general is a fiction. What
is such and such an individual, the real individual that I am,
'e

details of my experience, with all
the special features of the concrete adventure, assigned to me
and to no one else as my particular life. How can all this be
arrived at by deduction? It is not enough to say that the attempt

with the unbelievably minute

would be impracticable,

it

would be absurd in

principle.

The

that this deduction which seemed to promise so much,
matters
stops just short of the essential, of the thing which alone
was
I
of
for each one of us." By this,
definitely taking up
course,

reason

is

and moreover I went
methods of deduction in such a

my position against formalism of any kind,
so far as to think that to apply

is arbitrary and even false, that it is the unlawful transwhich
position into the metaphysical order of a requirement
definite
in
certain
value
has
and
departments of
meaning
only

realm

scientific thought.

VALUE AND IMMORTALITY

137

Now, here is the second point. I remember having listened to
the controversy which started in about 1906 or 1908 between
Mr. Brunschvicg and Mr. Edouard Le Roy on the relations of
science and religion, and having been somewhat shocked by the
immoderate use which each of them seemed to make of a certain
principle of immanence, which both showed to be an irrefutable
law of the mind and for that very reason of reality. I remember
saying to one of my companions it may have been to Michel
Alexandre: "That
directly

is

a principle which

and which ought

I

am

prepared to attack

be subjected to a very
from that time I tended to

at least to

thorough examination." In

reality,

dispute the validity of this principle, rather in the same way as
Ghestov opposed the principle of identity.
I am therefore able to say that from the beginning my
researches were explicitly directed towards what might be called
the concrete examination of the individual and of the transcendent, as opposed to all idealism based on the impersonal or
the immanent.
should doubtless mark, immediately afterwards, the valuable impetus given to me in my quest by experience of the tragic element in the universal drama, successively brought home to me in my private life and, of course, in

We

the tremendous event which
from the year 1914.

laid waste or

maimed our

existence

me

to deal
It is not possible within the limits of this lecture for
as fully as necessary with the part which the consciousness of
thought. But it is quite
tragedy played in the development of

my

was, for instance, at the root of the dispute
one
if
may say so) which brought me to grips with
(friendly,
Leon Brunschvicg, and ended in our discussions in the Societd
Philosophique, the Union pour la Verite and the Congress of 1937. I
shall actually be returning later to the last-mentioned debate and
to the particularly serious question with which we dealt, far too

evident that

briefly as

it

a matter of fact.

It

is,

however, possible to say in quite

a general way that a consciousness of tragedy is bound up with a
sharp sense of human plurality, a sense that is to say of communication and conflict at one and the same time, but above
all of the irreducible element which no rational settlement can
remove.
I

have come across a note on a

slightly different

plane which,

HOMO VIATOR

138

am

not mistaken, has never been published in the Journal
Metaphysique, though I do not quite know why.
"Metaphysical uneasiness. It seems to me probable that
metaphysics amounts to nothing else but the activity by which

if I

we

define an uneasiness and manage partially (and, moreover,
mysteriously) if not to remove it at least to transpose and transmute it, so that far from paralysing the higher life of the spirit
it tends rather to strengthen and maintain it." What are we to

understand, then, by this uneasiness? First of all, it is not a form
of curiosity. To be curious is to start from a particular fixed
centre, it is to strive to grasp or lay hold of an object of which
one has only a confused or partial idea. In this sense all curiosity

turned towards the periphery. To be uneasy, on the contrary,
be uncertain of one's centre, it is to be in search of one's own
equilibrium. This is true in every case. If I am uneasy about the
health of one of my relatives it means that the apprehension I
feel on their account tends to destroy my inward stability. My
curiosity is the more liable to become uneasiness the more the
object which arouses it forms a part of myself, the more closely
is

is

to

this object is

same time

incorporated into my own interior edifice.
is the more metaphysical the more

uneasiness

At the
it

con-

cerns anything which cannot be separated from myself without
the annihilation of this very self. It is probably true to say that

the only metaphysical problem is that of "What am I?" for all
the others lead back to this one. Even the problem of the existence of other consciousnesses is reducible to it in the last analysis.
secret voice which I cannot silence assures me in fact that if
others are not there, I am not there either. I cannot grant to

A

myself an existence of which I suppose others are deprived; and
here "I cannot" does not mean "I have not the right", but rather
"It is impossible for me". If others vanish from me, I vanish

from myself.

Can I say that I feel this metaphysical uneasiness as a state
with a direct cause such as the uneasiness one feels when
waiting for a beloved being who is late? I do not think so; I
should say rather that circumstances can, and even must,
inevitably arise when I shall be conscious of an uneasiness which
on reflection seems to me to reach infinitely beyond these circumstances in themselves. It is of a permanent character inasmuch

VALUE AND IMMORTALITY

139

not connected with such and such a now. Still more, as
soon as I formulate it, I extend it to all whom it is possible for
me to look upon as sharing in my own experience* It is an anxiety
for all of us, and this amounts to saying that it is in no way
concerned with man in general (a pure fiction invented by a
particular form of rationalism) but rather with my brothers and
as

it is

myself.

Like all true uneasiness (that is to say uneasiness which is not
merely the indistinct consciousness of a functional disorder)
metaphysical uneasiness can only find peace in knowledge. But
of what knowledge is there a question here? The metaphysician
seems to deny his own vocation if he does not proclaim that he is
seeking "truth"; but what is truth?

Perhaps we should first point out very distinctly that the truth
with which we are concerned here has nothing in common with
the truths which

it is

given to the scholar to bring to light as a

result of his patient investigations.

The property of a particular truth, of whatever order it may
be, is not only to be strictly definable, but furthermore to tend
to identify itself with the statement in which it is formulated, or
at least not to

In so

far as

make such an

it is

taken in

identification in

itself,

that

is

any way

difficult.

to say without reference to

the previous researches of which its discovery is the crown, it
tends to appear as independent of whoever proclaims it. This
means to say that it is of the essence of particular truths to have
nothing personal about them, to lay claim to an intrinsic value
of their own. In this respect there is a remarkable analogy

between particular truths and things. The thing is there, ready
to be observed by anyone, the particular truth gives itself also,
as though offered to whomever wants to recognise and proclaim
it.

This undoubtedly

is

the origin of a certain illusion of scientists.

We can amass

or collect particular truths as one collects pebbles
or shells. But it should naturally be noted that by the very fact
of our doing so, these truths are devitalised and degraded. To
realise this, we only have to think of those lists of historical or
physiological facts drawn up for the purpose of enabling a can-

didate to face such and such an ordeal of school or university
examinations
.

Is

it,

as I

have appeared

to imply, truth in general

which we

HOMO VIATOR

J40

have to contrast with particular truths? On reflection the
"
expression truth in general" is in danger of appearing vague and
meaningless. For my part, I should prefer to speak here of the
we may sometimes say about it in lanspirit of truth. Whatever
is far too inexact, it is not against truth, but against
which
guage
the spirit of truth that we are all constantly liable to sin. Moreover, the spirit of truth can totally inhabit a being who in the
whole course of his existence has only had the chance of learning
a very few particular truths, and for whom these truths have
never been even formulated in terms which would make it
possible to pass them on or a fortiori to teach them.
What then is this spirit of truth which sometimes takes possession of us and which opposes the "spirit of imprudence and error",
spoken of by the tragic poet? Here the philosopher must repossess
himself of a principle which he has been leaving to the care of
religious thinkers and even preachers to turn to account.
It

seems clear to

me

that

in relation to our condition,

it is

best to define the spirit of truth
is a notion to

and here again there

The idealist philosophers in particular have been far
inclined to think of the condition of man as of certain

re-establish.

too

much

contingent limits which thought could legitimately, and even
ought to, ignore whenever it was fully exercised. Thus with such
men as Brunschvicg or the thinkers of the Marbourg school
everything which could not be reduced to mathematics lost all
value. So a fatal duality is introduced into man's essence, and the
idealist is always ready to hand over any residuary elements
which do not seem to him to fit in with the essential pattern of
all truth to a psychology which is nothing but a department of
physiology or sociology.
The spirit of truth should be subjected to a phenomenological
description. We should then see fairly easily that it cannot be
confined within the limits of what is generally called the intelligence, or even the reason, in so far as the latter is fatally prone
to become entirely divorced from reality. The spirit of truth is
essentially incarnated in the act which terminates a game I can
play with myself under any circumstances a game always
springing from a certain complacency. In relation to this
the spirit of truth appears to be transcendent, and yet its
function might well be to restore

me

game

proper

to myself.

By

its

light I

VALUE AND IMMORTALITY

14!

my vanity I have really been betraying myself.
Here, surely enough, the words "more deep within me than
myself", find their full meaning.
We might at first be tempted to identify the spirit of truth with
liberty itself. But we have to be careful not to simplify our terribly
complicated situation arbitarily. We might say that we are
comparable with people whose goods are nearly all mortgaged
and therefore not really at our disposal. To deny that we cannot
dispose of them is once more to play with oneself it is once more
to violate the claims of the spirit of truth. What it is always within
the power of each of us to accomplish is to draw up a balance
sheet which is at least an approximation of our situation: it must
further be added that we are, and always should be, much
clearer about our debts than our assets. In drawing up this
balance sheet it seems as though we should place ourselves in
such a position that the spirit of truth which is certainly akin to
inspiration would be able to pierce us as a pencil of light. What
discover that in

depends on us is in short to dispose ourselves favourably in relation to a possible grace. I use this word purposely here in the
very same sense as Mauriac gives it in an admirable passage of
Ce qui Etait Perdu: "Madame de Blenauge said, as though it was the
most obvious thing, that he, Herve, her son, had received among
others one very great grace. I have?
Yes, the greatest grace of
all; you see yourself for what you are; you know yourself; you call
"
This knowledge,
mud, mud; you know that mud is mud.
however, if we can call it that, is at the same time a valuation;
in this realm, truth and value cannot really be separated.
It is indeed of the nature of value to take on a special function
5

c

3

in relation to life and, as it were, to set its seal upon it. An
incontestable experiment, which can scarcely be recorded in
objective documents, here brings us the most definite proof: if I

dedicate

my

life

to serve

involved, by this fact my
secration which delivers

some cause where a supreme value is
receives from the value itself a conit from the vicissitudes of history. We
life

must, however, be on our guard against illusions of all kinds
which swarm round the word "value". Pseudo-values are as full of
vitality as pseudo-ideas. The dauber who works to please a
clientele, even if he persuades himself that he is engaged in the
service of art, is in no way "consecrated"; his tangible successes

HOMO VIATOR

142

will not deceive us. Perhaps, in a general way, the artist can only
receive the one consecration that counts on condition that he
submits to a severe test. This does not necessarily take the form

of the judgment of others, for it may happen that for a long time
the artist is not understood by those around him but it means
at least that with lucid sincerity he compares what he is really
doing with what he aspires to do a mortifying comparison more
often than not. This amounts to saying that value never becomes
reality in a life except by means of a perpetual struggle against
easiness. This is quite as true in our moral life as in scientific
research or aesthetic creation. We always come back to the spirit
of truth, and that eternal enemy which has to be fought against
without remission: our self-complacency. To return to our first
example, the artist may even have to admit at a given moment
either that he is incapable of achieving anything and that he

would do

better to give

up a

struggle in

which he

is

wearing

himself out in vain, or that he is condemned to remain an
amateur, and that, if it is granted him to give pleasure to himself,
he should have no illusions about the importance of this

amusement.
It certainly does not follow from this that we should be justified
in simply identifying value and truth, but only that the spirit of
truth and the spirit of falsehood penetrate very far into a sphere

from which a

superficial analysis

would

at

first

be tempted to

exclude them.

a lecture given in May, 1938, at the Citt
the very substance of exaltation, or more exactly
it is the reality that we have to evoke when we
try to understand
how exaltation can change into creative force." In expressing
"Value",

I said in

Universitaire, "is

myself thus I was making use of and expanding a passage of
Charles du Bois: "For as long as it lasts", he said, "exaltation
sustains us in our race, affording the strongest of spring-boards to
increase our impetus: we feel its presence both in and around us
at the same time, like the presence of a being greater and vaster
but not of an essentially different nature from those other guardian
presences which we could not do without. ..." I must own, however, that it seems to me now that the word exaltation could lead
to grievous confusion. What we are really
aiming at is not an
emotional paroxysm, it is an upward rising of the very being

VALUE AND IMMORTALITY

14.3

which may be expressed, and indeed most frequently is expressed,
in an absolute self-possession, a calm in some way supernatural.
This calm can only be established in the presence of ultimate
realities, particularly

with words.

What

of death. But

are

we

to

Surely they are our limits.
new discrimination has

A

is

no doubt that

this

time

let us take care not to deal only
understand by ultimate realities?

still

it

to

will

be made, however, and there
be necessary to introduce the

category of the existential in spite of the care which it is well to
take in bringing it into any philosophical enquiry. The notion of
limits is indeed ambiguous in itself. Our life considered from outside as a particular phenomenon, or as the ensemble of observable manifestations whose nature is not directly known to us, can
obviously only subsist within certain limits (of temperature, atmospheric pressure, etc.). It is not, of course, such limits that we have
in mind when we speak of ultimate realities. What interests us is
at bottom the act by which what, objectively speaking, is only a
certain given stopping place, is encountered by a being who at one
and the same time recognises it and positively refuses to take any

notice of it. Perhaps in this case we can use the verb neantiser which
Mr. Sartre has recourse to so persistently and even injudiciously.

You may,

perhaps, object that the being does not really recognise
the limit since he refuses to take any notice of it, but it must be
answered that not to recognise it would mean that he was purely

and simply blind; yet here there is perfect lucidity; risk is taken
on, and this risk can in an extreme case, such as absolute sacrifice,
be the complete acceptance of annihilation, this being considered
as of no importance with regard to some special end. The word
"sacrifice" is the one we have to keep above all; value is probably
always related to a sacrifice which is at least possible; value is,
however, only authentic when something incommensurable is not
only granted but established, something beside which all the rest,
at least for the time being, sinks into non-existence all the rest,

including myself, that is, if by myself I mean a being who appears
to himself to have begun and to be going to end.
In the light of these remarks, we see clearly that value can only
be incarnate: if indeed it is reduced to an abstract definition we
fall back once more into our game and consequently into false-

hood, for here the game does not

know

itself to

be a game. The

HOMO VIATOR

144

is that we do not consent to die for beauty in general, or
even for liberty in general: all that means absolutely nothing. We
accept death in order to save our country, or perhaps more truly
for our enslaved brothers. Again, it would be as well to ask ourselves exactly what we mean by dyingfor. Death must be an act, it
must be felt as a positive mode of sharing in a certain good which
is itself bound up with history. From this point of view it seems
likely that it would be absurd to say that anyone died for an idea,
because an idea has no need of such a death, it cannot even know
about it, it is self-sufficient. On the other hand, my brothers do
need me, and it is very possible that I cannot answer their call to

truth

me

except by consenting to die. Here, to be sure, the consent is
everything, but on condition that it is not abstractly isolated from
the extremity, the limit to which it obliges us.
It seems probable then that a fundamental relationship is established between value and courage by the facts these reflections
have disclosed and by the mediation of sacrifice. We find here
transposed on to a different plane the implication of the terminology in use in the seventeenth century.
The conclusion seems, I admit, to conflict with the realism concerning values that a great many contemporary thinkers have
claimed to establish. Furthermore, it is somewhat difficult to see
how it can be applied to purely aesthetic values. Is not gracefulness a value for instance? And what relationship could ever be
discovered between gracefulness and courage? Perhaps the answer
is that we establish a category of the graceful and then set it
up as
a value by virtue of an illusion. What really exist are graceful
human beings, there are also works of art that are graceful, and
besides these there is a spiritual attitude to which these beings and
works correspond. This attitude, however, cannot be considered
by itself either as a value or as something creative of value. Must
we not then in some way identify value and merit, in other words

must we localise the value in the effort at the price of which the
work of art was achieved? This interpretation is obviously absurd.
All that we have to remember from our foregoing analyses is that
there can certainly be no value in the precise meaning of the word
without vigilance on the part of a consciousness exposed to the
temptation of surrendering to a facile and complacent system

which

is

springing

up around

us.

Only

it is

quite clear that

we

VALUE AND IMMORTALITY

145

have so far only succeeded in formulating a quite negative condition which cannot be conceived of without an opposite and
perhaps

this

think that

it

opposite

is

not absolutely definable. I

am inclined to

can only become clear by a consideration of the work-

ing consciousness

(conscience oeuvrante).

no doubt that we must proceed a contrario here, that is
to say we must get to the root of the nature of unemployment.
Unemployment is first seen from outside as a fact. It tends to
become boredom or tedium as it becomes more conscious. The
unemployed appears to himself to be unattached and even cast
away by what is real, as it were on some desert shore; it seems to
him that life has no more use for him. He tries to invent interests
for himself; to form habits, but he does not manage to dupe himself with them. The wife of the man on the retired list busies
herself in punctuating his life, in making sure that he has regular
amusements, which means in reality that she creates different
There

is

forms of slavery for him, but the result of it all is only to provide
a very imperfect disguise for his unemployment. What eats into
him is the more or less distinct sense of life's almost inconceivable
cruelty. Why should it persist within him, since he has no further
interest in anything, since no one needs him any more? The only
unknown element he can still look for is that of sickness and death.
All this, of course, only applies to the lonely unemployed, or the
one who has felt the loosening of the vital bonds which united him
to his friends and relations. Here unemployment borders on
despair; despair is nothing but unemployment which has attained
the most acute self-consciousness, or again, to put it rather bluntly,
it is the breaking of an engagement, the desertion of a conscience
which has no further part in reality.
To be at work, on the other hand, is to be possessed by the real
in such a way that we no longer know exactly whether it is we who
are fashioning it, or it which fashions us. In any case, difficult as it
is to form a perfectly intelligible idea of this operation, we can say
involves the reciprocal movement by which man and
embrace each other, which is none the less effective in the
artist and the scholar than in the artisan, for instance, or the
labourer.. All that varies is the manner in which the real is present
to man or, correlatively, the manner by which man is present to
the real. One thing becomes apparent in all cases to the

that

it

reality

HOMO VIATOR
confusion of a superficial logic which only applies to the world of
these terms are synonymous)- it is that
things and Having (here
wherever the operating consciousness is effectively at work, a
and in the end an identification
mysterious inversion takes place
and
receiving. It is not, indeed,
is established between giving
in
receive
we
that
proportion to what we give; the
enough to say
truth is far more paradoxical and more subtle: we receive in
it still better, giving is already a way of receiving.
giving, or to put
The unemployed or the man without hope of whom I spoke just

now is not only someone who no longer gives anything, he is someone who has lost the power of animating the world into which he

he has been thrown, and where he is superfluous. But this
in a purely subjectivanimating power should not be understood
shadows move
fantastic
of
istic sense, like the faculty
making
is
the power of
of
the
screen:
animating
across a lifeless
power
that
of
more
ourselves,
to
to
the
lending
deeply,
full, or,
go
using
of offering
is to say of allowing ourselves to be used to the full,
ourselves in some way to those kairoi, or life-giving opportunities
which the being, who is really available (dispomble), discovers all
around him like so many switches controlling the inexhaustible

feels

current flowing through our universe.
And yet is there not something deep

down in us which protests
abstract
an
opposition or a sneering
against this optimism? Not by
not the spirit of truth
does
but
no:
our
from
drawn
denial
pride:
those cases where all
itself force us to face those extreme cases
sources of help seem really to have dried up, where everything
seems to have failed the case of the prisoner, alone in the depths
of his cell, of the
incurable invalid

exile, lost in

a strange land,

who day by day

feels

down and remains helpless while life,

or, finally,

of the

the flickering flame die

continuing its relentless and

purposeless game, slowly deserts him.
It seems to me that a philosopher worthy of the name can never
consider these extreme cases with too great anxiety and insistence,
and it is indeed the spirit of truth that requires him not to turn
away from them in order to establish some well-adjusted, harmonious, soothing system where they are all omitted. We are here
at the exact point where honest thought changes into a De profundis and by the very fact of so doing opens to transcendence.
I am speaking of the one authentic transcendence and ask you to

VALUE AND IMMORTALITY

147

be good enough to ignore or rather to refuse to accept the often
vague and most certainly injudicious use which so many contemporary thinkers, for the most part existentialists, have made
of this word.
Yes, it is indeed here that invocation arises, that an appeal for
help to the absolute Thou is articulated. I have never ceased
repeating this many and many a time. But I should like to be

much more
seemed

to

explicit on a point which, to tell the truth,
essential and upon which there should

me

sible uncertainty.

The spirit of truth bears

another

has always

be no pos-

name which is

even more revealing; it is also the spirit of fidelity, and I am more
and more convinced that what this spirit demands of us is an
explicit refusal, a definite negation of death. The death here in
question is neither death in general, which is only a fiction, nor
my own death in so far as it is mine, as Mr. Brunschvicg admitted
in the course of the debate which brought us to grips at the Congrh
Descartes; it is the death of those we love. They alone in fact are
within reach of our spiritual sight, it is they only whom it is given
us to apprehend and to long for as beings, even if our religion, in
the widest sense of the word, not only allows us but even encour-

and enjoins us to extrapolate and proclaim that light is
everywhere, that love is everywhere, that Being is everywhere.
"To love a being," says one of my characters, "is to say you, you
in particular, will never die." For me this is not merely a sentence
in a play, it is an affirmation which it is not given to us to transcend. To consent to the death of a being is in a sense to give him
up to death. Moreover, I should like to be able to show that
again here it is the spirit of truth which forbids us to make this
ages us

surrender, this betrayal.
Yet nothing could at

first sight seem more arbitrary or even
more iniquitous than to compare what appears to be the pure and

simple recognition of a fact to a betrayal. Is it not, on the contrary, unreasonable and almost blameworthy to refuse to accept
this fact, and ought we not to say that those who, silencing their
longings and even their aspirations, admit and proclaim it, are
the

more

truly courageous? Is

who

it

not the unbeliever

who

refuses

the real representative of the
In
it
be asked what does this active
of
truth?
addition,
might
spirit
negation of death amount to? Is it anything but a purely verbal
all fallacious

consolation

is

HOMO VIATOR

148

negation, the refusal made by minds all aureoled with infantile
sentimentality to accept the reality which they have not the courage to face? There we have in my view one of the most important

problems with which the

existential philosopher has to deal,

and

am inclined to propose is in direct opposition
adopted in our own time by such men as

the solution which I
to the positions

Heidegger and Jaspers.
It seems to me that we should begin by observing that there can
be no question of treating the absolute cessation of consciousness
as a fact, and this is a sufficient answer to the supposed objectivity
on which he who is hardened in his denial prides himself. In the
first place, in fact, we have no sort of possibility or right to speak
of a consciousness in the same way as we speak of an object which
can be defined as "this particular thing", which first appeared at
a given moment of time and will come to an end (will break, for
instance, or dissolve) at another equally fixed moment. I should
also be quite ready to say that consciousness cannot be defined
ostensively; what can be designated is never it itself, it is something (the particular body) which perhaps keeps up and doubtless tends to impair a whole set of relationships with it, which are
inextricable to the point of contradicting themselves as relations.
Moreover, we must remark that if we admit that consciousness is

a manifestation there can be no question of observing anything
but the more or less prolonged eclipses of consciousness. We are,
however, unable to go to the extreme limit and to speak of a final
eclipse or

an absolute disappearance,

for unless

we

fall

into

an

indefensible materialism, we can neither apprehend nor even
imagine the principle of which consciousness is the manifestation.

From

this point of view we might say very simply that if death is
a silence we cannot mark its boundaries, for we neither know what
it is veiling, what it is protecting, nor what it is
preparing. The

fallacy, the treason, consists in interpreting this silence as

nona decline into non-being.
Perhaps it may be objected that such considerations do not
take us beyond an agnosticism which many of the poets of the end
of the nineteenth century, from Tennyson to Sully Prudhomme,
expressed, with pathos, no doubt, but with very unsound philosophy. Only I do not in the least think that agnosticism is the
last word here. The active negation of death, which I was
existence, as

VALUE AND IMMORTALITY

149

advocating a moment ago, has in it both something of a challenge
and of piety; more exactly, it is piety which from our mode of
insertion in the world is bound to appear as a challenge. The
world seems to assure me cynically that this tenderly loved being

no longer

exists

versal register

on its lists, that he has been struck
and I for my part claim that he exists

off the uniall

the same

and that he cannot help existing. I am thus caught in the
an agonising contradiction. Can I free myself from it?

toils

of

have to remind myself that the departed being of whom
to believe that there is nothing left but a past,
who is altogether past, was at the beginning nothing but a future.
A loving conspiracy had at first to be formed around him, at a
time when nothing was as yet known of what he would or could
be. The essence of this being was still only the prophetic hopes
he awakened in his relatives. And I have to ask myself in the
presence of this death, which is perhaps only a birth or an
ascension, if the conspiracy is not to be reproduced on a higher
plane. This time it is round a sleep that the conspiracy must be
centred a sleep which must not be disturbed by intruders.
But against what intrusion except that of infidelity and negation
have we to guard?
There is still a serious ambiguity, however. You may say that
this infidelity is simply forgetfulness; it is a memory which we
have to respect, and we are guilty of a veritable paralogism in
fraudulently changing this memory into an existence, to be protected and promoted. We have then to choose between two
interpretations, the one modest and in strict conformity with
First, I

they

now want me

the given facts of experience, the other arbitrary

and almost

delirious.

But if this divergence is possible, it is because we are no longer
in the realm of practical existence, where it is always possible,
at least in theory, to investigate what we seek to verify. To return
to the simile of sleep, everything happens as though we were
watching from the other side of a transparent partition; we
cannot make sure of the exact state of the sleeper; the very meaning of the words "real state" is no longer quite clear. The sleeper
has been taken beyond our reach, we are no longer permitted
to proceed to any sort of examination by manipulation which
would give us some way of pronouncing upon his state. If a

HOMO VIATOR

150

manipulation is still possible it can only be carried out upon a
thing which, because it is a thing, is no longer he> and which,
moreover, is in process of disappearing. It is required of us,
whatever the circumstances, to triumph over the obsessions which
cling to this thing, whether it be to preserve a memory or to
dwell upon a presence.
Nevertheless, it appears upon reflection that he who limits
himself to respecting a memory is at bottom still sufficiently in
awe of the "thing" to consider it as the remains of what we can
no longer preserve within ourselves except as an image. Moreover, this image grows fainter each day, like a badly printed
photograph which we vainly keep on dusting. But would it not
here be as well to destroy an illusion. Supposing that I really do
cherish a materialised or purely mental image, it is not for itself
that I do so, but out of love for the being this image evokes.
This being himself, then, should not and cannot be created as an
image, otherwise we shall fall into an absurdity, the image being
referred back to another image, and so on and so on for as far
as we can see. Our fidelity can only be founded on an unfailing
attachment to an existence which it is impossible to relegate to
the world of images. If our thought here tends to be confused, it
is really because some image, rudimentary as it must be, and
consequently a mere shadow,

is

necessary for this unfailing

attachment to become conscious of itself. This shadow, which
may be only a name still impregnated with affection, is the mode
by which a presence makes itself known to me.
It does not seem as though all this can be seriously disputed.
It may certainly be objected, however, that the existence seen

through the image is only something from the past; we shall
therefore speak of a "still existing" (un exister encore), of that which

"no longer exists" (n'existe plus), if we want to define what we
are here considering. But if we break away from this abstract
jargon, we shall without a doubt be forced to recognise that the
question

is

always and ever concerned with the image; yet

from

it is

we want

to free ourselves, it is a nonshadow that we are striving to grasp, that is to say something
indefectible. There is not and cannot be piety except where relations are maintained with what is indefectible. But we must at

precisely

this that

he same time emphasise the paradox that as a matter of fact the

VALUE AND IMMORTALITY

15!

memories, or more exactly the images, can very well tend to
stifle

the indefectible essence which

There

is

no piety which

is

it is

their business to evoke.

not in danger of degenerating into

idolatry.

Let us penetrate further: indefectibility is that which cannot
where deep-rooted fidelity is preserved, and this amounts to
saying that it is a reply. Only this reply could not be automatic
without fidelity becoming weakened in its very essence (for it
would degenerate into a process or technique). It must therefore
be well understood that the faithful soul is destined to experience
darkness and that it must even be familiar with the temptation
to let itself be inwardly blinded by the night through which it
has to pass. Moreover, this is saying too little and the language
I have used here is not courageous enough. Fidelity is not a prefail

liminary datum, it is revealed and established as fidelity by this
very crossing of the darkness, by this trial combined with everyday life, the experience of "day after day". So then the Indefectible is not the permanence of an essence, or, more exactly,
it is not in the mode of such a permanence that it can be given
to us.

The essence is in fact made known to thought as it advances,

by way of a law definable only in universal terms. This law is
not conceivable where relations between one being and another
are in question. Consequently, there is room for every sort of
error, false move and deception on the side of the subject. It is
through these errors and vicissitudes that we are allowed to
behold the intermittent gleaming of the indefectible fire. I will
not try to disguise, but emphasise rather, the contradiction
which these words contain; it seems to me to be bound up with
our human condition.
Such I think are the preliminary data concerning what is
really

somewhat improperly

immortality. I

am

problem of personal
from hazarding any con-

called the

actually very far

jectures on the mode of existence of the departed and the nature
of the palingenesis for which they are no doubt destined. More-

does not matter that I refuse to be interested in such
speculations. It must, however, be recognised that those who do
indulge in them are generally quite unprovided with any equipment for reflection, hence their theories are in danger of degenerating into pure fantasies. On the other hand, theological
over,

it

HOMO VIATOR

152

interdicts, of which it would be well to examine the foundations
very closely, help in great measure to paralyse all independent

research in this realm.
I should like now to go back briefly in order to bring out the
unity, admittedly hard to grasp at first, which underlies the
preceding considerations. The fundamental connection seems to
me to be as follows: whatever the Stoics or idealists say (we will

not here consider the
ultimate reality, value

elevated doctrines), if death is the
annihilated in mere scandal, reality is

less
is

pierced to the heart. This we cannot disguise from ourselves
unless we enclose ourselves in a system of pleasure. Simply to
admit or accept this scandal is not only to bow before an objective
fact, for here we are outside the order of fact; it is rather to
destroy human communion itself at its very centre. The spirit of
truth here identifies itself with the spirit of fidelity and love.

We

should really go further: value can only be thought of as reality
and by that I mean saved from a verbalism which destroys
while thinking to proclaim it if it is related to the consciousness
of an immortal destiny. We have seen clearly that it is not
separated from courage and sacrifice: but whatever the being
who sacrifices himself may think about himself and his metaphysical chances, reflection cannot accept this annihilation, even
if he is himself resigned to it. Do not let us be the dupes of words:
reflection, as

an abstract

entity,

is

nothing; what

is

real

is

I

brother.
myself, meditating about the destiny of
I do not in the least disguise from myself the numberless
questions which arise here particularly concerning the part played

my

in this realm by the appeal to absolute transcendence. Is it
possible to conceive of a real personal survival independently of
this transcendence? I think that my reply would be as follows:
there is no human love worthy of the name which does not
represent for him who exercises it both a pledge and a seed of
immortality: but, on the other hand, it is really not possible to
exercise this love without discovering that it cannot constitute
a closed system, that it passes beyond itself in every direction,
that it really demands for its complete realisation a universal

communion

outside which

to be corrupted

communion

satisfied and is destined
the end. Moreover, this universal
can only be centred upon an absolute Thou.

and

itself

it

lost in

cannot be

VALUE AND IMMORTALITY
It is

on

time to do away once and for

all

with the

153

positivist illusions

this subject.

There
myself.

is

another point on which I should like briefly to explain
real relation can be established between value and

What

immortality? There is, for instance, no doubt that the beautiful
work of art is uncorrupted and untouched by time. "A thing of
beauty is a joy forever", as the poet says. But is it true that this
is in any
way connected with what we understand by a real
the soul's or the person's actual victory over death?
could reply as follows: in a world of scandal where
absurdity had gained the upper hand, that is to say where what
is best and highest was at the
mercy of blind forces, where
c
'because a little piece of iron had passed through their heads, it
had become for ever impossible to get on with people like Peguy
or like Alain Fournier" (Jacques Riviere, A la Trace de Dieu)
there would not perhaps be a single value which was not in
danger of appearing ludicrous and suspect. We are thus led to
wonder whether the essence of value independently of what we
have seen to be its function is not to be found in its translucency.
This amounts to saying that value is the mirror wherein it is
given us to discern, always imperfectly and always through a distorting mist, the real face of our destiny, the "truer than ourselves". What it shows us certainly reaches its full development
in another world a world which it seems to be the property of
our earthly experience to open or half open to us, or in extreme
cases, to prevent us from entering.
Thus to make the other world the axis of our life is, of course,
to take the opposite position from that of nearly all contemporary
philosophers, and I do not deny that, at the bottom of my mind,
there is an anxious voice protesting and persistently arguing in
favour of the metaphysicians of Earth. It is, however, to be
wondered whether the systematic refusal to accept thjis other
world is not at the origin of the convulsions which have reached
their paroxysm at the present time. Perhaps a stable order can
only be established if man is acutely aware of his condition as a
traveller, that is to say, if he perpetually reminds himself that he
is required to cut himself a dangerous path across the unsteady
blocks of a universe which has collapsed and seems to be crumbling in every direction. This path leads to a world more firmly
survival,

by

Perhaps

we

HOMO VIATOR

154

established in Being, a world whose changing and uncertain
all that we can discern here below. Does not everything happen as though this ruined universe turned relentlessly

gleams are

upon whomever claimed that he could

settle

down

in

it

to the

extent of erecting a permanent dwelling there for himself? It is
not to be denied, of course, that the affirmation of the other
ec
world entails risk, it is the noble venture" of which the ancient
philosopher spoke, but the whole question is to know whether in
refusing to

make

which sooner or

this

venture

we

are not starting

upon a road

later leads to perdition.

PARIS, 1943.

To GUSTAVE THIBON

DANGEROUS SITUATION OF ETHICAL
VALUES
JTROM AN ABSTRACT point of view, which has been that
of most of the philosophers up till now, it may seem ridiculous
to speak of a situation of values: and if values are considered as
ideas there is no sense in saying they are situated. It is quite
otherwise if one admits, as I do not hesitate to do, that a value
not incarnated. Moreover, the word incarnated
What does it mean for a value to be embodied?
To simplify matters let us only consider what are properly
speaking ethical values here. The property of a value, as I said

is

nothing

must be

if it is

defined.

recently, is to assume a certain function in relation to life and,
as it were, to mark it with its seal. For that, it is still necessary

be incorporated in some cause. It seems to me,
general lines we can adopt the theory which
was presented with such force by the American philosopher,
Royce, in his fine book. Philosophy of Loyalty. A cause is neither
an individual nor a collection of individuals, nor an abstract
principle. A cause is not impersonal,, but rather supra-personal;
it is a particular type of unity which holds together a number of
persons within a life which they share. Hence a relationship of
a special kind, which we can call loyalty, is established between
the individual and the cause; it is not a mystical renunciation,
but a fully conscious attachment which presupposes the free subordination of the self to a superior principle. "My loyalty", Royce
says, "means nothing theoretically or practically if I am not the
member of a community. No success I can achieve will be valid
if it is not also the success of the community to which I essentially
belong, in virtue of the real relations which bind me to the whole
of the universe." This last detail is extremely important. If we
only took the first definition we might indeed fear that it justified
allegiance to a party, for instance, with all the servitudes which
can go with it. But, for Royce, if loyalty is a supreme good,

for the value to

in fact, that in

its

HOMO VIATOR

156

conflict between varying loyalties is the greatest of evils. It must
be recognised that some causes are favourable and others contrary
to the development of loyalty in the world. "A cause is good not
only for us but for humanity that is to say, in itself according
to the measure in which it serves the spirit of loyalty, that is to
1
say that it helps us in our loyalty to our fellows and fosters it."
This amounts to saying that there is a universal cause which is
that of loyalty in the world. Loyalty is infectious, it is a good
which spreads wide, it is a ferment of extraordinary potency.
Such is indeed the cause to which I should consecrate myself.
When I speak the truth I do not only serve the supra-personal
community which I form with my interlocutor, I help to make
man's faith in man grow in this world, I help to strengthen the
bonds which make a universal community possible.
I do not think all this can be seriously disputed, and the effort
of the American philosopher to save universality without becoming separated from the realm of concrete action is to be admired.
But at the same time we should most certainly be giving way to
baleful illusions if we made any mistake about the opposition
this idealism is bound, in fact, to meet with to-day, even if it
obtains a theoretical and lifeless assent from many minds. And

precisely here that we are obliged to introduce the notion of
situation. It is probable that at no time the faith of
in man,

it is

man

not only faith in his fellows, but in himself, has been subjected to
a more harsh and formidable test. What is in danger of death
to-day is man himself in his unity, and this is just as true of the
individual considered as a concrete whole as of the human race
considered as the flowing out or expansion of an essence. Hence
there is a great risk that Royce's idea of the spirit of loyalty will

be

felt as

an empty

aspiration, as

an

inconsistent dream, as

a

fiction.

It is evident that a metaphysic of faith can be built on the ruins
of humanism: and here there develops an impassioned dialectic.
For if it is possible to say that the death of God in the Nietzschean
sense preceded and made possible the agony of man which we are

now witnessing,

it is legitimate in a certain sense to say that it is
from the ashes of man that God can and must rise again. Am I

mistaken in presuming that the ideas of Barth in particular draw
1

Royce, Philosophy of Loyalty (Macmillan), p. 118.

DANGEROUS SITUATION OF ETHICAL VALUES

157

part of their strength from the radical pessimism to which events
have brought us on the purely human level?
But here the particularly serious problem arises which I want
to consider now. Have we the right, even from a strictly Christian
point of view, in a certain sense to sacrifice the ethical? What in
reality would such a sacrifice amount to? To put it briefly, it

would

consist in sanctioning

an actual

division

which we are

tending to create between those on the one hand who establish
their existence on a mystical basis and those on the other who try
simply to get along with as little harm as possible in this adventure, so incomprehensible and in the end so frightful, this
adventure into which they have a sense of having been hurled by
chance, or by inhuman and uncontrollable forces, which comes
to the same thing. In thus imagining the fissure which is tending
to develop at the centre of the human mass, we are however in
danger of excessively over-simplifying and even of misrepresenting a situation which is infinitely more complex and which it is

probably scarcely possible to schematise.
When we speak of existences seeking to base themselves on
mysticism we are in great danger of letting ourselves be taken in
simply by a word and of grouping realities which have nothing in
common under one head. The very term of mysticism, so abused,
so emptied of all value but nevertheless so difficult to avoid, calls
for serious reservations. What is really in question is, on the one
hand, fidelity to "God's Word" and, from this point of view,
differences of denomination should be treated as of relatively
secondary importance; and on the other a phenomenon of magnetic attraction or we might say of crystallisation. The announcement of an order to be set up in accordance with what the masses
is here embodied in some leader or group of
In both cases we can say with certainty that the individual
is required to make the sacrifice, not only of his immediate
interests but eventually even of his life, to a supra-personal end.
In the first case this end is found in an eternity which envelops
and transcends the present, and in the second case in a more or
less near future. But between these ends which, if one may so put
it seems
it, are not situated in the same metaphysical dimension,
to me very difficult to establish either a definite connection or a

are vaguely awaiting

leaders.

radical opposition.

One

point, however,

is

clear: in so far as the

HOMO VIATOR

158

terrestrial order to be established allows the domination of some
and the subjection of others, it must be stated without hesitation
that it can only be set up in defiance of all the values converging
towards the inaccessible centre for which we reserve the name of

On the other hand, in so far as the terrestrial order is
conceived of as effectively excluding all privilege and all slavery,
it is just possible to see in it a symbol, imperfect, no doubt, and
perhaps even inconsistent in the main, of a reality which can only
be effectively established under conditions incompatible with the
fragile, ephemeral and contradictory structure of our actual
eternity.

experience. These simple observations will be enough to show the
equivocal and even dangerous character of certain momentary

which at a time of crisis may be entered into between
Christianity or some Christian confession on the one hand and on
the other the most active form of earthly mysticism the only one
which stands a real chance of still surviving to-morrow after the
alliances

nameless tempest

we

are passing through to-day.

On

the strictly

tellurian plane, that is, in an order where given concrete dynamisms are at work, it is difficult to see how anything but a more and

more powerfully organised

systematised plutocracy can oppose
mysticism to-morrow. Such a plutocracy would,
moreover, be inevitably tempted to mobilise in its service, not so
this earthly

much

genuine spiritual forces, as some of the feeblest interpreters
those most open to suggestion and seduction whom the spiritual forces must call upon to represent them in visible form before
the eyes of the majority. Hence there will be a danger that a
situation may develop which will be all the more inextricable
because, in such a struggle, what might originally have still
figured as mysticism will have inevitably degenerated into a pure

system of spite and gratification.

Under these conditions it may seem as though the Christian
were condemned simply to retire from a conflict in which the
stake appears to him to be more and more futile, since this stake
amounts to nothing but the possession of the world, in other words
the seizure of the unseizable. At the end of this dialectic, which it
would be only too easy to illustrate with concrete examples, we
are apparently faced with what was already given us at the start;
an irreparable rent in the very stuff of which our humanity is
made.

DANGEROUS SITUATION OF ETHICAL VALUES

159

But at the same time, as we have already suggested, it is clear
that the Christian cannot rest content to observe and accept this
rent without denying his own Christianity and without emptying
the very notion of salvation of its substantial content.
Does this mean that in order to preserve themeaning and value
of this notion, the Christian has to arrogate to himself a sort of
right or duty of guardianship over the non-Christian? Briefly,

must we subscribe to the establishment of a spiritual paternalism
which will be both at the cost and to the advantage of the
Christian? I am sure that such a position is impossible from every
point of view. On the one hand, indeed, it would give the
Christian an essentially pharisaical sense of superiority; on the
other hand it would none the less fatally cause in the nonbeliever a sort of bitterness, or invidia, which is probably the root
of anti-religious passion. The Christian in fact cannot in any way
think of himself as possessing either a power or even an advantage
which has been denied to the unbeliever. There we have one of
the most paradoxical aspects of his situation, for in another sense,

he is obliged to recognise that grace has been bestowed upon him.
This, however, only remains true on condition that the grace
should inhabit him, not only as radiance, but as humility. From
the

moment

changes

its

that he begins to be proud of

nature,
malediction.

and

I should

be tempted

it

as

a possession it
it becomes a

to say

Philosophers as a whole have taken little trouble to scrutinise
the nature of this humility. Yet it is essentially in its name that the
Christian must constantly be on his guard against the temptation
to paternalism. At its root there is an assurance, or I should be
ready to say a knowledge that, in his quality of a Christian, he
acts neither on his own account nor through the power of a virtue

which is his property, or even which having been infused into him
has become authentically his own. Under these conditions he cannot in any way claim to be worth more than the disinherited
brother to whom he is speaking. It would moreover be unlawfully
pretentious on his part should he glory in having a good leader,
or a good master, whilst the unbeliever has no one, for this would
mean that he was putting himself once more on the plane of
Having, the plane where one boasts about what one possesses. It
would not be difficult -to show how this paradoxical humility

HOMO VIATOR

l6o
tends at

first

to strike the unbeliever as unbearable hypocrisy.
rise to a tragic misunderstanding, especially as the

This has given

sincere Christian can always
practising is any better than

wonder whether the humility he is
an attitude adopted in conformity

with something he has been taught.
If this

is

the case, to

come

to the help of the unbeliever spiritu-

ally can scarcely mean claiming literally to bring him something
of which he has been deprived. Such a claim would in fact always
be in danger of annulling or making sterile the good which we
set out to do. All that we can propose to ourselves is, in the last
analysis, to awaken within another the consciousness of what he is,
or, more precisely, of his divine filiation; to teach him to see himself as the child of God through the love which is shown him.
From this point of view, I should be rather tempted to say that,
contrary to what Kierkegaard proclaimed, there is probably a

Christian maieutic, of which, however, the essence is naturally
very different from what we know of the Platonic maieutic. It is in
treating the other as a child of God that it seems to me to be
within the limits of possibility for me to awaken within him a consciousness of his divine filiation. But in reality I do not give or
bring him anything. I merely direct the adoration of which God is
the unique object on to the divine life as seen in this creature, who
from the beginning has been unaware of his true nature and is all
the more unaware of it the greater his self-complacent vanity

may

be.

These considerations may at first seem rather far removed from
the problem we have set ourselves, but they are not really so. We
shall, however, have to apply what we have been saying about

any

Christian, to the Christian thinker.

am going to strive to put the question in as distinct terms as
possible. We shall get a better idea of its immense range if we
I

remember that

it does not only concern the relations of the
Christian with the non-Christian, but also the relations of the
Christian with himself, in so far as he discovers within himself

"immense
Moreover,

regions where the Gospel has not been preached".
in the depths of these regions that a greater part

it is

of his existence develops; the most important part, perhaps, often
the most visible and sometimes the only visible part.
In the light of the preceding remarks what would the theory of

DANGEROUS SITUATION OF ETHICAL VALUES
a Christian philosopher amount to

if he set

l6l

out to deny the specific

and authentic character of the ethical values, that is in fact to say
if he set out to crush them to nothing between revelation on one
side and undiluted sociology on the other? Let us get away here
from pure

abstractions.

A theory is absolutely nothing apart from

who propounds it, there is no affirmation without
someone who affirms. But who is making an affirmation here? It
the subject

I as a philosopher, it is I, consequently, in a special definite
capacity, as I address "you others," or, which comes to very much
the same thing, as I take counsel with myself concerning those

is

others

on

whom I am going to give judgment. From the position

what you consider good is not
you think you have for
adhering to it are without solidity or truth, and that, in the last
analysis, you only act in conformity with impulses of which the
temporal and impure origins are to be found somewhere in the
social structures which control your existence. As for me, on the
other hand, I claim to see the light which is actually hidden from
you and which alone could illuminate the darkness in which you
are groping you who do not even know that you are surrounded

which

I

occupy,

I declare

that

truly good, or again that the reasons

with gloom, so complete is your blindness. It is only too clear that
an assertion of such a kind, a judgment so summary, must be
regarded as contrary to the Christian, and particularly to the
Catholic tradition, which has always granted so large a place to
the natural virtues.

But

all

these reflections are precisely concerned with the phen-

omenon of the eclipsing of the idea of natural virtue, and
phenomenon is itself bound up with another very genuine

this

fact

to me has been the chief feature in the evolution of
western humanity for the last century and a half: the disappearance of a certain confidence which is both spontaneous and metaphysical in the order which frames our existence, or again what I
have elsewhere called the severance of the nuptial bond between
man and life. We shall be able to show without any difficulty,

which it seems

humanism of the eighteenth century
or of the middle of the nineteenth, paradoxically as it may seem,
marked the first stage in this tragic disintegration. "Everything
leads us to think", I said recently, "that the giving way of religious
I think, that the optimistic

beliefs

which has been going on for five hundred centuries in large*

HOMO VIATOR

l62

world has brought as its consequence a
weakening of the natural foundations on which those beliefs were
built. If this be so it means that what we need to reawaken within
and around us is this piety, not Christian but pre-Christian,, or
more exactly peri-Christian. Each one of us probably knows
Christians who are over super-naturalised and who have lost the
sense, we will not say of nature but of the nascent grace which

sections of the civilised

stirs

at the heart of nature. I

am

strongly inclined to think that,

apart from Revelation, this piety is the only true vinculum which
can bind men together, and that all abstract universalism which
claims to do without it, however upright its intention, really serves
only to prepare the way for a nihilism whose devastating action
we can discern on all sides. 35
I should express very clearly what I mean if I formed the
hypothesis that the forces of destruction which are let loose everywhere around us and tend to sweep away all the embodied values,
whether they are incorporated in the life of a family, a school, a
hospital, a museum or a church, have only been able to develop
beyond all limits because they started from a way of thinking
which, if we may say so, denied the real by deconsecrating it. But
of course there can be no more fatal error than to imagine that
anything with which to reconsecrate it can be found in these forces
themselves. There is no possible doubt that to seek to return to
paganism under any form whatever, is to sink even lower into
delirium and abjection. The Christian philosopher who wants to
do positive work in the field of ethics to-day should, it seems to me,
start by acquiring on his own account an increasingly concrete
and extensive consciousness of the underground connections which
unite the peri-Christian to what may strictly be called revelation.
These connections are not of a strictly logical order, but they
depend on a metaphysical anthropology of which for the last fifty
years or so thinkers as different as Scheler, Peter Wust or Theodor
Haecker, as Chesterton, Peguy, or to-day Thibon, have begun to

To undertake this, perhaps the most delicate of
an analytical effort of the utmost patience and
severity, but also a most ardent faithfulness to the human element
which is of the order of love and without which the analysis will
become dry and barren. To tell the truth it is only the counterpart
on the plane of intelligence or human creation of the mysterious
trace the features.
all tasks, requires

DANGEROUS SITUATION OF ETHICAL VALUES

163

work by which a tissue is re-formed or an organ regains its
power. I do not think I can convey my thought to you more
explicitly than by here introducing this reference of which the
implications go far beyond those of a simple metaphor in my
eyes.
I

am indeed very far from under-estimating the dangers which
there can be in introducing biological categories into the spiritual.
And on this point it may be permissible to think that Bergson,
the Bergson of Deux Sources, is not altogether beyond reproach.
But is it not a fact that in reality the biologist as such, by a
which it is not impossible to discover the principles,
tends increasingly to lose all consciousness of what life is, and, I
should say (though of course this does not apply to Bergson) that
he does this in so far as he has managed to persuade himself that
he will one day be able to produce it himself. Here again we
fatality of

to recognise a sense of proportion which it is the function
of humility to preserve. It seems clear that when biology claims
to grant itself rights comparable with those belonging to physics
and chemistry in the realm of inanimate nature, it is inevitably
guilty of the disastrous intrusions that we have seen becoming

have

widespread in our time. Actually I am quite prepared to recognise that it is difficult, and perhaps even impossible, to trace a
precise line of demarcation between what is lawful and not
lawful in this field; on its boundaries there are questions and
species about which one can only speak with knowledge after
the most minute examination of each case and all the principles

which it involves. The thing, however, that we can assert and
is that
it is what matters from the point of view I am taking
all demarcation disappears and man gives an irreparable opening to the Monstrous from the moment when he weakens in that
piety in his relations to life which can alone guide his steps in an
order where murder seems to be so easy, so indiscernible, so
tempting, that it
accomplishes it.

A

is

not even recognised as such by him

who

serious objection, or at the very least a delicate question,
fail to occur to our minds at the point we have now

can scarcely

reached. If we put a sort of pre-Christian or peri-Christian piety
at the basis of ethics are we not either making them depend on
an irrational feeling over which we have no control, or else

HOMO VIATOR

164

embarking upon the paradoxical or even hopeless undertaking of
trying to resuscitate natural religion which the philosophy of
enlightenment tried vainly to establish? Are we not in any case
ruining the specific quality of ethical values which we meant on
the contrary to safeguard?
It is certainly difficult to reply to this question in a completely
satisfactory way within the limits of a brief exposition such as
this. It could only be done, I think, by first of all attacking the
classic and arbitrary distinction which it presupposes between

and reason. As an illustration of my objective at the
moment, we might call to mind the beautiful analysis which
Soloviev, for example, has given of modesty, pity and reverence,
in his Justification du Bien. There we have principles expressing
the human quality as such, this human quality which we mutilate
and betray when we claim to reduce its essence to a mere faculty
of association, a faculty, moreover, which the higher animals are

feeling

far

from lacking.
real and most agonising problem seems

The

to

me much

rather to concern the extent of our control of these principles.
How far does it depend on us to revivify them? It is impossible
to be too sceptical about the efficacy of philosophic preaching in
this field

and

I

am

not even thinking, of course, about the

vulgarised expressions which such preaching is liable to adopt.
As Thibon has so admirably pointed out, it is above all a question
of moral renewal. It is conceivable that it will be the task of

small communities coming together like swarms one after the
other to form what we might call centres of example, that is to
say nuclei of life around which the lacerated tissues of true moral
existence can be reconstituted. It is not here a question of fleeting
dreams. The most actual and immediate experience shows that
men can relearn how to live, when they are placed in conditions

which are real and when a light illuminates the group they
form (with each other and with the things supporting them) at
its summit. There is every reason to think that the guarantee of
the success of such undertakings is bound up with the humility
in which they originate and which shapes their first objectives.
Levelling, in the ambitious forms under which it was conceived
before the war, characterised by a titanism which was its original
defect, has every chance of being wrecked in a nameless cata-

DANGEROUS SITUATION OF ETHICAL VALUES

165

clysm. In any case, on ethical grounds it can be asserted that
not only doomed but that it is complete nonsense.

it

is

I

have no

illusions

accompany such a

about the disappointment which

conclusion.

What

I really

want

may

to stress

is

urgent in all departments to carry out clearing operations which will make it possible to find once more the lost springs
that

it is

whose values men would be condemned to an infraanimal existence, an existence of which our generation will have

for lack of

had the

painful privilege of witnessing the

first

apocalyptic

symptoms.
PARIS.
December, 1943*

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS
THE IMPORTANCE OF Mr. Sartre's new book

1 is

incontestable.

not the most important contribution yet made to general philosophy by the generation of
"under-forties". Is it a perfectly original contribution? We are
It

is

to

be wondered whether

it is

tempted to doubt it, so much do we feel on every page
upon the form at least, of Martin Heidegger. We
should surely be wrong, however, to stop at this first impression.
The thought of Mr. Sartre diverges from the doctrine worked
out in Sein und eit on some very important points, and it seems
very possible that the central intuition of the young French
philosopher is his own. It is this intuition that I want above all
to try to bring out in the following pages without attempting to
at

first

the influence,

keep scrupulously to the author's own order. I may say in
passing that he has himself owned that the introduction is one
of the stiffest parts of this difficult book and makes it particularly
hard to get into.
The fundamental principle of UEtre et le Neant (Being and
Nothingness) is the irreconcilable opposition which exists between
the being in

itself (I'fare en-soi} and the being for itself (Vitre
property of Vttre en-soi to be identically and

pour-soi). It is the

what it is. "There is not in the en-soi the smallest particle
of being which does not belong to itself without distance. There
is not in the being thus conceived the slightest hint of duality.
The en-soi fills itself and it would be impossible to imagine a
more total plentitude, a more perfect co-extensiveness of content
and container: there is no empty space in the being, through
which nothingness could squeeze an entry" (p. 116). It may be
asked what right we have to postulate the existence of this
fare en-soi. The reply is that it is of the essence of consciousness
to be conscious tf/^that is to say to be aware of a reality which is
properly speaking aimed at, but at the same time treated as
independent and irreducible* To be conscious of something is to
be confronted with a full and concrete presence other than the
consciousness. "Transcendence is an essential structure of confully

1

UEtre

et le

Want, Edition of the N.R.F.

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS

167

sciousness" (p. 27). For myself I should express this by saying that
I consider the consciousness which I
or anyone else can

when

acquire of some reality, I

am

irresistibly led to

imagine

this

reality as existing in itself (en-soi) and as consequently being an
example of that fullness of being, that self-sufficiency which

logically appears to be the characteristic of the en-soi. It is true
that we still have to find out whether what we have here is not

way of seeing the world which is implied in the very
structure of consciousness. If this were the case the en-soi would

simply a

some

in

sort destroy

fagade or optical

itself,

illusion.

moment is that it is in
that we shall be able to

since

What

it

would be reduced

has to be borne in

to

a sort of

mind

for the

opposition to Vfare en-soi thus defined
recognise what constitutes the originality
its

of Vfare pour-soi.
Analysis shows, indeed, that it is impossible to define consciousness, that is to say the being pour-soi^ as something exactly coincident with itself. I can say of this table that it is purely and

simply this table. It is not thus with my belief. I should not in all
honesty be able to say only that it is belief, precisely because, in
so far as it is pour-soi, it is consciousness of belief. From the very
it tends in some sort
from its belief-being. It is disturbed belief. A belief
which was purely and simply and absolutely belief would not
be aware of itself, and would therefore no longer be consciousness, nor even, when all was said and done, would it be belief.
Let us say then both that belief is only itself on condition that it
escapes in some sort from its own identity, and, inversely, if it

fact that

my belief is apprehended as belief,

to escape

coincides fully with itself in the
do away with itself as belief.

manner of the

en-soi it will

tend

to

These arguments which

may at first seem singularly subtle and

by an admirable analysis of bad faith
which forms one of the most outstanding and solid

abstract, are illustrated
(la

mauvaisefof)

chapters of the book.

The

author, considering the conditions

under which bad faith is possible, shows that it presupposes the
existence of a being so constituted that it is not exactly or fully
what it is, and this same structure is moreover implied in the
ideal of sincerity set for himself by the man who proposes to be
himself, to coincide with himself, that is to say, in reality, to
fulfil

the conditions of the being en-soi within the heart of the

l68

HOMO VIATOR

being pour-soi, however contradictory and hopeless such an
undertaking may appear.
In the eyes of Mr. Sartre, a constant phenomenon such as bad
faith can only be understood if it has been realised once and for
all that negative judgment, under all its forms, supposes a previous presence of nothingness within and outside us. What does
this mean? Are we not falling into the worst kind of conceptual
mythology? But it is enough to reflect upon the implication of a

question or interrogation of any kind. The questioner, by the
very fact that he questions, admits and therefore recognises the
possibility of a negative reply. Moreover, the reply, even if it is
strictly positive, will contain something negative, that is to say

some not-being, "What the being will be must necessarily be that
which detaches itself from the background of what it is not;
whatever the reply was it could be formulated thus: the being
"
is that, and outside that nothing
(p. 40). It is to be observed
e

9

that the non-being always appears within the limits of a human
expectation. This is undeniable; the world does not show its
non-beings to anyone who has not first postulated them as

Can we, however, conclude from this that they are
reducible to pure subjectivity? It must be noted that the question
in a dialogue is only one form of interrogation: "If my car breaks
down, it is the carburettor, the plugs, etc., that I interrogate. If
my watch stops I can interrogate the watchmaker about the
possibilities.

causes for which it stopped, but it is the different parts of the
watch's mechanism that the watchmaker will question in his
turn. What I am expecting from the carburettor and what the
watchmaker expects from the works of the watch is not a judgment, but an unveiling of being, on the grounds of which a judgment can be formed. If, however, I am expecting an unveiling
of being, it means that I am prepared at the same time for the
possibility of the unveiling of a non-being. If I interrogate the
carburettor it is because I consider it possible that there is
nothing in the carburettor. Thus my question by its nature
."
envelops a certain prejudicative comprehension of non-being
(p. 42). It would be difficult to find a more complicated way of
expressing a simpler idea and it is to be wondered whether the
author is not unsteadily balanced here between a pure truism
and a sophism which, moreover, he does not manage to formulate
.

.

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS

169

distinctly (perhaps because it is a kind of monster which cannot
stand the fresh air of reflection and is only able to live its precarious life in some sort of twilight). This comprehension of nonbeing founded on being is moreover implied in all activity
directed towards destruction. The examination of destructive
behaviour leads to the same result as that of interrogative
behaviour. All this, in short, goes to show that human realitywhich is at the same time "consciousness of" and pour soi cannot

to non-being. But can we say
that this non-being, this nothingness exists? Certainly not, and
here the author hazards a frightful solecism: "As nothingness is

be constituted without reference

not, as it has only an appearance of being,
said that it is made to be (est ete) or eke that
(est ntantise).

it

should rather be
made to not-be

it is

A being must therefore exist whose property it

is

to

make Nothingness nothing (neantiser le neanf) and to support it
with its being ... a being by whom Nothingness comes to

Do not let us be taken in here by what is certainly
defective
very
terminology. Neantir does not in any way mean
to annihilate or to annul, but, to use a frequent illustration of
things" (p. 58)

.

means much more to surround the being with a
casing of non-being, or, as I personally should be more ready
to say, to put it into the parenthesis of non-being. Following
this author, it

this the problem is to know what this power of neantisation
"The Being by which Nothingness comes into the world is a

from
is.

being in which the question

arises

within its being of the nothing-

by which Nothingness comes into the
world must be its own nothingness" (p. 49). These obscure
formulae which border on pure nonsense need I think to be translated into somewhat different language. The very clumsy
expression, "the question arises" means seemingly that such a
ness of its being: the Being

being keeps up a living connection with the possibility of its
own nothingness: it should be added at once that this possibility,
from the very fact that it is thus recognised and taken into consideration or assumed, becomes what might be called an element
of being. The words comes into the world should also be analysed.
The world here envisaged has nothing to do with the cosmos;
as a matter of fact, we might wonder whether a doctrine such as
the one we are studying is not at bottom acosmic in its fundamental intention. The world here is the Umwelt in relation to

HOMO VIATOR

170

which each one of us has to take his place in order to exist and
even to become conscious of himself.
From this point of view it is easy to see that the power of
nfantisation is liberty itself.

modify
to

it.

What

it is

given to

human

reality to

relationship with the being which is placed opposite
as it were, switches out some particular thing which

is its

If

it,

exists it is really
this case the

switching

human

itself

out in relation to this thing. In

reality escapes

from

it

and

is

beyond

its

reach, the particular thing cannot act upon it; for it has retired
beyond a nothingness I should rather say it has placed itself
in an insulated position. As far as human reality is concerned,
to separate itself from the world (or from anything in this
world)
to separate itself from itself; and it is this capacity to prendre du

is

soft (the expression is
own invention)
constitutes liberty. The author, following Kierkegaard,
recognises that "anguish" is the mode of being of liberty as a

champ par rapport a

my

which

consciousness of being," it is in anguish that liberty within its
is in
question for itself" (p. 66). Here again let us trans-

being

late: it is in

anguish that liberty becomes aware of itself, not as
which
would have no meaning, but as a concrete
object,
possibility not to be eluded. A fine analysis of dizziness here
elucidates the author's thought. "At the very moment when I
am aware of myself as being horror of the precipice I am con-

an

scious of this horror as not being determinant in relation to
possible behaviour. ... It is of the very being of horror to appear
to itself as not being the cause of the behaviour it calls for. .
.

my
.

The

decisive behaviour will

emanate from a

self which I

am not

Thus, the self that I am depends in itself on the self that I
not yet to the exact extent that the self that I am not
yet
does not depend upon the self that I am. And the dizziness
appears as the awareness of this dependence" (p. 69). It appears
then as clearly as possible that it is of the nature of human
reality
to contain what we might call
gaps, instead of forming like the
en-soi a tissue so
closely constituted as to have in it no
yet.

am

empty
which makes itself known to me in
anguish can be characterised by the existence of this nothing
which insinuates itself between motives and actions; and it is the
structure of the motives as inefficient or as non-determinant which
space.

Hence the

1

liberty

This means roughly: to stand back from oneself.

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS
is

the condition of

sciousness

not

my

liberty.

171

Let us say once again that con-

own motive

in so far as it is empty of all
content and in so far as it confronts its past and future as it
confronts a self which it is in the mode of not being (sur le mode
du n'Stre pas).
Here we have the point of departure for a general theory of
is

its

temporality which I cannot attempt to develop within the limits
of this article. What matters is the general fact that it is the
property of the being pour-soi to be what it is not (for instance, what
it has ceased to be and what it is not yet or what it would like to
be)
according to modes which on the contrary are excluded by the ensoi wherein the principle of identity triumphs. This is very strongly
expressed in the following lines: "There are many ways of not
being and some of them do not reach the innermost nature of the
being which is not what it is not. If, for example, I say of an inkpot that it is not a bird, the ink-pot and the bird are still untouched
by the negation which is an external relation and can only be
established by a human reality which is its witness. On the other
hand, there is a type of negation which establishes an internal
relation between what one denies, and that of which one denies
it. Of all the internal negations the one which penetrates deepest
into the being, the one which makes the being of that which it
denies to constitute the being of that of which it denies it, is lack.
This lack does not pertain to the nature of the en-soi which is all
positiveness. And it only appears in the world with the arising of

human
and

this

reality" (p. 129). Lack
amounts to saying that

makes

appearance with mail

its

human reality itself is a

lack.

But

us have a good look at what that means: this lack is not discovered from outside, on the contrary it is lived from within as
lack, and the author goes so far as to say that the being in question
let

own

not possible except as
or
of thought such
modes
desire,
as the present or past conditional, characterising regret or nostwhich
algia. To tell the truth we are fed on a fallacious psychology
systematically eludes the antimony inherent in the fact of being
what one is not, by imagining mystical realities which are states of
consciousness: for example, a regret or a memory "which one has".
establishes itself as

its

lack. Desire is

presupposing such a structure

Hence an

entirely fictitious duality

one side and on the other

is

set

up between the self on
which attach

parasitic structures

HOMO VIATOR
A mode of reflection which inthemselves to it or find room in
1752

it.

vents these psychic objects and results in a false mechanical process
which we should recognise as a veritable magic is not a pure one.
For my part I admit I can only discern somewhat imperfectly
reflection could be which, dissipating the clouds of
ce
the psychological and being the simple presence of the reflective
pour-soi to the reflected pour-soi is both the original form of reflec-

what the pure

tion

and

its

ideal

form"

(p.

201).

What is brought out much more clearly is the notion of knowing
arrives at when one understands lack as an
(le connaitre) which one
essential element of human existing (exister) (It is tiresome to have
to take a verb as a substantive, but it is perhaps the only way of
.

avoiding the ambiguity which in French attaches to the word tre,
on account of its two-fold grammatical nature.) First of all, know-

a'way of being. Knowing is neither a relation established
between two beings nor an activity of one of these
beings, nor a quality, property or virtue. "It is the being itself of
is

ledge

after the event

the pour-soi, in so far as it is present to. .
it has to be its own being by making

as

being

to

which

,

.

That

is

to say, in so far

be a particular
This
means
that
the
pour-soi can only
present.
of a reflection, making itself reflected as not being
itself not to

it is

be in the mode
a certain being" (pp. 222-3). We shall certainly need to translate
this paragraph. What Mr. Sartre means, I think, is that there are
no grounds for admitting the existence of a positive activity which
constructs given realities as idealism would have it. All that is
only given by the act of negation whereby I exclude it
at the same time establish it for myself. It can only
appear within the framework of a making nothing (ntantisation)
which reveals it (p. 558). This is elucidated when we come to the
explanations given by the author on the subject of the relationship which defines my place, of my "being- there" ($tre-la). The
establishment of the connection fixing my place presupposes that
I am able to carry out the following operations:
i To
escape from what I ana and to make it nothing in such a
way that while yet being existed (existi] what I am can nevertheless be seen as the term of a relation. This relation is
given directly
not in the simple contemplation of objects but by means of our
immediate action (he is coming upon us, let us avoid him, I run
after him, etc.). But at the same time it is necessary to define what
given

from

,

is

me and

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS
I

am,

173

from the being-there (V&tre la) of other "thises"
As a being-there, I am one who is pursued or
has an hour's climb before he reaches the top of the

in starting

(d*autres "ced").

one who still
mountain, etc. Thus, for example, when I look at the top of the
mountain it involves an escape from myself accompanied by a
reflux from the top of the mountain towards my being-there in
order to
2.

fix

my place.

To escape by an internal negation from the this in the middle

of the world that I
I

am

not,

and which

I cause to tell

me what

am.

"To

discover

same negation.

and escape from them
.

.

.

is

the effect of one

and the

My liberty has given me my place and fixed it

as such in situating me; I can only be strictly limited to the beingthere that I
because of
ontological structure is not to be
53
what I
and to be what I
not (pp. 272-3).

am

my
am

am

This passage

is instructive in that it shows clearly that my place
one may so express it, at the junction of being and
knowing. Moreover, Mr. Sartre rightly adds that it is in the light
of the end that my place takes its significance, and is for example
apprehended as a home or as a place of exile. It is in reference to
the future and to non-being that its position can be and is, in
fact understood or more exactly recognised by me. We here discern the indissoluble link between facticite"*- and liberty. It is
liberty which in proposing its end and in choosing one that is
inaccessible or difficult of access, makes it apparent that our
situation is impossible, or difficult, for our plans to surmount.

is

situated, if

"Liberty

is

only free

if it establishes facticite as its

own restriction.

would be no use to say that I am not free to go to New York
because I am an unimportant civil servant of Mont-de-Marsan.
It is, on the contrary, in relation to my plan of going to New
It

York, that I

am

going to

situate

myself at Mont-de-Marsan.

My

location in the world, the relation of Mont-de-Marsan to New
York and to China would be quite different if, for instance, my
plan was to become a rich farmer of Mont-de-Marsan. In the
case Mont-de-Marsan appears against the background of the
world systematically related to New York, Melbourne and Shanghai; in the second it emerges from an undifferentiated world
first

1 This word has no
equivalent in English, It means the actual limitations of
our condition, time of birth, place where we live, contingent possibilities, etc.

HOMO VIATOR

174

background. About the real importance of my plan to go to New
York it is for me alone to decide; it may just be a way of choosing
to be dissatisfied with Mont-de-Marsan, and in this case everything is centred on Mont-de-Marsan, I simply feel the need perin perpetual
petually to nullify (aneantir) my location, to live
it
also
can
be a plan
I
inhabit
the
to
withdrawal with regard
city
to which I am wholly committed. In the first case, I should perceive my location as an insurmountable obstacle, and I should
simply have made use of an expedient to define it indirectly in the

world; in the second case, on the other hand, the obstacles would
no longer exist, my location would no longer be a point of attach." (p. 576).
ment but of departure
All this analysis can be considered as valuable. Only, perhaps,
the use of the word choice might be called in question. We might
ask whether I really choose to be dissatisfied with Mont-deMarsan? This way of speaking seems to misrepresent the facts of
experience. It would be no use to try to show me the advantages
and pleasures of a life passed at Mont-de-Marsan, I should try in
vain to let myself be persuaded. It is something I cannot help;
Mont-de-Marsan disgusts me. Where is the choice here? Where is
the liberty? For common sense and for a certain worldly wisdom
this liberty can only consist in disregarding the dislike with which
this small town where I am obliged to live fills me: let us say in
the language of Sartre I have to nullify (ntantisef) this dislike. But
the point of view of our author is different. For him we are doomed
to be free, liberty is our fate, our slavery much more than our victory. In reality it is here conceived as starting from a lack and not
from a plenitude, and one is sometimes tempted to wonder if it is
not a defect, if it is not our imperfection made evident. I think, at
least, that in Mr. Sartre's mind there is a current flowing in this
direction. But it must at once be added that another current, perhaps the main one, flows in the opposite direction. Indeed, in so
.

.

far as liberty consists in assuming responsibility or taking charge,
quite obvious that it is no longer possible to understand it by

it is

from lack or from a disengagement from oneself (decollement d'avec-sot). To tell the truth the author would probably deny
us the right to carry out this disjunction. From the point of view
starting

of the cogito, which he maintains to the end, lack is the consciousness of lack, and there could not be consciousness without a

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS

175

passing beyond, a transcendence. Let us grant this, but in that
case should it still be permissible to say that we are "doomed to
be free" (p. 639)? This statement only has a meaning in opposition
to a situation or an ontological modality different from it, which
it should at least be possible to conceive in the abstract or to
imagine in some way. I do not think I am mistaken in suggesting
that this modality can only be the state of the creature. At bottom,
what the author strives to define as being ours is the status of a
being which is at the same time finite and uncreated; does it mean
that this finite being thus becomes divine? This could not be
claimed. From all appearances, it is doomed to total extinction.
is
consequently nothing in common between this philosophy and the pluralism of a MacTaggart. We cannot say here
without the most explicit reserves that the individual being is self-

There

caused (par

soi}. It

certainly

is

not given

him

to raise himself #

which would make of him a God in miniature. For Mr.
Sartre, it is the idea of God at all levels if one may so put it, which

nihilo,

is

contradictory. This stands out clearly in the remarkable

development of his arguments concerning Vitre pour Vautrul (the
being for others). The most forceful of his analysis has to do with
looking (le regard}. Others exist for me as a subject from the
moment when I am aware of myself as looked at.
Let us suppose that I have been led by jealousy or curiosity to
Behind the door a scene is as though
put my ear to a keyhole.
a
conversation
to
be
seen,
waiting to be heard. The door
waiting
.

.

.

and the lock are at the same time obstacles and instruments for
me.
My attitude is a pure connecting of the instrument (keyhole) with the object to be obtained (scene to be witnessed); it is
"purely a way of making myself absorbed by things as ink is by
blotting paper"; the end justifies or fixes the means, the whole
only existing in relation to a free planning of my possibilities. I am
my jealousy or my curiosity. I do not know them. There is a scene
to behold on the other side of the door only because I am jealous,
but really my jealousy is nothing if not the objective fact that
there is a scene to witness behind the door. The whole of this constitutes the situation which, as we have seen, reflects both my
in the
facticite and my liberty. "But suddenly I hear some steps
.
is behind me; someone is looking at me.
someone
passage;
it is the recognition that I am
me:
over
shame
comes
Immediately
.

.

.

.

.

HOMO VIATOR

176

really this object which others look at and judge." "I
in a world which others have alienated from
that I

am

am the self

for the
look of others embraces my being and correlatively the walls, the
. ." This world of which all the landmarks are
door, the lock.
instruments or utensils for me, arranges itself suddenly in relation
to a subject that I am not, for whom I have an outside, a nature
whereas by virtue of that transcendence which is as it were the
source of the pour-soi, I was always aware of myself as not strictly

me;

.

coinciding with what I am. For the others-subject (autrui-sujet} on
the contrary, "I am sitting, like that ink-pot is on the table, I am
59
bent towards the keyhole like that tree is bent by the wind "My
original fall is the existence of the other, and shame is, in the same
way as pride, the becoming aware of myself as a nature, . . The
other is my transcendence transcended" (pp. 317, 319, etc.).
Moreover, according to Mr. Sartre, we should always distinguish between the massive certitude bearing on the existence
of others in so far as they are others, and thefacticite of others, that
is to say their contingent connection with an object-being (etreobjet) in the world. The presence of others he says is original, it is
beyond the world. That means, I suppose, that reflection on certain modes of experience such as shame or pride leads us to recognise the presence of the others-subject (autrui-sujef) as forming
part of our '.structure, without it being permissible in principle to
attach this presence to a particular given being in the world.
I own, however, that such a position seems to me singularly
arbitrary, in so far as the author quite rightly no doubt
expressly denies that others are a category. In reality it seems as
,

.

,

can only distinguish by abstraction and in an indemanner between others and a particular other, who is
above all thou for me, and through whom I come to recognise a
trans-subjective reality. "I am ashamed of myself before others",
Mr. Sartre says very rightly (p. 350). But should the analysis be
taken further? To begin with, I am ashamed before some par-

though

I

fensible

who has prestige and influence over me; before a
treated
as a slave, I should doubtless feel no shame. It may
slave,
be claimed perhaps that if shame is lacking here it is because the
ticular being

slave
is

is

not really considered as another person; but-exactly

he not?

else.

He looks

Must

it

at

why

me nevertheless in the same way as anyone

not be that otherness in

its

purity

is full

of a value

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS

177

which the analysis seems to ignore here? This is surely the reason
why it would seem that the author has nowhere succeeded, I do
not say in giving an account of love, but in conceiving it, whilst
under the head of sexuality and particularly of the caress, he gives
the most pertinent details. It might be said that his thought
gains all the more force or body the more it itself dwells on the
body.

"The body

is

the contingent form which the necessity for

my

371). This definition seems somewhat
unintelligible at first. It simply means that it is both contingent
that I should be (since I am not the foundation of
own being)

contingency takes"

(p.

my

and necessary

that I should be under the form of

etre-la,

and

although it is necessary that I should be "identified
with a point of view"; it is contingent that I should be thus,
within this point of view to the exclusion of all others. The body
is not distinguishable from the situation of the pour-soi (for which
to exist or to be situated are the same): on the other hand, it
identifies itself with the whole world "in so far as the world is
the total situation of the pour-soi and the measure of its existence".
The obscurity of this last formula is to be deplored. Have the
finally that,

words "total situation" a meaning? it is doubtful, for there is
really nothing in the situation or situations which could be
cannot even see in the least how a situation could
totalised.

We

situation. As a matter of fact the author
himself recognises it implicitly when he adds "a situation is only
revealed in so far as the pour-soi passes beyond it towards itself".
This last formula is scarcely any better than the preceding one,
but Mr. Sartre is easier to understand when he says that "the

be added to another

body

is

is passed beyond and only
in making myself nothing (me
not say, however, much more concretely

everywhere as that which

exists in so far as I

niantisanf)"

escape from

Could we

and simply, that, as a
and reborn from my

it

am

living being, I
ashes: that life

is

perpetually consumed
death and perpetual

In this sense I only cease to make myself nothing
(me neantir] when I become a corpse. The body is then destined
to be perpetually more than itself or less than itself. In no case is
it identical with itself. In the language of Mr. Sartre we should

resurrection.

have

to say that it is the very opposite of the en-soi. It is certain
that a great many questions arise here, particularly that of

HOMO VIATOR

178

would not be well to find out if the ontological
the body thus defined can really be reduced to the
of
modality
as
the
author claims, and is even obliged to claim by
pour-soi
reason of his premises.
He observes on the other hand that if the body is my continwhether

it

gency, if Plato had good grounds for saying that the body is that
individualises the soul, "it would be vain to suppose that
the soul can tear itself from this individualisation in separating
itself from the body by death or by pure thought, for the soul is

which

the body in so far as the pour-soi is its own individualisation"
to call the crudely materi(p. 372). Here what it is difficult not
alistic foundation of the doctrine appears in full daylight.
This dogmatic foundation is no less evident when the author,
after having truly observed that the absence of a being is still a

mode

of presence, sees fit to add that this only applies to the
absence of a living being. "Pierre, in London, in India, in
America or on a desert island, is present with Therese who is
still in Paris; he will only cease to be present with her at his
death" (p. 338). But by what right can this be asserted? From
the phenomenological point of view an experience of communion
continuing between a living being and a beloved dead one is
enough to take all value and all meaning from this assertion.
concrete analysis will, moreover, enable us to establish our point.
Pierre, who is travelling far away, is present with Thdrese even
if she is without news of him for some time; his letters no longer
arrive because Pierre has fallen ill and cannot write; in the end
Pierre dies of this illness. The situation of Therese, who knows
nothing of Pierre's death and is still expecting a letter, is, however, not changed by what has happened, unless we consider it
from the grossly materialistic point of view of the en-soi. It is a
fact that, from November 24th, Therese is a widow; but since she
does not know it, in what way is Pierre less present on the 25th
than he was on the 23rd? How can we help wondering whether
there has not been a disastrous confusion here between two planes
which, moreover, should have been kept distinct at all costs; the
planes of the pour-soi and the en-soi and whether in the end,
whatever effort the author generally makes to keep clear of it,
it is not the en-soi which has influenced him most, not so much
in his thought as in his imagination? This is actually all the more

A

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS
strange since the author

on the

who,

I repeat, claims to

179

found himself

is to say on the immanence of the
an experience of whatever kind, applies himself

pre-reflexive cogito, that

consciousness in

with a most admirable tenacity to develop all the implications of
the pour-soi. The most serious question which this work raises
then, is really to know how it can come about that starting from
premises which in another age would have been called idealistic,
Mr. Sartre arrives at conclusions which a materialist would not
disclaim. No doubt the author would protest, alleging the central
place which liberty occupies in his doctrine. But did we not see

we went along that it is really for him only the counterpart or
even the positive expression of a lack, a disengagement, an
imperfection? Does not that join up in a very unexpected way
with the epiphenomenist conceptions according to which consciousness is connected with an imperfect adaptation? To be sure
it would be excessive and even wrong to assert this categorically.
The truth seems rather, I would repeat, that this complex
thought, which becomes ceaselessly encumbered in a vocabulary
taken over wholesale rather than re-created, is crossed by divergent currents. It is to be thought that we might locate the prinas

ciple of these contradictions in the obscure introduction to the
work. I believe it is to be found in what Mr. Sartre calls by the
dangerously ambiguous term of the transphenomenality of the
being. Contrarily to what we might suppose, the meaning of this
expression is in no way like that of the "thing in itself" of Kant.
"The transphenomenal being of the phenomena ... is the being
of this table, of this packet of tobacco, of the lamp and more
generally the being of the world which is implied in consciousness. It requires simply that the being of that which appears does
not only exist in so far as it appears. The transphenomenal being
of that which exists for consciousness, is itself en-soi" (p. 29). This
becomes clearer or more precise further on when the author

defines intuition

which he regards

as the only real

as the presence of the consciousness to the thing,

what he

knowledge

and introduces

the phantom dyad of the reflecting reflection (reflet
the only purpose of the reflecting being to reflect the
reflection and the reflection only being a reflection in so far as
it returns to the reflecting. Here again we can wonder if we are
not coming back by the most tortuous and often .most badly
reftetanf),

calls

HOMO VIATOR

ISO

cleared paths to a rudimentary doctrine which has, moreover,
throughout the course of history been united by bonds of good
neighbourliness or even of parentage with pure materialism! I

mean to say a realistic attitude towards knowledge which actually
tends to do away with it as a form of activity. But is not this
reduction of knowledge to a reflecting reflection purely imaginary
also? It is difficult to see how the transphenomenality of the being
could be anything but a fiction invented by thought which has

not yet fully succeeded in making itself explicit.
In his conclusion, Mr. Sartre introduces a distinction between
ontology and metaphysics, destined, it seems, to calm in some
measure the anxiety which all this can scarcely fail to awaken
even in the most inattentive of readers. It goes without saying
that ontology is understood here in a phenomenological sense,

a description bearing upon structures which reflection elucidates starting from experience. "Ontology teaches us", he says
(p. 714), "(i) That if the en-soi is to establish itself it can only

as

attempt to do so by making itself consciousness, that is to say,
that the conception of the causa sui bears within itself that of the
presence to-the-self, or, in other words, of the decompression of
the ntantisant being (the being which makes to be nothing). (2)
That consciousness is in fact the project of establishing oneself,
that is to say of attaining to the dignity of the en-soi-pour-soi or
' 9

en-soi-cause-of-itself.

This project

a view

is

evident in every attempt at appropriation with

to possessing the

world through a special object

(p.

68 1):

an attempt, moreover, which is doomed to failure in its very
principle but which none the less constitutes the nisus by which
the individual adventure whatever it may be
Mr. Sartre adds that "nothing authorises us

is distinguished.
to assert on the

ontological plane that the neantisation of the en-soi in the pour-soi
from the beginning, and in the very heart of the en-soi,
the project of being its own cause. Ontology here comes up

signifies

against a deep contradiction; since it is by the pour-soi that the
a foundation comes into the world. In order to be

possibility of

the project of founding itself, the en-soi would have originally to
be presence to itself (presence a-soi], that is to say it would have
to be consciousness already. Ontology therefore confines itself to
declaring that everything happens as

if

the en-soi in a project of

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS
itself

It

is

founding

itself

l8l

gave itself the modifications of the pour-soi.
form the hypotheses which will permit of

for metaphysics to

the conception of this process as the absolute event which crowns
the individual adventure of existence" (p. 715).

Let us set to work to bring out all the meaning of the avowal
contained in these few lines. They seem very much like the
expression of an agnosticism strangely akin to that of Spencer
or, to be more exact, it could be said that the thought here
oscillates between such an agnosticism and a pure and
simple
materialism. We are obliged, for reasons of method still more
than of doctrine, to refrain from any statement as to what the
is just possible that it may have
something in it, that
a consciousness or a world of consciousness, but we can
know nothing about it. We are obliged to treat it as pure en-soiy
and under these conditions should we not be careful to avoid
imagining it to have some sort of aspiration to become conscious
of itself? By so doing should we not interfere with this very
purity? Let us content ourselves with noticing once more that
"everything happens as if" the en-soi in order to grant itself a

en-soi

it

is.

It

may be

more complete

existence

changed

itself into pour-soi.

But to

me

the expression "everything happens as though" either really
implies nothing at all, or else acknowledges that perhaps everything is quite otherwise, which would seem to mean that this
modification follows a sort of shock or pure cataclysm occurring
en-sol. If such a hypothesis is contradictory,
be concluded from it either that the en-soi effectively wills
to be pour-soi, however confusedly this may be possible, that is to

at the centre of the

it is to

say that the pour-soi itself somehow anticipates itself, or else that
the whole of this so laboriously constructed edifice can only
remain standing in a dream world, for an imaginative mind
which does not develop its postulates. Moreover, these two possibilities seem to be in fact identical. The whole system falls if the
is anterior to itself, and if it is impossible for thought to
itself the act of nSantisation by which the pour-soi
before
place
"would rise". It remains then to wonder if the hypothesis of a
shock or cataclysm can be seriously considered. The end of non-

pour-soi

'

receiving which the author opposes to creationism could very
well have as counterpart the unacknowledged attachment to this
strange conception which is linked with I scarcely know what

HOMO VIATOR

l8f2

Mr.

pre-Socratic or even pre-Anaxagorian speculations. Only
Sartre has the sincerity expressly to recognise that it is impossible
for us to conceive the previous totality of the en-soi and of the
form of a self-causative being. This is
pour-soi, unless in the

concept involves a contradiction.
"Can one", he asks, "postulate the spirit as the being which both
5
has no sense. It supposes
together is and is not? "The question
in fact that we are able to adopt a point of view on totality, that
actually not possible

and

its

'

to say to consider it from outside. But that is impossible for the
exist as myself on the foundation of this
precise reason that I
that I am involved in it. No consciousextent
the
to
and
totality
is

not even that of God, can see the other side, that is to say
grasp totality as such. For if God is consciousness, he integrates
himself in totality. If, moreover, by his nature he is a being

ness,

is to say, an en-soi which establishes
can
only appear to him as object, in which case
itself, totality
his inner disaggregation as a subjective act of self-apprehension
is lacking; or as subject, in which case as he is not this subject,
he can only feel it without knowing it. Thus no point of view on
totality is conceivable; totality has no exterior, and the very
question of the meaning of its other side is without significance"

beyond consciousness that

(p. 363)If, however, totality is unthinkable, the hypothesis of a shock
taking place in it cannot even be entertained. Hence in every
case we are driven to the unthinkable. "The total being, he
whose concept would not be divided by a hiatus and who nevertheless would not exclude U$tre neantisant neantise (the nothingmaking-being made-nothing) of the pour-soi, he whose existence
would be a unitary synthesis of the en-soi and of consciousness,

being would be the en-soi established by the pour-soi
identical with the pour-soi which establishes it, that is to say
the ens causa suL But precisely because we adopt the point of view
this ideal

and

being to judge the real being which we call holon,
should discover that the real is an abortive effort to attain to
the dignity of the self-cause. Everything happens as though man,
the world and man-in-the-world, only managed to realise an
abortive God. Everything happens, then, as if the en-soi and the
pour-soi appeared in a state of disintegration in relation to an
ideal synthesis. Not that the integration has ever taken place,

of

we

this ideal

BEING AND NOTHINGNESS

183

but on the contrary precisely because it is always indicated and
always impossible" (p. 717).
It seems to me that we are here at the very heart of
absurdity.
How, in fact, could there be real disintegration of a thing that had
never been really integrated? The very most we can admit is that

we are forced to represent to ourselves, or imagine,

this disintegra-

same time acknowledging that we can neither
conceive nor imagine the state of the world which preceded it.
Under what conditions is this possible? Have we not reason to
wonder whether the consciousness which receives this impression
of a breaking up of the real is not led when it reflects upon its own
tion, whilst at the

to regard
itself as degraded, without being able, however, to
think in concrete terms of the world before the Fall? This expression is foreign not only to the vocabulary of the author, but also
to the universe in which he moves. But we may wonder whether

state

it together with its
implications he does not condemn
himself to move in an infernal circle, a circle, moreover, wherein
he has imprisoned himself of his own free will. There would
indeed be scarcely any sense in alleging that it is the given facts or
the structural conditions of our existence which have forced him
into it. Is not the one authentic transcendence (it would no doubt
be better to say the one authentic transcending), the act by which
we break free from these facts and these conditions and substitute

in excluding

them renewed facts and conditions? As far as we can see it
would still be necessary to acknowledge that this act cannot be
carried out by the mere powers of our own being, left to itself, but
that it needs a help or inflowing which is nothing else but grace.
From this point of view one of the merits of the work of Mr.
Sartre, and not the least, consists, without any doubt, in showing
clearly that a form of metaphysics which denies or refuses grace
inevitably ends by setting up in front of us the image of an
atrophied and contradictory world where the better part of ourselves is finally unable to recognise itself. It is, in fact, not enough
to say that the world of Mr. Sartre does not seem to allow of any
for

supernatural grafting, because the pour-soi has established itself
there in a consciousness of its incompleteness which it even
proudly claims as its privilege. Perhaps it should be added that the
act by which the philosopher, be his name Nietzsche, Jaspers, or
Sartre, shuts himself within the narrow circle of immanence,

HOMO VIATOR

184

denying any other world or after

life,

appears in the

last analysis

much less as the expression of reason made wise by experience and
ever ready to learn from

it,

then as the Luciferian refusal with

rebellious individuality, intoxicated with itself, spurns
the signs and calls to which Love alone could make it sensitive
on condition that this Love succeeded in getting clear from the

which a

fantasms

it is

attaining

its

reduced to when

it

turns back

on

itself

instead of

fulfilment.

PARIS.
November, 1943.

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION AND THE
EXALTATION OF THE MAN OF ABSURDITY
XHE BOOK

U

OF Mr. George Bataille,
Experience Interieure*
one of those about which it is very difficult to speak with precision and justice. In the first place this is because the thought in
it is very often
self-contradictory. It even tends perpetually to
challenge and arraign itself, and, at the same time, paradoxical as
it may seem, to
identify itself with the accusation. On this account
one finds if one is in good faith that one has to be on one's guard
against a temptation to exploit certain extreme formulse against
the author when, after all, they only mark the acme of a particular torment. I say torment deliberately. I prefer it to the word
torture which Mr. Bataille misuses in a tiresome way. It is nevertheless very difficult only to consider the book as a mere descripis

tion of a fever or

an agony.

ec

l teach

how

to turn

agony into

delight", declares the author (p. 59). . "To Glorify: that is all
the meaning of this book." But to glorify is not to describe, it is
.

.

to exalt, and a fortiori it is to appreciate. Furthermore, the author
himself recognises that his experience in some way has need of
others, if only so that it may be offered to them. "Each being is,
I think, incapable of going to the end of Being by himself. If he
tries he is drowned in a particular which only has meaning for
him. Now, there is no meaning for one alone; the 'solitary' being
would himself reject the particular if he saw it as such (if I want

my life to have a meaning for myself, it must have one for others;
no one would dare to give life a meaning which he alone recognised, which was inapplicable to the whole of life with the exception of himself)" (p. 71). Here we discern Hegelian harmonics
which agree as best they can with the generally rather more
Nietzschean sonority of the book. It is moreover to be observed
that the word "dare" in the passage that I have just quoted is
ambiguous. Does it mean: no one would have the courage or the
strength to give life a meaning that none but he could perceive:
or: no one would have the unreasonable impudence to proceed in
1 Edition of the

N.R.F. (Nouvelle Revue

Franfaise).

HOMO VIATOR

l86

such a way? I really incline towards the second interpretation,
but without guaranteeing that it is right. It is further to be wondered whether spiritual torment does not here comprise a sort of
fluctuation between judgments of contrary values. In any case, as
soon as an experience offers, it calls for a judgment. Now one does
not judge a fever, one verifies it, one measures its effects or some
of its effects. We are then obliged to find out what there is here
that is capable of taking some shape or some form of truth, if only
in order to respond to the pathetic appeal made to us.
Mr. Maurice Blanchot, who is not only the friend and confidant
of the author, but a remarkably penetrating interpreter of his
thought, here does us the great service of formulating what he

regards as the fundamental propositions of the "new theology"
of all spiritual life, saying
(sic). This is how he lays the foundation
that

it

must:

"Have

its

principle

and end in the absence of salvation, in the

renunciation of all hope.
"Assert of interior experience that

it is authority (but all
authority pays its own penalty).
"Be at war with itself and non-knowledge" (Faux Pas, p. 158).
I really doubt if anyone has ever gone further in the formulation
of radical nihilism. But, before examining the meaning and range

of these propositions, it would be well to see precisely what Mr.
and Mr. Blanchot mean by interior experience.
"I mean by interior experience that which we habitually call
mystical experience" (p. 17). This is perhaps more categoric than
it is distinct. Elsewhere the author will declare with some
ingenuity that he has "followed the desiccating methods of St.
John of the Gross to the end". This, however, does not prevent him
Bataille

from condemning asceticism for reasons to which I shall return
later. "That an atom life, bloodless and without laughter, avoidof joy, lacking in liberty, should attain or claim to
a snare and a delusion. We reach
the extremity through a plenitude of means; beings full to overflowing are needed, capable of every kind of audacity. I oppose
asceticism on the principle that access to the extremity is gained
through excess not lack. . . ." The extremity, to attain the
extremity, what does this mean? and how can we help asking
whether or not this ascetic who is compared to a mirthless

ing

all excess

have

attained the extremity, this is

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION
atom, deprived of

all liberty, etc., is

or

is

not

St.

187

John of the

Gross?

"I

experience a journey to the end of what is possible to
is able not to take this
journey, but if he does take
follows that the existing authorities and values which limit
call

man. Each one
it, it

the possible are denied. Because it is a negation of other values,
other authorities, experience, having positive existence, itself
becomes value and authority positively" (p. 22). This does not
yet enlighten us much on what the extremity or the end of the
possible can be. "By definition the extremity of the possible is the
point at which, in spite of what to him is his unintelligible position
in Being,

man, ridding himself of

all

enticements and

all fear,

advances so far that no one can conceive a possibility of going
further" (p. 66). We do not yet get away from tautology: the
extreme is the neplus ultra; all that we learn is that one only reaches
it by means of a complete self-stripping. "If one renounces the
average man for the extreme, one is throwing down the challenge
to a fallen humanity, cut off from the Golden Age, and to avarice
and lying. One repudiates at the same time that which is not the
desert where the extreme is found, the desert where the saturnalias
The being is a point there, or a
of solitaries are unrestrained.
wave, but it would seem that he is the only point, the only wave;
the solitary is in no way separated from the other, but the other
is not there" (p. 200). "We are only totally laid bare when we are
going without any trickery to the unknown. It is the share of
.

.

.

unknown which

gives the experience of God, or of the poetic
realm, their great authority. But in the end the unknown demands

an undivided empire" (p. 20).
There are numerous things to say about these

passages. This
extreme "takes place" only so far as it is itself experience experience of God, for instance; but such experience only has authority
where it is not perfect, for if it were perfect it would make emptiness around itself; there would therefore no longer be any thing
or person it could command, and under these conditions it would
cease to be authority. The author owns, moreover, that "experience ends by achieving the fusion of object and subject, being as
subject not knowing and as object the unknown" (p. 25). And he
says besides that "when the extremity is there, the means of attaining it are there no longer" (p. 82). But this is to say too little: it is

HOMO VIATOR

l88

quite cleat that the extremity immediately disproves itself as such;
it only appears as extremity because it is the end of the per-

for

spective we see before us; once we have followed our path to its
end the appearance has altered, the end is no longer there. Would

Mr. Bataille say that we attain to non-knowing? The answer
would have to be that this non-knowing only retains a reality, a
value as non-knowing, on condition that in spite of everything it
is still apprehended as such, which supposes a minimum of survival of the subject, or else (to use language whose extreme
subtlety I

beg you

knowing. The

to excuse)

use which

is

a

here

minimum of knowledge of nonmade of the word unknown also

calls for serious reservations. It seems,

indeed, that, in using

it,

a somewhat illegitimate speculation on the uneasy curiosity which the prospect of knowing something unknown arouses
in us; but there cannot be anything left of this curiosity where
there is precisely nothing to know any more. Further, we must
denounce the perpetual deception of enshrining amongst the
adornments of verbal gems what is perhaps a mere void of experience, pompously baptised as experience of God. Actually the
author himself shows great reserve about the question of knowing
whether he has attained the extremity, whether indeed he can
there

is

ever envisage its attainment. "One can, I suppose, only touch the
extremity in repetition, because never is one sure of having
attained it and never will one be sure. And even supposing the
extremity to be attained, it would not yet be the extremity if one

went

to sleep.

The

extremity implies 'there must be no sleeping

during that time' until the moment of dying. But Pascal accepted
not to sleep in view of the beatitude to come (he gave himself
this reason at least): I refuse to be happy (to be saved)"
(pp. 71-2).

Here again there are a thousand comments to be made. The
chief one seems to be the following: the injunction "there must be
no sleeping during that time" only has any meaning if it refers to
an expected visitation, awaited either with hope or fear. I should
add that from the point of view of an eventual visitation the word
unknown would once more have a positive value. It is, however,
just such expectation or hope that it is claimed we are forbidden;
or, more exactly, to this hope, suggested and scorned, is opposed

an unreceptive attitude which is firial.

It should

perhaps be added

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION
that

aim:

189

what one is never sure of attaining or of having attained is an
now an aim involves some action or project. The author,

however, here tells us distinctly that "interior experience is the
contrary of action which is itself entirely subordinated to the
project". Besides, and this is weighty, discursive thought itself is
involved in the mode of existence of the project. (Here the author
uses language characteristic of Heidegger.) ". .
not only the mode of existence implied by action

.

The

project

is

and necessary to

action, it is a way of being paradoxical in the time order: it is
putting existence off till later on (c'est la remise de V existence a plus tard}.
... To speak, to think, unless one is joking or . . this is to conjure
,

existence; it is not to die, but to be dead. This is to go into
the extinct and motionless world where we drag about habitually;
everything there is suspended, life is put off till later on, over and

away

." (pp. 76-7). An accusation is next brought against
Descartes. "According to Descartes, the world we are in is the
world of progress, that is to say with a project in view . . . interior
experience denounces all intermission, it is Being without a
break." And here, of course, we recognise a metaphysic of the

over again

.

.

instant which is directly derived from Kierkegaarde. It is well,
however, not to be intimidated by such neighbours and to fix
upon a formula such as: To have a project is to put off existence
till later: or again: to think is to conjure existence away.
It is impossible for me not to see in all this the exaggerated and
affected expression of truths which are as it were taken out of their
orbit. It is merely untrue to say that to form a project is to put off

existence

till

later; it is

only true

consumes the existence which

its

when

the project in some

function

is

to direct,

way
when a

being forms projects instead of living. To condemn the formation
of a project is simply to condemn man; and, be it understood, this
is exactly the proposal, the project of Mr. Bataille. The author,
who is certainly not without mental agility, is aware of this contradiction, but se how he tries to get over it: "Interior experience
always consists of planning, whatever the desired goal may be.
This is because man is entirely so constituted by language, which,
if we make exception of its poetic perversion, is essentially purposeful. But the project in this case is no longer the positive one of
salvation, it is the negative one of abolishing the power of words
and hence of the forming of projects" (p. 45). Since asceticism is

HOMO VIATOR
out of the question, because it is the sacrifice of only one part of
the self which is lost with a view to saving the other since it is a
question of losing the whole of the self, it is "by starting from a
bacchanalian movement", and in no sense of the word coldly,
that this loss

is

to

be achieved.

It

is

quite evident that

it is

the

Nietzschean or pseudo-Nietzschean, the Dionysian or pseudoDionysian aspect of Mr, Bataille's thought that comes out here.
Actually some of the best pages of the book are coloured by the
feeling expressed in this passage. The author vigorously attacks
everything which savours of satisfaction and sufficiency. But it is

alarming to see how quickly the steadiest thought can immemediately drift into grandiloquent nonsense. "To seek for suf-

Mr.

ficiency ",

shut the being

Bataille stoutly asserts, "is the same mistake as to
in some pdint: we cannot shut anything up, we

up

only find insufficiency"
to similar ideas

He

repeatedly gives expression
speaks of the necessary renunciation

(p. 138).

when he

consists of"''Ceasing from wanting to be everything". But all at
once the thought becomes clouded over or engulfed, whichever
you prefer to say. "We try to put ourselves in the presence of God,
but God, living in us, immediately demands to die. We can only

which

grasp

him by

killing. (Incessant sacrifice

necessary for survival,

we have crucified once and for all, and yet
anew. God himself crucifies)" (p. 138).
It will
is

be necessary to come back

essential in

Mr.

each time

we

crucify

to this idea of sacrifice

Bataille's thought. I only

want

which

to point out the

confusion, not involuntary, but on the contrary deliberate, here
surrounding the relations of God and the self. This literally
invalidates his thought which is unable to dissociate a superficial
need for severity from a fundamental need for lyrical exaltation,
a need which cannot and should not be developed on the same
plane. The author is expressing something both profound and
true when he says that "the ipse, seeking to become the all is
only tragic at the highest point for itself", but that it is "laughable
when its powerlessness is openly exhibited (in this case it cannot

became conscious of its powerlessness, it would
pretension, leaving it to someone stronger than itself,
only possible at the highest point)" (p. 140). Mr.

suffer itself; if it

give

up

which

its

is

Bataille

is

also right in saying that

"Laughter

is

born of a change

of level of depressions brought about suddenly

.

.

." that it is

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION

igi

often, perhaps essentially, combined with an overturning strikingly illustrated by the Saturnalia. He has equally good grounds

for maintaining that laughter, like poetry or
ecstasy, is not the
means to anything else and does not give satisfaction (p. 172). But

we cannot
laries into

regard with too great a caution the Dionysian corol-

which he allows himself to be enticed when he declares

"that the intoxicated existence in me addresses the intoxicated
.", that "I cannot be my own ipse without
having thrown out a cry to them" (p. 180). Still more brutally
he asserts "that excesses are suddenly substantiated signs from
what is supremely the world" (p. 186). And it is indeed here
that we catch a glimpse of the nature of that bacchanalian movement by which the utter loss of ourselves can be brought about.
Here we have the most challenging self-accusation of the tendency
which brings extremity and excess so near as almost to identify
them with each other. Would not the author himself declare that
the extremity is not to be attained by renunciation but by excess?
But the poverty of such thought shows up at once in the clearest
possible light, for, after all, what is the excess and what the
renunciation in question? Mr. Bataille seems scarcely to suspect
that what we are considering is Love and that it can be nothing
else. But not only has this Love nothing in common with the
excesses, erotic or otherwise, which are forbidden by the
"laughterless atom", etc., but it repudiates and excommunicates
whoever indulges in them. For it cannot but be reverent, and
just as the raising up of a range of mountains cannot take place
without corresponding depressions being hollowed out, such a
love is surrounded with abysmal zones of sacrilege such as those
in which the author seems often enough inclined to set up his
abode. "In sleep, although mute, God addresses himself to me;
existence in others

.

.

insinuating his meaning in a whisper as in love: Oh, my father,
thou who are on earth, the evil that is in thee delivers me, I am
temptation, into which thou art the fall. Insult me as I insult
love me. Give me each day the bread of bitterness.
absent in heaven as on earth. I am bound in impotence.
name is insipid. Hesitant and troubled in mind I reply:
"
'Amen'
(p. 201). And a little further on: "I rely upon God
to deny his own existence, to execrate himself, to repudiate what
he dares, what he is, in absence and in death. When I am God,

those

will

My

who

is

My

HOMO VIATOR

IQ2
I
I

deny him to the deepest limit of negation. If I
do not know him" (p. 202).

"When

I

am God"

.

.

.

"if I

am

am

only myself"

only myself,

such are the

keyboard on which it seems to me that
like a bacchanal than the mournful pacing

limits of the dialectic

something much less
of a prisoner in his cell is being marked out. Moreover, it may
easily come about that this prisoner cuts a few capers in his
attempt to forget his boredom. But (starting with himself) who
could be taken in by such gymnastics? I imagine that we might
give the author some satisfaction by telling him that we felt
asphyxiated by some of the pages of his book, but that would
only be due to a misunderstanding. It is not the intoxicating, rare
atmosphere of the heights to be inhaled at the summit of
Nietzsche's work which we are breathing, but rather the stifling
air of the basement. Why is this so? Before tackling the question
directly, I should like to say a few words about Mr. Bataille's
conception of sacrifice and about his refusal to entertain any idea
of salvation.

"The forces which

are working for our destruction find tendenwithin us which co-operate with them so willingly and
sometimes so violently that we cannot just simply turn from them
as it is in our interest to do. We are led on to play with fire
without going so far as to surrender ourselves we can surrender
a part of ourselves: we sacrifice some goods belonging to us, or
and this binds us by many a bond which we discern so very
3
indistinctly our fellow. Surely this word Sacrifice means: that
men, of their own will, place some goods in a dangerous region where
destructive forces are rampant" (p. 151). In its most extreme form
there is "the bare sacrifice without a ram and without Isaac.
Sacrifice is madness, renunciation of all knowledge, falling into
the abyss, and nothing is revealed either in the falling or in the
abyss, for the revelation of the abyss is only a way of falling
further into the void" (p. 85). It must then be recognised that
sacrifice is the contrary of project-forming. "If it falls into the
pattern of a project it is only by accident or in so far as it is
decadent. . .
Sacrifice is amoral like poetry, since the moral
plane is the plane of project-making and, for the matter of that,
speech-making" (pp. 209-10). It is even added in a note that
"the sacrifice of the Mass is iii its essence the greatest of all
cies

.

.

.

.

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION
crimes"

(p. 310).

"The meaning of

sacrifice is to

193

keep a

life,

which necessary avarice is ceaselessly leading back to death,
alive and tolerable" (p. 207). We must note well what precautions have had to be taken here in the choice of words. If by an
unlucky chance we had happened to say that the end or function
of sacrifice is to keep a life, etc., we should have immediately
changed its nature in reducing it to a project.
And now, what is to be our judgment of such a conception?
The words of abuse and confusion are those which suggest themselves most naturally, and perhaps it will be possible to define
what constitutes this abuse and this confusion. Beyond all doubt
a folly of the Cross. If then we look at things entirely
outside, the author might be able to produce positive
evidence to support his allegations. It is however to be feared that
there

is

from

such an analogy would be found most superficial and misleading.
When Mr. Bataille asserts, for instance, that "if one renounces
the average man for the extreme, one is throwing down the
challenge to a fallen humanity, cut off from the Golden Age and
to avarice and lying", it is quite evident that what he means by
extreme is, as we already know, an experience at its highest
limit, which is to be chosen for its own sake, which is its own
justification (in so far as this word has any meaning here). It is

an experience, moreover, which is fleeting, as we know only
too well, and tends to vanish in the very act by which it is fulfilled. But this consecration of the experience, as such, can
appear on good grounds as the deliberate negation of Love and
consequently of martyrdom, in so far as the latter is a creative
attestation stretching towards a transcendence, a transcendence
in no way to be swallowed up in the inward dynamism which it

moves and

Moreover, we cannot declare ourselves too
be against the method which isolates that part of

directs.

definitely to

the great mystics* experience considered suitable for exploitation, independently of all Christian teaching or even against the
fundamental positions of any Christian confession, and attributes
the orthodox pronouncements of these same mystics to a prudent
or self-interested conformity or a childish misunderstanding of
themselves. Those following such a method would say, for
instance, that "if St. John of the Cross had had more courage
or if he had thoroughly understood himself" or "if he had lived

HOMO VIATOR
in a

more enlightened age/ he would not have
9

Catholic faith; "it

because",

etc. I

am

confessed the

however quite possible to forgive him
persuaded that we must denounce as literally
is

unbearable this commonly met-with modern pretension to put
such a one as St. John of the Gross in his place, to understand
him, for that matter, better than he understood himself, to go
to the very end where he stopped half-way, etc. Mr. Bataille, as
I said, has made a remarkable analysis of laughableness, but if
he had gone more deeply into the nature of self-complacency he
would have seen clearly that his book affords a very significant

some places. If we would do full justice to the
aims at making a clean sweep of salvation,
which
pretentiousness
and in a more general fashion of hope itself, we must view it
from the same angle.
"There is no longer any question of salvation: it is the most
illustration of it in

hateful of all subterfuges" (p. 29). "It is doubtful in every case",
read elsewhere, "whether salvation is the object of genuine
faith or whether it is not a mere convenience enabling spiritual
life to be presented in the form of a project (ecstasy is not sought
for the sake of the experience itself, it is the way leading to a

we

deliverance, it is a means). Salvation is not exactly that value
which the end of suffering represents for the Buddhists, and God
for the Christians, the Mohammedans and the non-Buddhist
Hindus. It is the perspective of value from the point of view of
cases the value is totality,
personal life. Moreover, in both
e
believer is to become all',
the
for
salvation
and
completion;
for
divinity directly attained for the majority, non-individuality
the
indimeans
Buddha
to
the Buddhists (suffering according

The

project of salvation once formed, asceticism is
now imagine a different, even an opposite will,
the will to become all would be regarded as a stumbling

vidual).

possible. Let us

where

(to escape from isolation, from selfall would be held to be the sin
to
become
where
compression),
not only of man, but of all possible things, even of God himself.
To lose oneself in this case would really be to lose oneself and
not in any way to be saved" (p. 44).
It is regrettable to find once again how easily the author slips
from an idea of truth to a paradox in which we have the impression
that he is draping himself with the most terrestrial ostentation.

of the will to lose oneself

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION

195

"Salvation", he says, "means for the believer, to become all."
exactly do these words mean? We can admit and I have
already admitted it just now that natural man has within him
an uncontrolled desire to possess the world, to let nothing remain

What

beyond his grasp. The great conqueror would not occupy the
place he does in recorded history if in some confused way
everyone did not see in him the immeasurably enlarged likeness
of what he himself aspired to become. But how is it possible not
life is found in the renunciation of
ambition? The "becoming all" which is condemned here is of
the order of a plethora: to put it in other words, it comes from
the will to power. The aspiration to salvation is seen to be all
the more different in character because in its principle it is not
and cannot be a will, and it thus escapes from the world of the
project which the author never tires of excommunicating.
Salvation can only be deliverance, but deliverance from what, if
not from the prison of the egoistical self ruled over by avarice?
It remains to be seen how this deliverance is possible and whether
it really comes about, as Mr. Bataille seems to think, in ecstasy
but why not just as well by opium or hashish, or by cunningly
elaborated erotic practices? "Why not indeed?" The author
repeats, unhindered by any ethical prejudice in his course of
total sincerity, which for that matter, costs him very little. At the
very most he proposes in the name of acquired experience to
establish a hierarchy among these different processes arranged
according to their respective degrees of efficacy. But the faithful
will declare outright that this hierarchy cannot bring anything
like the deliverance he aspires to, a deliverance separated by a

to recognise that spiritual

fathomless abyss from those releases which inferior Magi, at best

nothing but magicians, have to

offer.

The

in that word! It

faithful

what a

full-

not only faithfulness
meaning
to Christ, the Head of the Church, which it evokes, but simply
all that fidelity to one's neighbours which for a way of thought
such as the one we are considering is swallowed up in nothingness. How could we so much as conceive of fidelity in an inner
world of which such a description as the following is offered to
us: "What you are is the result of the activity which binds the
countless elements composing you, of the intense inter-communication of these elements . where you would seize the timeless
ness of

there

is

.

.

is

HOMO VIATOR

ig6

you will only meet with a slipping away, only those
of your perishable elements which are badly co-ordinated
the lasting vortex which constitutes you comes up against other
vortices with which it forms a vast animated figure in rhythmic
movement. Now, to live means for you not only the waves of
light which are unified in you, but the passing of warmth or
substance,

.

.

.

from one being to another. We are nothing, neither you,
beside the burning words which could go from me to you,
printed on these leaves, for I should only have lived to write
light

nor

I,

them, and if it is true that they are addressed to you, you will
from having had the strength to hear them. I am and you
are only a stopping place from which to rebound in the vast

live

." And, finally, this, which is strangely charged
flux of things.
with meaning: "The stabilised order of isolated appearances is
.

.

necessary for the agonised consciousness of the torrential floods
which sweep it away" (pp. 147-9).
This last sentence makes it as clear as possible that agonised
consciousness is itself the central value. At bottom it is to a regular
cultivation of anguish that we are invited. But how is it possible
to avoid seeing that from this point of view all the structural
relations which constitute the framework, not only of a com-

munity but of a human life worthy of the name, are at once
depreciated and evaded. Here pure and simple conjuring away
of values is beyond all measure. No doubt with such a one as
Nietzsche, the prophet of the new age, we have to recognise a
genuine vocation for solitude: but what a difference! Nietzsche
most certainly did not evade anything: we cannot for a second
doubt the seriousness of his mission, even if one is inclined to
think that this mission was bound in the end to further the
process of destruction which is taking place before our eyes.
But it must be admitted that in a case like the one we are concerned with, it is just this very seriousness and authenticity
which we cannot but call in question, and the fact that the
author himself constantly talks of conflict, or experience which
conflicts

with

itself,

does not

make

this

searching question any

less acute.

And admitting that it is,
This
is
we
now
have
what
to decide.
exemplary?
First of all, is it genuine? Has the author really had the experiIs the interior experience genuine?

is it

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION

197

ence which he describes with precision almost worthy of Proust
("I felt the softness of the sky present within my head like a
vaporous shimmering", etc.)? Here there is and can be no good
reason for doubting it. On the other hand, when he declares:
"I perceived that the state of felicity into which I had fallen was
not entirely different from mystical states", it is necessary to correct it and to say: was not entirely different from the idea that I

had formed of mystical

states.

He adds,

moreover, sincerely, that

was partly spoilt, and tries to explain how, without transition, he passed from a zealous clasping to complete dispossession (p. 194). All that we can but accept. I wish only to
point out that in such a realm the idea of authenticity loses much
of its value and weight. When I wonder if a document is authentic
I ask myself a perfectly definite question to which theoretically the
reply should be a categorical yes or no. Watteau really did or did
this experience

not paint

this picture; Pascal really did or did not write this letter.
reply to the question changes something in the way we
imagine Watteau or Pascal and consequently the world. It is to be
feared, on the other hand, that where we are dealing with experiences occurring on the fringe of what it is possible to put into

The

,

words or describe, the question

loses

much

of its meaning

and

it

possible to reply by a yes or no; this is all the more so
his
effort to communicate his experience, the witness or
in
since,
sincere he may be, is inevitably led to introduce
however
subject,
is

no longer

conceptual determinants, of which it could not strictly be said
either that they were or that they were not involved in the experience as such. This brings us to a fact which, though negative, is
well worth noticing; it is that we are here in a region where no
criterion can be set up or indeed conceived. When someone
describes an experience of pure ecstasy to me, I neither have nor
can have any way of telling whether his account is accurate or
not; and that is because in the last analysis the word accuracy is
not applicable here. In the case we are considering I am morally
convinced that the author is doing his best to relate what it was

and

it

must

him

is impossible to go further,
ever
one of his friends or relaif
that
be understood

actually given

to live through. It

to me saying, "Be careful, he is a humbug", I should
have no conceivable possibility of contradicting the accuser.
I must own that, as far as I am concerned, remarks of this kind
tions

came

HOMO VIATOR

ig8

tend appreciably to diminish the interest I am able to take and
the importance I am able to attach to such accounts. It would be
quite otherwise, of course, if the experiences took place within the
context of what you must allow me to call an exemplary life
that of a saint or someone of great spirituality, whose testimony
would have the more value the more any kind of exhibitionism
was foreign to his nature, and the more he visibly bore that aureole
of humility which seems to me to be one of the most unmistakable
signs of the true mystic. Gould it not be affirmed that in principle
"a mystical experience" (I put these words in inverted commas)
which has not first gained the victory over all self-complacency,

must be regarded
that

is

with a

Mr.

as negligible, at any rate in the spiritual realm,
to say in the order where judgments of value can be made
minimum ofjustification? Now, it seems evident to
that

me

book is dripping with self-complacency a comcan in certain places affect the superficially miswhich
placency
leading impression of the condemnation of self. I recall in support
Bataille's

of this assertion not only the sentence about St. John of the Gross
"whose method of desiccation" the author has "followed to the
end", but all he says about asceticism, and the strangely irresponsible way he expresses himself concerning the spiritual life of the
Hindus as well as that of the Christians who have the unforgivable weakness of troubling themselves over their salvation.
Like a pedal persistently held down from the beginning to the
end, we discern throughout the book, with increasing impatience,
the aggressive attitude of a "we the 61ite", of a "we the true, the
pure, the liberated, the tormented", and this
in my eyes, to throw the greatest suspicion
"these others" seek to convey.

is

enough, at least

upon the message

But at this point I think that we should be able to give our
opinion as to the claim put forward by such experience to "set
up an authority". In the first place, we do not see any way in

which it can be established

word

as primitive in the sense of the

What we really have

German

a sequel and a
hybrid sequel: the sequel of Hegel, of Kierkegaard and of
Nietzsche: and who would dare to claim that a lasting agreement
could be established between the residual elements of such
divergent philosophies? I am well aware that the author would
deny that he had put forward anything at all resembling a
ursprunglich.

before us

is

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION

199

be make a counter-attack, and would
have no difficulty in showing in high relief the reasons we have
to-day for being on our guard against all attempts at philosophic
systematisation. It is none the less true that a book like
Experience Interieure conveys dogma
dogma in reverse, if you like, but
dogma all the same. Let us, in fact, recall the first proposition,
stated by Mr. Blanchot in full agreement with the author: "spiritual life can only have its principle and its end in the absence of
salvation, in the renunciation of all hope". Can it be said that this
is only a deliberately chosen attitude towards reality? We must go
further, I think: what is here defined is an irrevocably set opinion
which bears on the apprehension of this very reality itself; / want
reality to be of such sort that it gives me no grounds for expecting any salvation or cherishing any hope; I hold out the hand of brotherhood to all
those who have their souls well enough tempered to sustain the
same exigency: as for the others, can I feel anything but disdain
for them? It is quite clear that this way, not only effacing destiny
but of shaping it from within and wanting it to be as hard as possible, is altogether in line with Nietzsche: but, I repeat, we have
only a sequel of Nietzsche there. Whatever we may think of
Nietzsche in the last analysis, his own destiny always has an
exemplary character for us. Why? Because Nietzsche, if one may
say so, went through with his adventure to the very depths, to
madness and to death, and, moreover, because he was himself,
the first to face such a trial. Who could dream of denying that he
had in him that Ursprunglichkeit which we cannot in any way
recognise in his modern disciples? Of course, this would not in any
way be a reason for adopting the theories of Nietzsche, supposing
that they could be regarded as forming a coherent and organic
whole, but it would at least be a reason for honouring the enduring greatness of Nietzsche, and no doubt for seeing in him the
involuntary witness of a truth, still declared through the negations and sometimes the blasphemies by which he claims to oppose
it. Whatever consideration one may have for Mr. Bataille and his
system, that he would

if need

U

difficult to see

them as witnesses in

this secondary, yet
"to pretend" is one which I should
never allow myself to use in speaking of Nietzsche, so burning is

friends,

it is

grandiose sense.

The verb

his passion for sincerity: it

comes naturally, however, when one is
One feels pretty sure that with

writing of these other authors.

2OO

HOMO VIATOR

them the adopted attitude controls every sentence, even if, as is
more or less certain, they have become so far its prisoners as no
longer to feel it as an attitude.
Perhaps some of their friends may protest that this is a biased
judgment. But what is really in question here? What they bring us
cannot be presented by way of a demonstration or even a formal
argument, and we can only adopt it, or oppose it by our refusal.
"Very well", they may reply, "but in refusing you are judging
yourself." It is well here, I think, to denounce what is really an
imposture, I mean to say a kind of patent of superiority which
they claim to grant themselves when they declare that spiritual
life can only be founded on an absence of salvation, etc. I mean by
this that it is a little too easy to claim to place oneself beyond the
limits which the great spiritual giants of humanity have reached

most severe asceticism, and to rest one's claims
on
merely
phrases ("words, words!"). No, they cannot install
themselves thus in an authentic world beyond, they merely limit
themselves to playing a game of which the inspiration is boundless pride merging into a will to intimidate, and our wisest
course is probably to reply with a smile and a slight shrug of the
at the price of the

shoulders.

Nevertheless, if I confined myself to this, I think there would be
good grounds for accusing me of bad faith and for insisting that

was simply evading the real problem, perhaps because it was
to some extent insoluble. At the root of Mr.
Bataille's book, and those of many others, there is what one might
I

awkward and

call a general declaration of absurdity. Perhaps, however, this
formula itself needs to be amended. Mr. Albert Camus, whose
talent cannot be disputed, particularises further in the following
very able passage: "I said that the world was absurd and I was
going too fast: the world in itself is not reasonable that is all that
can be said. But what is absurd is the comparison of this irrationality with that desperate yearning for light, a light which man
craves for from the very depths of his nature. Absurdity comes as
much from man as from the world. It is the only link between
them at the moment. It fastens them to each other as only hate
can rivet beings. This is all that I can discern clearly in this

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION
measureless adventure where

my own

This

adventure takes

SOI
its

way"

seem utterly confusing: is not absurdity pure negation, discordance admitted to be
impossible to harmonise? How, under these conditions, can the
author speak of "this absurdity which controls my relations with
my life"? It is because at bottom, from the 'moment that it is
(Le Mythe

de Sisyphe, p. 37).

may

at

first

is a passion, the most
heart-rending of all passions"
(p. 38) . Elsewhere we are told that the notion of absurdity is essential and that it can figure as "the first of
truths" (p. 49). These

recognised "absurdity

my

formulae are not very easy to reconcile. Everything becomes clear.,
however, when Mr. Camus tells us that absurdity, the sin without
God, is a state in which life has to be lived. "I know what it is
it is this spirit and this world buttressed one
against
the other without being able to embrace each other. I ask for the
rule of life in this state, and what is suggested to me neglects the
foundation, denies one of the terms of the painful opposition,
orders me to resign. I ask what the condition I recognise as my
own brings with it, I know that it involves darkness and ignorance, and I am told that this ignorance explains everything, and
that this darkness is my light. But no one replies to what I mean,
and this intoxicating lyricism does not hide the paradox from
me. ... To seek the truth is not to seek what is desirable. If we
have to f?ed on illusion, like donkeys, in order to escape from the
question of the meaning of life, the absurd spirit prefers to adopt
Kierkegaard's answer of despair, rather than resign itself to falsehood. All things well considered, a resolute soul will always

founded upon:

manage somehow" (p. 61).
How can we help, at first, admiring

this desire for lucidity at

any price? Let us be very careful, however. Have we here an
example of the stoical pessimism adopted by the great souls at the
end of last century Thomas Hardy, for instance, or Mme.
Ackermann souls for whom in a last analysis truth always
remains as the supreme and sometimes the only value? Apart
from the fact that the word "absurd" is not generally found in the
vocabulary of these pessimists, it would not have occurred to any
of them to speak of absurdity as a passion, "the most heartrending
of all the passions". If, as Mr. Camus writes somewhere, absurdity
were simply enlightened reason becoming aware of its own
limits, it would be impossible to understand how absurdity could

HOMO VIATOR

202

be a passion. Let

more

us,

however, penetrate further and

we

shall see

clearly.

in my nature not to form part of the world in which I am
involved in some way, if not in every way; I am opposed to this
world by my whole consciousness and by all my need for the
"And there is nothing at the bottom of this conflict
familiar.
between the world and my spirit but my own consciousness of it.
It

is

.

.

.

want to keep it up" we shall come back to this sentence
must be by continuous consciousness, constantly renewed
and always tense. That is what I have to remember for the
moment. At this moment absurdity, so obvious and at the same
time so difficult to conquer, enters a man's life and finds it is at
All problems again become acute. Abstract evidence
home.
disappears before the lyricism of forms and colours. Spiritual conflicts become incarnate and once more take a miserable yet magnificent refuge in the heart of man. Not one of them is settled.
Nevertheless, all of them are transfigured. Are we to die, to make
our escape by a leap, to reconstruct a dwelling-place of ideas and
forms to fit us? Or are we, on the contrary, to take up the heartIf then I
"it

.

.

.

rending and marvellous wager of absurdity? Let us make a last effort
with regard to this and accept all the consequences. The body,
affection, creation, action, human nobility will all fall into place
will at last find there the wine of absufdity and

then.

Man

the bread of indifference

on which he

feeds his

grandeur"

(pp. 74-5).

This passage

is

not without beauty; yet, though

this is

hard to

express, it seems to me that a critical ear can detect beneath the
self-confidence of the words an indefinable element of discord

which at once arouses suspicion. The author had begun by wondering whether life should have a meaning in order to be lived.
Here, on the contrary, it appears that it can be lived all the better
for having no meaning. To live through an experience or fulfil a
destiny

is

knowing

to accept it fully. Now, we could not fulfil this destiny,
to be absurd, if we did not do everything to keep

it

before ourselves this absurdity brought into the full light of day
by consciousness. . . "To live is to make absurdity live. To make
it live is first of all to look at it. Unlike Eurydice,
absurdity only
.

dies

when one

turns one's

back on

constant awareness of himself. It

"Revolt is man's
not aspiration, it knows no

it" (p. 76).

is

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION

203

hope. This revolt is the certainty of a crushing destiny without the resignation which should accompany it" (p. 77).
Suicide is thus condemned, since it resolves the absurdity, whereas, in order to be kept up, absurdity cannot be resolved. "The
opposite of suicide is the state of the man condemned to death"
(

P

.

7 8).

last sentence throws a blinding light on the end of Mr.
Camus's novel, DEtranger, a remarkable work on which I should
have liked to dwell at greater length. I should then have been
able to quote in full the scene which takes place between the man
condemned to death and the chaplain who comes to visit him in
prison. The novel is contrived in such a way that if the man did
indeed commit the act of which he is accused, he did it under such
conditions that none the less he is really the victim of a misunderstanding which is absurd yet impossible to remove. This is because
poor human logic obstinately insists in explaining this act and on
creating an imaginary chain of circumstances to account for it.

This

"I will pray for you", the chaplain has just said. Then the conexplodes. "He, the chaplain, was not even sure of
being alive, since he lived like a dead man. As for me, I appeared

demned man

be empty-handed. Nevertheless, I was sure of myself, sure of
more sure than he was, sure of my life and of this
death which was to come. Yes, that was all I had. But, at least,
I held this truth as firmly as it held me. ... It was as though I had

to

everything,

waited

all

one when

and for that other brief little
should be justified: nothing, nothing at all, had any

the time for this instant
I

importance, and I knew quite well why. He knew why, too. From
the bottom of my future, during all this life of absurdity which I
had led, an obscure breath had been rising up towards me across
years not yet come, and this breath as it passed made equal everything they were proposing to me then, in the no more real years
Did he understand, could he
I was living through.
understand? Everybody was privileged, there were none but

which

privileged people"

.

(U Stronger,

.

.

p, 157).

What

does this mean? "Privilege", writes Mr. Blanchot (Faux
Pas, p. 260), "expresses the final justification which puts each one
in harmony with what he has done, which rewards him for having

evaded nothing and kept nothing back for later on, which makes
him aware of his kinship with the unknowable world." I do not

HOMO VIATOR

204

care much for this last extract. It seems to me to be likely to mislead the reader. Mr. Camus himself, in an important article on
Franz Kafka, expresses himself more crudely, but also more
is given and nothing
a
or
value
of
of
the
fruitfulness
any attempt at metaexplained,
is a meaningless notion."
physics
Obviously, the last assertion could be disputed from beginning
to end. First, is there any sense in speaking of a world where everything is given and nothing explained? Is it not evident that in any

forcefully:

"In a world where everything

kind of world explanation's special property is precisely not to be
given, but only to be discovered, so that the author is contrasting
with this world of ours not another as yet unrealised world, but

something which is not a world at all? But this is not all; we cannot see why positive values cannot be established within an
irrational world. Nietzsche would certainly not have subscribed
to Mr. Camus' formula. It will be well, however, to make a still
more direct attack upon the position which is here defended with
something more than talent with a kind of harsh exaltation
which could scarcely fail to intimidate the unprepared or unprotected mind, or even to make breaches in the consciences of those
who have not fully reflected upon the convictions which they

imagine they live by.
Revolt as it has been defined for us "gives life its worth.
Absurdity is man's most extreme tension which constantly upholds him by his solitary effort, for he knows that in this consciousness and in this day-to-day revolt he is witnessing to his one
and only truth which is defiance" (p. 78). "From the moment when
I met with absurdity I have been cured of believing in my own
liberty wherein I appeared as the prisoner of the aims I set myself
in daily life" that is to say the project, to use Mr. Bataille's term.
"Thus I have gained access to true liberty the liberty of
.

.

.

absurdity."

"And here we find

the divine readiness of the

man whose

man condemned

prison doors will open before him one
early dawn, this unbelievable disinterestedness about everything
except the pure flame of his life; we feel it, death and absurdity
are here the principles of the only reasonable liberty: the liberty
that a human heart can feel and live. .
The man of absurdity
thus catches a glimpse of a universe burning and frozen, transto death, the

.

.

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION

205

parent and

limited, where nothing is possible and everything is
given, past which there is downfall and nothingness. Then he can
decide to agree to live in such a universe and to draw his strength
from it, his refusal to hope is the persistent evidence of a life

without consolation" (pp. 83-4).
"What does life stand for in such a universe? Nothing for the
moment but indifference to the future and a passion to exhaust
everything that is given. ... To know if one can live a life without appeal is all that interests me" (p. 84). "The thing that
matters is not to live as well as possible but to live as much as
possible" (p. 84).
Let us notice at once the ambiguity of these last words. To feel
life, one's revolt, one's liberty, and to do so "as much as possible".
It seems then that the word "much" here
applies to the intensity
of an awareness or an enlightenment. But a little further on we
are told that "in the eyes of the man of absurdity, no depth, no

emotion, no passion and no sacrifice can make a life of conscious
awareness of forty years (even should he desire it) equal to sixty
years of lucidity" (p. 87). And here it seems to be an extendible
quantity which

Mr. Camus

in question. What appears quite clearly
gives us the witness of a generation on

is

first

is

that

whom

a

sentence of death had been pronounced, and for whom to live is,
in fact, only to benefit by a reprieve liable to expire to-morrow or
this evening. Such is the setting, given as the drama opens, for it
is indeed a drama. We now have to see what attitude consciousness is going to adopt in such a situation. It refuses to imagine a

metaphysical background from which some light might shine
forth to transfigure the scene. It refuses, out of honesty in the first
place, but also out of pride, and we have there two states of mind
so closely interconnected that we cannot think of separating them.

But there cannot be any question either of consciousness giving in
to its fate, for that would still be to lower itself. Only one course
it is not only to proclaim the nameless absurdity of such
a situation, but to become so rooted in it as to make it one's own,
to assume and in a sense exalt it. Is not this the only way, not to
test, but to prove oneself? Here we see outlined in an almost total
darkness a sort of proof by absurdity which could serve as an
inverted or inarticulate answer to the Cartesian cogito, in tune
with Pascal or Kierkegaard if it were possible to imagine one or

remains:

HOMO VIATOR

206

other of them as having no faith, but on the contrary bearing the
sign of the most stubborn refusal it is possible to oppose to religious
certainty. To be sure, the terms of 'defiance', 'challenge', 'wager',
which I emphasised in passing, take on their full meaning here.

There can be no question at all of a statement. But can there be a
challenge or a wager without any value? "Without any fruitful
value; yes", the author would surely reply. In other terms, we are
concerned with an attitude which is not expected to bear fruit for
<c
anybody. ln the world of absurdity", declares Mr. Camus, "the
value of an action or a life is measured by its unfruitfulness"
a world closely
(p. 96) This can only mean that here we are in
and hermetically sealed up in itself. How great then is the inconsequence of the author when he speaks elsewhere "of the only
luxury, that of human relationships ... of the strong and chaste
friendship of one man for another", etc. (p. 121)? How does he
not see that a friendship or a love of any kind creates a world
around it in which this formula no longer has any meaning, unless
we are most unpardonably to confuse fecundity with usefulness?
The truth is that there has never been so radical a monadism as
that of Mr. Camus. There is no longer any question of an orgy, or
of the passage of light and heat from one being to another. There
is no longer either light or heat; and if for a moment the author
seems to forget it, he only does so in faithlessness to the principle
he himself has laid down.
It is only too evident that a rebel in the style of Mr. Camus
.

challenges in advance, with the greatest possible scorn, the judg-

ment we might be tempted

to bring against his revolt.

Much

more: he can only reject the very compassion we might at some
times be tempted to show him. In these conditions, at the end of
a development like his, there is room for nothing but noncommunication or contagion. It is necessary to insist on this last
word. We see only too clearly how seductive such an attitude can
be. Here as before, only in a still more perceptible way, a veritable
intimidation
adolescents.

is

at work, particularly on the consciousness of
in a sudden access of pride, should they not set

Why,

work on their account to embrace this world of absurdity which
suggested to them, or to brandish the torch of revolt in their
turn?
to

is

The

task

which here devolves upon the

critic is thus

a thankless

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION

He

must know that he runs the risk of being accused of
cowardice, of bad faith or of stupidity and probably of all these
things at once. It must be added that such a position appears to
be impregnable in principle. For if we warn the author that in the
end he will himself feel suffocated and will be forced to break a
window-pane in order to breathe, he can always reply that this is
only so because he has proved to be too weak to fulfil his wager to
the end. He may even go so far perhaps as to admit or concede
that no one is strong enough to endure such a trial: but what does
that prove if not that man's condition is seen to be inhuman as
soon as it is thoroughly thought out: he has never claimed
one.

anything

else.

Henceforward what means have we at our disposal for attacking this stronghold? We shall no doubt have to make a very
important distinction here.
First, it is to be wondered whether there is any way of convincing our adversary, and on that point I am as pessimistic as
possible. I do not think that there is any form of argument, or that
any can be invented, which would be able to triumph over such a
narrow and such a hardened will. Arguments do not, and cannot,
act like a magical charm. They require a certain receptive power,
an open-mindedness which cannot but be lacking in this case. We
must have the courage to acknowledge that only grace can have
any effect here, it being well understood that a priori the hardened
denier can only have a very inadequate idea of its action which he
accordingly challenges. By definition, the hardened denier cannot
imagine the ontological change which grace is able to bring about
within him; we therefore have good grounds for saying that when
he thinks he is refusing it, he is really refusing something else, a

shadow or mirage.
is

The other question, which seems to me much more important,
that of knowing how we can both protect ourselves and put the

on their guard against the contagion of which I spoke
now.
just
There are, I think, three main ways by which this evil thing can
reach us. I say it is an evil thing. I do not, indeed, hesitate for a
second in considering as an evil thing the process at the end of
which our life is felt to be a prison a prison in the midst of a
world destitute of all the attributes which by common consent
defenceless

HOMO VIATOR

208

were formerly regarded as its glory. This will instantly be disputed.
I shall be told that it cannot be an evil thing to see our situation as
it really is, to face the truth. But it will be well to denounce an
error which is surely a sophism. The situation in question cannot
be separated from the preconceived opinion of those who fix and
define it, and, in spite of appearances, this opinion is in no way
that of a scholar in search of pure objectivity. As I have already
said incidentally: we have here, first and foremost, the claim not
to allow oneself to be consoled: this claim implies a pride quite
foreign to the pure scholar as such. This accounts for the refusal
to consider the signs, numerous enough for whoever takes the
trouble to notice them, of a supernatural intervention which is

regarded as being lowering for those who accept it or adapt their
accordance with it. This is the first way of infiltration.
There is a temptation, specially for the adolescent, to perch on the
top of a tower, or to view scornfully from behind the bars of his
cell, the vacillating, grovelling crowd. I am inclined to think that
great experience of life makes one almost totally immune from
this temptation. But how difficult it is to make someone, who not
only lacks but challenges such experience, profit by it! In such
cases exhortations are in vain and arguments have no effect; we
have already seen why. We can only count on chance meetings, on

lives in

all

the opportunities scattered throughout

summer

life like

pollen in the

air.

There is another way of infiltration by which evil can reach our
very foundations. The events which assail us can at any moment
devastate our existence in such a way that we no longer see anything stretching around us but the undefined no man's land of
universal inanity. Each of us can quite easily imagine some actual
situation in which he might suddenly find himself as a result of
passing events, and where he would be in danger of sinking into
absolute nihilism. We can go further: that other beings, not even
personally known to us, should be plunged into inescapable
despair, is enough for the question inevitably to arise in our minds
as to the meaning or absurdity of life. But the problem is always
the same, and I maintain that it is not and cannot be a problem
of truths. Is there really a superior kind of ethics which forbids us
to seek a refuge beyond the shimmering lagoon which perpetually
sends us back the reflection of our own dereliction? I find it hard

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION

20Q

not to believe that we are really considering a delusion which is
perhaps a dramatised form of vertigo. I knew two people, actually
as different from each other as possible, who at a definite moment
of their adolescence worried over the idea that they would be too
cowardly to dare to steal a little cake at the pastry-cook's so
much so that they ended by committing this petty theft in order
to discomfit the sarcastic tempter who questioned their courage.
Should we say that they were acting in the name of a superior

code of ethics? I should take good care not to. The illusion here
seems to consist in giving an intrinsic value to courage, or in
another case to sincerity, whereas courage and sincerity, which
essential conditions of value, only become true values when they
are in conjunction with other constituted values. There is a serious
temptation to take courage or sincerity out of their orbit, that is

are

to say to detach them artificially from a certain spiritual organon,
in which each of them has its particular function. If, for instance,
I

make

it

my

business to erect

most desolate and depressing

around myself a Iife-d6cor of the
and to prove that I can live in

style

the midst of such surroundings, what is the spiritual value of such
an attempt? It seems very much as if its inspiration is my desire to
please myself. And the fact that I come to need this decor, that
something within me demands it and refuses to do without it,
proves that this is no longer a question of stoical resignation. In a
world which was not absurd, in a world which had meaning in

and a transcendent meaning
I should have no occasion to

my personal
myself and to establish
myself as a central focus of values. In other words, I should feel

itself

aims

in relation to

test

had come down in class, that I was depreciated, and that is
really what I do not want to feel. Where the agnostic pessimist of
I

the end of last century found it impossible to accept the existence
of a providential order in which he would have liked to believe,
the nihilist of to-day repudiates any idea of such an order; it
would be no exaggeration to say that he congratulates himself
upon finding that this order cannot be accepted, so that he reaches
the point of offering an apologetic in reverse, an apologetic of

absurdity for which total absence of value becomes the supreme
value.

But

if

expressed

without any

.bias

by this apologetic

we come

to consider the process
it is difficult not to

in reverse, I think

HOMO VIATOR

210

should we say from the centre to
it a flowing back of life
the furthest extremities or from the extremities to the centre? The
point is precisely to know which is the centre and which the
see in

extremity. Solipsistic idealism, exaggerating and distorting certain time-honoured formulas, has come to consider the ego as the
one and only centre; it is then necessary to speak of the reflux

towards the centre from the circumference. But is
that which constitutes not merely the archetypal

it

not precisely

error,

but in a

manner

the unforgivable sin intellectual sin, metasin?
Is
not
secular ontology founded on the assertion, too
physical
often repeated and moreover in terms which are inadequate and
certain

somewhat unconvincing, that the true centre is actual being itself
and not in any degree the subject which asserts its being, especially if this assertion is shown as a projection or as the act of conOntology has always maintained that the ego
can only assume an appearance of substance or content in
so far as it is the image of, that is to say that it bears a likeness to,
a plenitude which is beyond all possible representation. If this is
so, we have on the other hand been witnessing a reflux towards
structive thought.
itself

the extremities for the last three centuries, as though, while the
heart no longer carried out its regular function, the blood flowed
to the surface and there became stagnant and hardened or else
spurted out in a mortal haemorrhage.
.

.

.

not without a motive that, at the end of this long account,
I have made use of a physiological comparison which must be
seen as more than a simple metaphor. The third way of infiltration to which I have alluded is the tadium vita> the boredom and
disgust with living, which claims as its victims hundreds of
thousands of human beings who do not ever know how to
recognise the disease which is attacking them; we must not forget
It

is

many of the most incurable ailments to which man is subare
ject
painless and not easy to detect for a long time. But this
t&dium mt(B encouraged by inhuman conditions, as much among
that

the idle rich as

made

among

the disinherited working

classes, is

only

by the rupture, or more exactly the loosening, of
the ontological bond which unites each particular being to Being
in

possible

its fullness.

will not get
reality

It

seems to

me

and human

ills,

that psychiatry or psycho-analysis

superficial stratification of human
so long as they are not able to diagnose

beyond the most

THE REFUSAL OF SALVATION

211

this functional lesion, or if you like, this
ontological traumatisation,

however hard it may be to formulate.
and this is the essential point upon which I
Still, however
would like to insist in conclusion still it is necessary that the
traumatisation should be recognised as a traumatisation, that the
anomaly should be seen to be an anomaly. In order to fulfil this
condition the notion of the human order should first be safeguarded, and it is precisely this notion which is attacked from
all sides to-day. No doubt man's essence has, in a sense, the
power to call itself in question; this is, at the most, scarcely more
than the spiritual or ideal parallel of what the permanent possibility of suicide stands for on the plane of physical life. Has Mr.
Camus any suspicion that the spiritual attitude he advocates is at
bottom only a more subtly destructive equivalent of the suicide
against which he has taken up his position? In reality what is
prescribed for us is the restoration of dogmatics of which all the
foundations have been systematically undermined. It seems,
however, that we have here a vicious circle. If these dogmatics
are to be reconstituted, do they not presuppose the conviction of
which they are to be the justification? The problem, stated in
purely intellectual terms is insoluble, but that is because anything in the way of definition is quite inadequate. The problem
arises for living beings
for beings engaged in a strange destiny
which they have to face squarely and to understand. Perhaps we
have grounds for thinking that it is by becoming conscious of the
destruction and chaos which all nihilism inevitably engenders
that the human being can awaken, or rather reawaken, to
consciousness of Being in its fullness.
To sum up, I should say that the mode of thought of which I
have tried to-day to analyse two particularly significant manifestations, can be conceived either as a perverse but fascinating
game, or at a deeper level and more truly, as the end of a process
of auto-destruction which is going on within a doomed society,
within a humanity which has broken, or thinks it has broken,
ontological moorings. However this may be, it is nothing but
a pure and simple imposture to claim to hold up as some unheardof metaphysical promotion or as a triumph of pure lucidity the
really blinding gesture by which all that humanity has ever

its

acquired

is

swept away and

we

are thrust headlong into the

HOMO VIATOR

2152

dungeon, itself a sham, of a Narcissism of nothingness, where we
left with no other resource but to wonder tirelessly at our
courage, our pride and our stubbornness in denying both God
and the being full of weakness and hope which in spite of every-

are

thing

and

for ever

we

are.

PARIS.
December, 1943.

To

Mile. LOUISE

LEVEQUE

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL:

PART

Ii

UNDER which these two lectures have been
JL H E TITLE
announced I consider to be justified first of all in a negative
way. For reasons which will soon appear, I did not feel it was
possible to speak either of Rilke's mysticism, of his religion or

even of

his spirituality; this last
as not strictly Rilkian.

word

itself

has a sound which

me

strikes

But what exactly does "Witness to the Spiritual" mean here?
In using such an expression I am referring to the notion of
creative testimony to which my reflections during the last ten
years have led me to give an increasingly important place. The
witness, of course, is not just he who observes or makes a statement; that is not what he really is, but he is one who testifies and
his testimony is not a mere echo, it is a participation and a confirmation; to bear witness is to contribute to the growth or coming
of that for which one testifies. But what does the spiritual mean
for Rilke? I fear that we cannot risk offering a definition of it
yet. We shall have to work out the elements of this definition by
degrees, and I do not in any way guarantee that we shall be
able to weld them into a formula. I will simply quote as an
epigraph the first verse of the Twelfth Sonnet to Orpheus (first
series)

:

Heil dem Geist der uns verbinden mag;
denn wir leben wahrhaft in Figuren.

Und mit kleinen Schritten gehen die
neben unseren eigentlicken Tag.

Uhrm

(Hail, the spirit able to unite!

For we truly live our lives in symbol,
and with tiny paces move our nimble
clocks side by side with our true day.) 2
1

Lectures given in January and February, 1944, at the Centre de Recherches

Philosophiques et Religieuses.
2 Sonnets to
translated

Orpheus9

by J.

B.

Leishman,

p.

57 (Hogarth Press, 1946).

HOMO VIATOR

214

Here the close relationship appears which unites the Spirit to
the Symbols, to the images in which it clothes itself. We shall have
to come back to this.
difficulty arises immediately, however;
should we not regard Rilke as a pure artist whose only concern

A

was to gain an ever fuller and more distinct consciousness
of the mission of his art? This is roughly the theory which the
most recent of Rilke's interpreters, Werner Gxinther, defends
with great talent in his book, Weltinnenraum, die Dichtung R. M.
Rilkes9 to which I shall often have to refer in the course of these
lectures. "Rilke wants to be a poet, nothing but a poet. His
really

religious position, his wisdom, are bound up with the particular
nature of his poetry, they are indeed only side-issues and, as it
were, marginal problems which suggest themselves to his artist's
nature" (loc. dt. s p. 41). We shall see, for example, that for
Giinther the Book of Hours, which at first appears to be an almost
mystical work, can only be correctly understood if it is con-

sidered from this particular aesthetic angle. There is here, I
an element of truth which, however, presented without

think,

any precautions could quite easily give rise to a misinterpretation.
declaration: "Rilke is an artist, nothing but an artist; a

The

seems to support a limitative conception of the poet and the artist, which would separate them
from the common run of mankind, even though it be by relegapoet, nothing but a poet"

them

to a sort of sanctuary where the common folk have no
do not know whether I am mistaken, but I feel that this
conception, which was Mallarm6's for instance, is utterly foreign
to such as Rilke. Rilke has a sense of the poet and his vocation
which is both too human and too cosmic for anyone to have the

ting

access. I

right to introduce such a dissociation a dissociation which,
while claiming to purify the vocation, impoverishes and even
mutilates the very idea we should form of it. I am sure that Rilke
would have subscribed from the very depth of his heart to these
lines of Charles

du

is

"The

valley where souls are fashioned,
to
the
test and made into a soul."
put

Bois:

wherein intelligence

(We recognise here the celebrated words of Keats.) "That is
actually life and literature is nothing but such life itself when
it reaches its fullest expression in the soul of a man of
genius. Life
and literature, far from opposing and contradicting each other,
are bound together by the closest and most intimate of ties.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

215

would have no content were it not for life; but were
it not for literature, life would be but a
waterfall, that ceaseless
waterfall in which so many of us are submerged, a waterfall
without meaning, which we merely accept, which we are
incapable of interpreting; and literature carries out the functions
Literature

of a hydraulic belt with regard to this waterfall, catching, collecting and raising its water" (Approximations, VII, pp. 320-1). If
Rilke's message was really only addressed to artists, his poems

and above all his correspondence would not ring with the marvellously fraternal understanding which souls cruelly wounded
in life's journey find in them; there would not flow from them
do not believe we could ever discover a parallel: I doubt indeed whether we could find anything
comparable, even in the letters of Katherine Mansfield, which
have awakened such eager echoes everywhere.
To sum up, I should say that it would be quite ridiculous to
try to find in Rilke anything like a philosophy in the traditional
and systematic sense of the word; but, on the other hand,
those emanations for which I

existential philosophy, as we are coming to conceive of it to-day,
tends more and more to be identified with an experience which

not only elaborates
one might even say

its

own development but

defines

its

allusion,

adherence, to a reality apprehended more
and more intimately as a network of protective or hostile influences. I should not hesitate to assert from this point of view that
the work of Rilke helps me, in my own studies, for example,
its

infinitely more than some system drawn up by a specialist and
based on personal grounds, which are at times quite obviously
defective. Here, on the contrary the grounds are imposing,
almost inexplorable and at the same time the implications of the
affirmation reach beyond all the limits we might at first have
fixed. I think it would be wise to point out before we go any
further the limitless or even vague and hence ambiguous quality
which we find in the conclusions Rilke reaches I do this in
order to avoid any disappointment. Moreover, the word "conclusions" is in this case the most unsuitable we could have found.
The process which takes place in Rilke is not in the least comparable with a discursive development, but rather with a progressive transformation of vision not only of interior vision^ but
just vision in the ordinary sense of the word which takes place

HOMO VIATOR

2l6

by side with the perfecting of his poetic technique. I shall,
of course, say nothing about the latter here; I shall have quite
enough to do in pointing out certain characteristics of this
vision, one of the most unusual possible, and in trying to evoke
this Rilkian atmosphere, seemingly so well suited at the present
time to many souls which Christianity has so far failed to hold.
It will be as well to say once and for all that we should be giving
a completely false idea of Rilke's thought if we did not make it
side

quite plain that there

is

in

him an

increasing opposition to the

religion of Christ. Angelloz wonders whether the origin of this
disaffection is not to be traced to a feeling of bitterness for Him

who having

taught him resignation and compunction gave him
to the humiliating sarcasm of his comrades at the
Cadet School. The incident he relates in a letter to his fiancee,
Fraiilein von David Rhonfeld, might indeed have produced a
traumatism in him with far-reaching effects; but I think it would
be rash to exaggerate its importance. Rilke's opposition to
Christianity has other and deeper roots. This extract from his
diary of October 4th, 1900, seems to me particularly significant:

up

in

advance

"For young people

who

.

.

who

.

Christ presents a serious danger; he

hides God.

it is

We

get used to seeking the
divine by human methods. We get into soft and easy habits with
all this human element, and later on we shall be frozen by the
keen air of the heights, the air of eternity. We drift between
Christ, the two Maries and the Saints. We are lost among forms
and voices. We are deceived over and over again by this halffamiliar element which causes neither surprise nor fear and does
not tear us from our everyday outlook. We get accustomed to
this, but there can be no getting accustomed to finding God." It
seems as though a retrospective confession is discernible in these
few lines which enlighten us concerning the conditions under
whick Rilke broke away from Christianity very early, probably
only a short time after he left Sankt Polten (in 1891, when he
is

too close,

came away from

the Cadet School, he was sixteen years old).
Certainly the passage I have just quoted shows an indisputable
craving for transcendence. Let us remember all the same that
it is never very wise to make use of a technical
vocabulary only
suited to professional philosophers when we are speaking of
Rilke. What at the very least we do detect in these few lines is a

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

217

horror of anything confined, and also of a certain promiscuity;
this corresponds with the love of the poet of the Elegies for
solitude, and also with his passion for space on which Rudolph
Kassner has insisted with such good reason. These two points
deserve our attention.
Let us recall what he wrote in the Letters to a Young Poet: "Only

one thing

is

necessary: solitude.

The immense inward

solitude.

To withdraw into oneself and not to meet anvone for hours
that is what we must arrive at. To be alone, like a child is alone
when grown-ups come and go." This solitude, as Gunther says
very aptly, does not consist in shutting ourselves away from
people, but in practising recollection, in gathering our faculties
together under a law which is genuinely our own. Rilke himself
said quite early that we cannot be alone, except within the heart
of the All. It is impossible to have a more acute consciousness of
the tension which connects solitude and immensity with each
other. And here what I have just now called his passion for space
shows itself. But, of course, this kind of space is not that of everyday life, nor that of science and nature; it is the space of the
visionary, "the space wherein God has established all things
with his creative hands, the mystical space of metamorphoses,
that which was at one and the same time the world, the world
of God and of Childhood" (Kassner, Buck der Erinnerungy
p. 306).
I do not think that

we can separate the deep and lasting
his
which
journey to Russia in 1899 must have left
impression
with him from this passion for distance and for spaces, but it
must immediately be added that in his case this passion itself is
joined with his devotion to intimacy. Only, just like the word
"space" which we used just now, this word "intimacy" has to be
defined and purified. There is a stifling intimacy which prevents
the soul not only from opening out, but from breathing: he
would not have been able to endure such an intimacy as that
for a moment. Perhaps we could say without any paradox that,
for him, intimacy did not exclude distance, but demanded it.
Abstand, Entfernung,

Feme

these words are essentially Rilkian.

surely it is not by chance if we feel that it is in his correspondence that he is closest, most immediately present, to those
whom he seeks, for instance, to stimulate or console. However

And

HOMO VIATOR

2l8

tempted we

may be

and admired

to

evoke Kierkegaard, of whom Rilke knew

some

writings, though of course not the
entire works, I think we should be very careful: the note he
strikes seems to us to be really as different as possible. The very

at least

idea of paradox, central as it is with the Danish philosopher, I
be completely foreign to our poet; it suggests a mood which
is not and never will be his. The truth is that with Kierkegaard
we discern a smirk, we feel at times that he is grimacing; the
fictitious characters he chooses as a disguise do not mind assuming
a falsetto voice, and can even be suspected sometimes of ventriloquism. There is nothing like that here happily! How much
more even, more musical or just more human is the voice of this
feel to

poet!
"It was in Russia", says Angelloz, "that Rilke had the revelation of a world wherein God creates himself" (Rilke, p. 122).
This is probably quite true. "Russia", Rilke was to write later
to Ellen Key, "was reality, with at the same time the deep daily
intuition that reality is something far away, coming with infinite
slowness to those who have patience. Russia, the country where

men

are solitary beings, where each bears a world within him,
is full of gloom like a mountain, where each is deep
in his humility, is not afraid of abasing himself, and for that very
reason is a being full of piety. Men full of far distance, of uncertainty and hope, beings who are always growing spiritually. And
over all a God who has never been defined, who eternally

where each

changes and who eternally grows." Already on July 6th, 1898,
on the eve of his journey to Russia, he evoked the solitary of the
future, of whom all creators are the ancestors. "There will be
nothing outside him, trees and mountains, clouds and waves will
have been but the symbols of those realities which are found in
him. Everything has flown together in him.
He no longer
...
he
is.
And
God
is
the
each
whole
a world, its
of
prays,
past
ultimate meaning, the unified expression, and at the same time
the possibility of a new life. ... So then I feel it, we are the
ancestors of a God and by our deepest solitudes we plunge into
the centuries to come till we reach his beginning." This passage
.

.

.

clearly goes to support the interpretation suggested by Gunther.
I refuse, however, to believe that Rilke's God in
process of being,

or to come, can be thought of purely

and simply

as a masterpiece

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

219

or genius of the future. "I was speaking of him in a low voice",
Rilke tells us in a diary fragment of which I have already quoted
lines. It is God of whom he is
writing here. "I was saying
that his lacunae, his injustice, the inadequacy of his powers were
due to the degree of his development. That he was not yet

a few

completed. When will he have been able to develop? Man has so
urgent a need of him that from the beginning he feels him and

though he were already there. Man needed him to
and he said: God is. Now he has to catch up with this
anticipated becoming and it is for us to help him. It is with us
that he becomes, he grows with our joys, and our sorrows throw
shadows across his face. We can do nothing which does not
affect him once we have found ourselves. And you must not
think of him as above the multitude. He did not wish for the
multitude; it is by a multiplicity of individuals that he wished to be
carried. In the multitude each one is so small that he cannot put
his hand to God's edifice. But the individual who places himself
opposite him looks at him and is sure to reach him as high up
as his shoulders. And he has power over him. And he matters
to God. And thence comes my best courage in life: I have to be
great in order to be the auxiliary of his greatness, I must be
simple so as not to throw him into confusion, and my gravity
should somewhere meet with his.
But while I express these

sees

be

him

as

finished,

.

.

.

am not simply in living

contact with him,
because
I
am
who pray to him
him.
about
Those
just
speaking
do not speak about him. Perhaps I may be more than a simple
worshipper. Perhaps a sort of ordination has been conferred upon
me, perhaps others having become strangers to me, it has
befallen me sometimes to approach a man with solemnity, as
though I had access to him by a golden gate. But then they will
always be the only ones to see me, those who dwell beside golden
gates" (Brief* und Tagebucher, 1899-1902, p. 369-70). Here
already we find the idea which he was to formulate in a letter
of October, 1907, in which he said that he had never been able
to receive God simply, but that he always had "to fit himself
to him productively". There is a deep experience here which
thoughts, I feel that I

we must

extricate from the abundant and contradictory images
which as we shall see, swarm around it in the Stundenbuch. What
we can most certainly affirm is that there is nothing in this

HOMO VIATOR

22O
'

evocation of a God in process of becoming which can be compared with the ideas familiar to the readers of the later Renan.
We are not here in line with the thought of Hegel; perhaps the
fact that the God of Rilke is not the God of the multitude, but
of individuals who are all creative in their way, would be enough
to prove it. The only thing which I think we should add is that,
as we shall see more clearly later on, this creation need not take
shape in a work of art. A great love is a creation as well as a poem
or a statue; a great love is creative participation in what, in

order to simplify, I shall
divine

call,

in scarcely Rilkian language, the

life.

It seems to me important, at the point we have reached,
before embarking on the Stundenbuch^ to quote a part at least of
the admirable passage from the diary (December igth, 1900),
which refers to Gerhardt Hauptmann's Michael Kramer. This

drama, the Silesian writer's masterpiece and, to my way of
thinking, one of the masterpieces of the modern theatre, had
made a deep impression on Rilke. I will very briefly remind you
of the subject. A painter, Michael Kramer, who has the highest
and most exacting sense of his art, but to whom it has not as yet
been given to realise his ideal fully, had at first transferred the
centre of his ambitions to his son, Arnold,
gifted.

But Arnold

is

who

is

exceptionally
physically tainted, being a hunchback,

irresistibly attracted

by less reputable pursuits: drink, gambling,
sexual indulgences. He arouses aversion and sarcasm everywhere;
he falls in love with a barmaid who spurns him; after a frightful
scene, which his pride makes it impossible for him to survive, he
commits suicide. The last act is a tite-a-t$te between the father and
the dead son. .
The corpse has been brought into Michael's
studio; he has been watching beside it all night. "And now the
day breaks when the great sorrow, which has been seated voice.

,

him, takes him in its hands and we see how he is
transformed by those hands of sorrow. His words are not words
but the features of an austere countenance which light up and
lessly beside

and nobility. The old man does not speak, he
and
we hear, as it were, the imperceptible murgreat,
muring of growth. He finds he is, as it were, infinitely confirmed.
Death has raised the treasure he could not lift and placed it
where it belongs. On Arnold's face ugliness was only a reflection.
attain completion

becomes

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL
Death has torn away

221

masks, opened the shutters and revealed
that he has not been mistaken:
his son was indeed there; he is there. It was not an
empty casket
which in former days he carried to the temple when he presented
the new-born child to Eternity. They were inestimable treasures
which he bore in his trembling arms, and life has not touched
them, life has not opened the casket it has spent nothing out
everything.

all

And Michael knows

it has not discovered them. For life is blind and
makes no demands. But death has opened everything out, like
someone rich and powerful who knows where his gold lies, even
when it is most hidden and deeply buried. 'Death, the most
merciful form of life.' The infinite justice which raises and pro-

of these riches,

has recognised him whom life never understood; the unfortunate being, hounded by everyone, has been received by
equitable death as a prince is received. Death is above life, as
love is above life, and it is still greater than love, since love left
the hunted child without help. And so it is revealed to the father
that this death the shameful death of the only and beloved
son is not a simple 'decease', as all those might think who view
it from outside with a heart dulled by custom. He feels that it is
something great which has fallen to his lot, an experience which
dilates his life, a sorrow which changes all the proportions of what
he feels. So strong is the sense of being, of truth and of reality
which takes possession of him at this moment of death that it is
as though God had affirmed his existence before Michael's very
eyes. For there, on the pillow, the face of his child lies in respose,
like an open book where the confirmation of reality can be read
word for word; this he no longer desires for himself but it is something he has to know in advance, for the sake of him who is one
day to come in order to apprehend it. What is time? Who would
lose patience in the presence of Infinitude? What does it matter
if certain mute presences to whom treason is unknown transmit
the sacred deposit after an interval of one, or even several,
centuries, and if no one sees it or guesses it is there. Now for an
instant, on this face of the dead, what should be is exhibited. And
that exists. All is well, that exists. And we should go on our way
resolutely with calm dignity, we the forerunners of him who is to
come and who will not come in vain, of him he who will dig
tects

up and

discover the treasure.

Amen."

HOMO VIATOR

222

have made a point of giving some

sort of a translation of this
in
it we find united in a rare
because
magnificent passage
harmonic fullness a sense of God and of death; we see clearly
here how in Rilke the ideas of being and becoming are closely
interwoven. The revelation which comes to Michael Kramer

I

really bears on being; it is something of eternity which is freed
for him at the sight of the face made peaceful and transfigured
by death; but at the same time it is an annunciation, it is an

anticipated testimony to
one day be revealed.

what

will

come

to pass

one day, what

will

And now we come to the Stundenbuch. It was from 1899 to 1901
that Rilke composed the first two books: the Book of the Monastic
Life and the Book of Pilgrimage. The third, the Book of Poverty
and Death, was composed in 1903 after the Book of Images, and
he had made the discovery of Paris, that is to say, of the great
modern city and of the nameless trial which it involves not only
for an artist but a man.
after

God of the Stundenbuch? To avoid certain miswe
must
always bear in mind what Rilke himself
understandings
said later on: "God is a direction of the heart." This sentence is
found in a letter of a much later date written to Use BlumenthalWhat then is

the

Weiss from Muzot, December 28th, I92I. 1
"Faith! There is no such thing, I had almost said. There is
only Love. This forcing of the heart to regard this and that as
true, which is ordinarily called Faith, has no sense* First you

must find God somewhere, experience him as infinitely, prodigithen whether it be fear or astonishously, stupendously present,
ment or breathlessness, whether it be, in the end, Love with
which you comprehend him, it hardly matters at all, but faith,
this compulsion towards God, there is no place for it once you
have begun your discovery of God, a discovery in which there
is no more stopping, no matter in what place you have
begun.
And you, as a Jewess, with so much immediate knowledge of
God, with such ancient Fear of God in your blood, ought not to
have to worry about 'faith at all. ... I have an indescribable
trust in those peoples who have come up against God NOT
3

through faith, but
nationhood, in their

who
own

1 Selected
Letters, translated

experienced

God through

tribal sources (Volkstwri).

by R.

their

own

Like the Jews,

F. C. Hall (Macmillan), pp. 335-7.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

223

the Arabs and to a certain extent the Orthodox Russians
then, in a different way, the peoples of the East and
of ancient Mexico. For them God is Origin and hence also
Future. For the others he is a derivative, something they
struggle away from or struggle towards as though he were a
stranger or had become estranged, and so they are in perpetual need of the Mediator, the truth, someone who translates

and

their blood, the

idiom of their blood, into the language of God-

head."
It

would be

as well to notice here

tain the thought of Rilke

is

on

how ambiguous and uncerand how badly the

this point,

idea he has formed of faith corresponds with what a truly lived
is. It is to be wondered if he is not
going entirely by
what he remembers of a devitalised religious instruction through
which he had been unable to make any contact with true
faith really

Christianity.

"Religion is something infinitely simple, simple-souled. It is
not knowledge, not the content of feeling (for every kind of
content is admitted at the outset when a man enters into collusion
with life), it is not duty and not renunciation, it is not a limitaa
tion: but within the perfect amplitudes of the universe it is
direction of the heart. Just as a man can go and wander off to
left or right, and bang himself and fall and get up again,
and do wrong here and suffer wrong there, and here be maltreated and there harbour evil in himself and maltreat and
misunderstand; so all this passes over into the great religions and
preserves and enriches in them the God that is their centre. And
Man, who lives at the outermost periphery of such a circle

the

belongs to this mighty Centre, even though he has only once,
perhaps, at dying, turned his face towards it. When the Arab
turns at certain hours towards the East and casts himself down,
that is religion. It is hardly 'faith'. It has no opposite. It is a
natural animation within a being through whom the Wind of
God blows three times a day, as a consequence of which we are

at least

supple."

1

I am going to quote some fairly
long passages from the Stundebuch, though I cannot disguise from
myself the imperfections of my attempted translation.

Now, with your permission

1 Selected
Letters,

pp. 336-7.

HOMO VIATOR

224

Thy mouth, of which I am the
and Thy hands are of ebony.
Thou

breath,

is all

dark

art so great that I cease to exist

as soon as I

even approach Thee.

Thou

my

art so dark;
has no meaning at

Thy will moves
and each day

is

little

Thy

light

boundary.

a wave
drowned therein

like

.

.

Thou, darkness whence I issue,
I love Thee more than the flame
which limits the world
shining
for

a

circle

which no being knows it.
But darkness holds everything to itself,
forms and flames, and animals and me,
outside

as

it

takes possession

of men and powers.
And it is possible that a mighty force
is moving in my neighbourhood,
I believe in nights.

I believe in everything that has never been said.
wish to set free
most pious feelings.

my

I

That which none has yet dared to wish
I shall one day not be able to help wishing.
If that is presumption, God forgive me.
.

am too

.

.

alone in the world, and yet not alone enough
each hour.
I am too puny in the world, and yet not small enough
to be in Thy presence like a thing,
dark and gifted with wisdom.
.
I

to consecrate

,

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

Thou
I

can rock Thee

and
are

225

art the forest of contradictions.

yet

Thy

fulfilled.

.

.

a child,
which lie

like

curses,

terrible over the nations,

.

I know; Thou art the Mysterious One
round whom time stopped hesitant.

How

beautiful

Thou wert

as I created

In a tense hour,
with an arrogant gesture of

my

hand.

Thee
.

.

.

Thou, God my neighbour, when sometimes
during a long night I disturb Thee with hard knocking,
because I rarely hear Thy breath
art alone in the hall.
And shouldst Thou need something no one
to place refreshment in Thy groping hand.
It is

and know Thou

I listen always. Give
I
quite close.

some

is

there

slight sign.

am

Nothing but a thin partition divides us.
This is but chance; for it could be that at
a call from Thy lips or from mine
it would be rent
without any sound or noise.
It

is

formed of pictures of Thee.

And Thy pictures stand, before Thee like names,
And when the light in me
by which my depths know Thee blazes up
in glitter about the periphery,
which quickly flag,
are left homeless and are parted from Thee.

it

wastes

and

itself

my perceptions,

We see how difficult,
the

way

of a notion of

even impossible, it is to gain anything in
God from such poems; on the contrary,

HOMO VIATOR

226

Rilke purposely destroys the images which he has just called

and

substitutes others

Rilke himself said, "is

an

up

which seem to be their opposite. "God",
55
a direction given to love. A direction, not

object.

And

here

The

influence of Russia

is

the Book of Pilgrimage.
is

clearly discernible in

it.

Here we find him singing of the Son of Man, which is partly
explained by the fact that he was going to be a father; but this
son of man
I

is

not Jesus here.

was a house after a fire
which only murderers sometimes

in

sleep

before their gnawing punishments
drive them further into the country;
I was like a town beside the sea

where a plague raged,
which hung heavy like a corpse
upon the hands of the children.
I was a stranger as anyone might be;
and all I knew about him
was that once he hurt my mother

while she was bearing me
and that her heart, her constricteid heart,
beat very painfully against my embryo.
.

I

am

effete like

.

.

an old man

who no

longer understands his big son
and knows little of the new things
upon which the will of his seed is set.
I tremble at times for thy deep happiness

which

travels in so

many

strange vessels;

wish sometimes to have thee back inside me,
back in the dark which nourished thee.
When I am too much absorbed in time,
I fear sometimes that thou art no more.
Then I read about thee. The evangelist
I

everywhere proclaims thy

eternity.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

227

am

the father; yet the son is more,
the father was, and there grows in him
the being that his father did not become;
he is the future and the return of the past,
he is the womb, he is the sea.

I

is all

.

.

.

Does one love a father? Does one not leave him,
as thou leftest me, with hardness on thy countenance,
tearing oneself away from his empty, powerless hands?
Does one not put his faded words
into old books which one seldom reads?
Does one not flow like water from a water-shed
from his heart towards pleasure and pain?
Does not father mean to us the past,
years dead and gone, which we think of as strange,
out-dated manners, dead fashions,
withered hands and faded hair?
Though in his own time he was a hero,
he is the leaf which falls as we grow.
.

That

is what father
to call thee father?

means

to us.

And

.

I

.

...

am

I

That would mean parting myself from thee a thousand

Thou

art

my son.

I shall recognise thee

as one recognises one's only beloved
he has become a man, an old man.

Put out
stop

up

son,

even

when

my eyes; I can see thee;
my ears; I can hear thee;

and without feet I can go to thee,
and without a mouth I can still call upon thee.
Tear off my arms, and I shall yet seize thee
with my heart as with a hand;
stop my heart, my brain will go on beating;
and if thou settest fire to my brain
I shall

still

bear thee in

my blood.

.

.

.

times.

HOMO VIATOR

228

Thou

art the heir.

Sons are

heirs,

for fathers die;
sons stand erect

Thou

and

flourish.

art the heir.

And

thou inheritest the green
of past years' gardens and the calm blue
of crumbled skies;
the dew of thousands of days,

the many summers which declare the sun,
and innumerable springs -with their sparkle and
like the letters of a young wife.
.

Thou

shalst inherit

.

grief,

.

Venice and Kazan and Rome,

Florence shall be thine, the cathedral of Pisa.
The Troitska Lavra and the Monastery,
which below the gardens of Kiev
forms a dark, tortuous labyrinth;
Moscow with its bells as memories;
music also shall be thine; violins, horns and tongues;
and each song sung deep enough
shall sparkle on thee like a jewel.

For thee only do poets shut themselves in
and gather rich and intoxicating images
and emerge and ripen by their metaphors
and remain so solitary all their lives.
.

.

.

And

painters paint their pictures only
to enable thee to recover in imperishable form
that Nature which thou didst create ephemeral.

Those who create are like thee.
They wish for eternity. They say: Stone,
be eternal; which means: Be thine!

*

.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

And

who

those

love

come

229

together for thee;

they are the poets of a brief hour.
On an expressionless mouth they kiss

a

smile, as if to

make

it

more

beautiful.

pile mystery on mystery and die
as animals die, without understanding.

.

*

.

They

But perhaps they

will

.

,

.

have grandsons

whom their green existence will ripen;
through them shalst thou inherit the love
which they give each other blindly, and as
in

Thus the overflow of things

if asleep.

flows towards thee,

.

.

.

As I understand it everything is made clear by the sentence
have already referred to, which occurs in a letter of May i6th,
191 1 , to the Princess of Thurn und Taxis: "I cannot understand
religious natures, which receive and feel God as that which is
I

him productively (ohne sick
an ihm productiv zu versucheri)" (p. 131).
But here are some other themes, some other motifs, which
together with this last one make up an extraordinary symphony,
a symphony which as a whole could never be contained within
the limits of an intelligible formula.
given, without fitting themselves to

No one lives his life.
Men are chances, voices,
.

.

.

commonplaces,

fears,

fragments,
small happinesses,

many

disguised, dressed up, since childhood;
their mask which talks; their face is silent.

it is

I often think there

where

all

these

must be treasure-houses

many

lives lie

armour, sedan-chairs or cradles
which no one real ever occupied,
like

which are incapable of
standing upright unsupported, but flop

just like garments

against strong walls of vaulted stone.
I would walk abroad in the evening
out of my garden in which I am tired,

Whenever
I

know

that all paths lead

to the arsenal of things in

which there has been no

life.

.

.

.

HOMO VIATOR

230

And

yet, though everyone tries to escape from himself
from a prison which hates and confines him,

as

a great miracle in the world.
that all life is lived.

there

is

I feel

Who

then lives it? Those things which
stand upright in the evening as in a harp,
like
Is it

an unplayed melody?
the winds blowing upon the waters,

the branches signalling to each other,
the flowers weaving perfumes,

or the long, ageing avenues?
Is it the warm-blooded animals, moving hither and thither,
or those strangers, the flying birds?

Who

lives this life? Is it

Thou
is

art the old

ashes.

.

.

Thou who

man whose

livest

it,

God?

hair

.

Thou art the smith, the song of the
who has always stood at the anvil.

years,
.

.

.

There are rumours abroad that cast doubt on Thee,
and doubts which obliterate Thee.
The indolent and the dreamers
mistrust their

own

fervour

and want the mountains

to bleed;

otherwise they will not believe.
But Thou lowerest thy countenance.
Thou couldst cut open the arteries of the mountains
as the sign for a Last Judgment;

but thou carest nothing for
the heathen.

Thou dost not wish to fight with
Nor to seek the love of the light,
for

thou carest nothing for

Christians.

every sort of wile

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

Thou

carest nothing for

him who

231

questions.

With a

Thou
Here

gentle countenance
lookest upon those who bear burdens.

to sing of

God

is

to sing of humility

and law:

is humility; countenances
sunk in quiet understanding of Thee,
So do young poets walk in remote avenues at evening;
so do peasants stand around the dead body
of a child.

Thy meaning

.

He who
is

.

.

for the first

disturbed

by

time has Thee in his keeping
watch;

his neighbour, or his

he walks bent over Thy footprints,
as if laden and burdened with years.
Only later does he draw near to nature,
becomes aware of the winds and the far
hears

Thy whisper

in the

distances,

meadow,

worships Thee in song from the stars,
and can never again unlearn Thee,
for everything is but Thy mantle.

For him Thou art new and near and good
and marvellous as a journey
which he makes in silently moving ships
on a great river.

And

everything which follows recalls navigation on the Volga:

Sometimes the boat steers to places
which lie alone, apart from village or town,
waiting for something on the waters,
waiting for him who has no home. *
For him small carriages are waiting
(each drawn by three horses)
which plunge breathless into the evening
along a road which loses itself.
.

*

HOMO VIATOR

232

The

last

house in

this village is

as lonely as the last

house in the world.

The

road, which the little village does not bring to an end,
goes slowly on into the night.
The little village is only an uneasy stage, full of foreboding,

between two great expanses.

.

.

.

man

gets up from his evening meal
and walks and walks and walks
because of a church standing somewhere in the east.

Sometimes a

and walks

out,

And his children bless him as though he were
And he who dies in his house
lives in furniture

still

lives in

and

his children

it,

dead.

and crockery,

go out into the world

towards the church which he forgot.

The theme

of a pilgrimage

is

now

to take

on increasing

importance:

Oh

God, I should like to be a crowd of pilgrims,
be able to approach Thee in a long procession,
and to be a great piece of Thee,

to

Thou garden with
If I

who

walk alone,
notices

Finally, the

it?

living walks.
solitary as I am,
sees
approaching

Who

me

theme of non-possession

Thou must

not

fear,

is

oh God. They

Thee?

introduced:

call

mine

All things which are patient.
They are like the wind which strokes the branches

and

says:

They

say:

My tree.

.

.

.

My life, my wife,

my dog, my

child,

that everything

and yet they well know
wife, dog and child

life,

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

233

are alien creatures, against which they blindly
their outstretched hands.'
this
is only known to the great ones
True,
who aspire to have eyes. For the others
do not want to hear that their poor wandering
has no connection with anything,

knock

that, repulsed by their own possessions,
they are denied by that which is theirs,
and that they no more possess their wives than they possess
a flower,
which lives a life of its own alien to all men.

and

Oh God, do not lose Thy balance.
Even he who loves Thee, and recognises Thy countenance
in the dark, when it flickers like a light
in Thy breath, does not possess Thee.

Even when someone seizes Thee in the night
making Thee enter into his prayer,

Thou are
who later

the guest
goes on his way.

Must we really accept the interpretation Giinther offers us,
according to which God is nothing but the symbol of the poet's
soul? In that case the text as a whole would only take on its
full meaning for a reader who knows how to discern a continuous
reference to the creative artist beneath all the diversity of the
symbols. The Son, or the Heir, would only be the work of art
in process of growth, never finished, always present. The tender
affection which is poured out upon him would be that which the
creator dedicates to his work. Again when writing about Book
III, the Book of Poverty and Death, Giinther says that if God
is poverty at its height, it is still in so far as he is the symbol of
the creative artist.

Du

aber bist der

Der

Bettler mil verborgenem Gesicht,
bist der Armut grosse Rose,

Du

tiefste Mittellose,

Die JEwige Metamorphose
Des Goldes in das Sonnenlicht.

HOMO VIATOR

234

(But thou art the most profoundly needy,
the beggar with concealed face.
Thou art the great rose of poverty,
the eternal transformation

of gold into sunlight.)

To tell the truth, it seems to me,
interpretation can neither

as I said before, that Giinther's

be unquestioningly adopted, nor yet

categorically rejected. I repeat once more that it is of the essence
of Rilke's vision, or again of the power of vibration at the heart

of his work, not to isolate the artist from creation in general.
Perhaps in a certain sense the poet for Rilke is the very lifecentre of creation, but this amounts to saying symmetrically that
the rest of creation participates in its own order and according
to its particular rhythm in the cosmic order which is the poet's.
The Hymn to Death and to Poverty which is the peak of Book
III seems to me to lose the best part of its pathos and meaning
if it is robbed of its universally human character.

There men

live, their lives

are wretched

They go about degraded by

care.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Their clothes sag on them
and their beautiful hands soon grow

and hard.

old.

.

.

.

And behind misery, there is death, but it is an anonymous,
impersonal death, it is not our death the one to which each of
us has a right and which should ripen with his life:

O

Lord, give each one his own particular death,
the death stemming from his own life
in which he had love and awareness and distress.

For we are but the peel and the leaf.
The great death which each man bears
is

within himself
the fruit around which everything gravitates.
.

.

.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

235

For what makes death abhorrent and hard to bear
that

is

it is

not our death.

.

.

.

What we

give birth to is
an abortion of our death,
a twisted and anxious embryo.
.

.

.

With the marks on
the fear of

all

his

.

,

.

puckered brow of

that he did not suffer.

.

.

.

invocation that God will send the predestined man
a night of universal blossoming will rediscover his
childhood:

There

who

is

in

the

unknown and

the wonderful

and the

endless, dark cycle of rich legend
belonging to his prescient first years.
.

Let him await his hour
Lord. Give us

and he

.

In the land of those who laugh, he

.

will give birth to death, the

the austere motherhood of man
gives birth to death,

him who

.

.

.

.

.

.

will

be an object of ridicule,

for

He
Is

will be called a dreamer, for he who watches
always a *dreamer in the land of carousal.

Establish

him

in thy grace.

and make me the
messiahship

a singer with two

.

.

.

.

.

minstrel,

the

baptist

of this

new

.

voices;

One to prepare the distant things,
the other to be the countenance, and beatitude,
the angel of my solitude. ...

We have

the

to the poor:

hymn

to true poverty;

may God

restore poverty

HOMO VIATOR

236

are not poor. They are only the not-rich,
are without will and without a world;
marked with the sign of the last agonies,
and everywhere leafless and deformed.
The dust of the towns presses upon them.

They

who

.

.

.

Yet they are purer than pure stones,
and like the blind, animal which has scarcely begun,
and full of simplicity and infinitely Thine;
they wish for nothing, and need only one thing,
the right to be as poor as they really are.
For poverty is a great inner light.
.

Thou
that

.

.

too art poor: like spring rain
a blessing on the roofs of the town;

falls like

and like a wish nursed by prisoners
in a cell eternally deprived of the world.
And like the sick who change their position in bed
and are happy; like the flowers along the railway line
so grievously poor in the mad wind of journeys;
and as poor as the hand into which we weep
.

The poor man's house

is

in which the eternal

is

transformed into bread;

when evening comes

it softly

in a wide circle to
and re-enters into

like

an

altar-shrine

returns

itself

itself

The poor man's house

is

leaving

many

echoes.

like the earth;

the chip of a future crystal,

now light, now dark in its chance flight;
poor as the warm poverty of a stable.
Yet there are evenings when it is everything,
and all the stars emerge from it.

.

.

.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

And
Assisi,

so the

who

is

poem

237

by the evocation of St. Francis of
named; a St. Francis who might also

finishes

not, however,

be Orpheus:

When

he died, so light as to be nameless,
he was scattered; his seed flowed
in the brooks and sang in the trees
and gazed at him calmly from the flowers.
He lay and sang. And when the sisters came
they wept for their beloved spouse.

Oh! where has

the clear echo of him gone to?

the poor who wait not feel
from afar his presence, his rejoicing and his youth?
Why do they not see rising in the east
the great evening star of poverty?

Why do

This

hymn

cannot be separated from the confession which

is

given to us in the Notebook of Malte Laurid Brigge, although the
latter was only written at a rather later date, between 1904 and
1908. But, I repeat, Rilke had already had the terrible and
mortal experience of a great city and the Notebook originated

from

this

"The

experience and this revelation.

still and will perhaps
always remain a problematical book, against which Rilke himself on several occasions warned his friends." Everything in the
book is at the bottom paradoxical. The Notebook is not a novel,
it is not an autobiography, he expressly said so although he does
not even seem to have made Malte go through "a single development or express an opinion which he had not had himself".
(Kippenberg's, R. M. Rilke, p. 59). He wrote to Lou Andr6as
Salom6 on December 28th, 1911 (XII, p. 247). "No one but
you, dear Lou can distinguish between them" (Malte and him-

Notebook", Angelloz admits, "is

"and show whether and to what extent he looks like me.
Whether he, who is in part compounded of my own dangers,

self)

perishes in order to keep me, as it were, from perishing; or
I have only now, with these notes, really got into the

whether

current that will sweep

me and

dash

me

i Selected
Letters, p. 184.

to pieces." 1

We

have

HOMO VIATOR

238

here a very strange phenomenon, a deeply ambiguous relation
between the creator and his creation. He told M. Edmond

Jaloux that one day, to see clearly into himself, he imagined a
conversation between a young man and a girl at a watering
place. The young man began to speak about a Danish friend,
Malte Laurids Brigge, who died and left him his papers! This
figure became a centre of inner crystallisation. Malte thus was
for him both himself and someone else, in relation to whom
later on he would appear to himself, as a survivor without
resources or occupation. A paradoxical situation this, of a being
wearing mourning for himself; and I dare suggest the hypothesis
that if Rilke stressed the deep identity of life and death more
and more strongly, it was because after finishing Malte he had
felt as it were a death at the heart of life.
The fundamental word for whoever wants to penetrate the
extremely complex and polyphonic meaning of the Notebook is
the word "experience".
"No, no", we read in the Notebook (p. 220), "there is nothing
in the world which can be represented by the slightest thing. Everything is composed of such and such unique details which cannot

be thought of abstractly (abseheri). In imagining, we pass rapidly
over it and do not see that they are lacking. But realities are slow
and indescribably detached"
It

must be added that the limits of this experience have been
back far beyond what is usual. "Artistic vision should first

thrust

of all go beyond itself, to the point of seeing right into the Terrible
(das Schreckliche) and into what seems to us merely repulsive,
,

which exists and which counts in the same way as all the rest."
This word schrecklich, terrible, taskes on its full value here: the
war, of which Rilke felt the utter horror, only served to illustrate
on a gigantic scale a fundamental intuition which found expression from the first pages of the Notebook and which we can trace
back to the Cadet School and to his experience of the misery of
the life of the crowds in Paris. "Distress and disaster", he writes
from Munich on November 6th, 1914, "are perhaps no more
prevalent than before, only more tangible, more active, more
visible. For the misery in which mankind has lived
daily since
the beginning of time cannot really be increased by any contingency. But there

may still be an increase in our understanding

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

239

of the unspeakable misery of being human, and perhaps all this
is leading us towards it" 1 (XIII, p. 26).
But it is important to recognise that he has owned himself that
if we must be mindful of life's weight it does not mean in the

degree a denial or giving up of the struggle (XIV, p.
give life weight is to weigh things according to the carat
131).
measure of the heart, not of suspicion or chance. There must be
no denial; quite the reverse, there must be an infinite adherence

slightest

To

to that which exists (%ustimmunz zum Du-Sein) It is scarcely necessary to draw attention to the almost Nietzschean, or more
exactly Beethovian tone of such a sursum corda. But it is in
relation to this profession of faith that we can understand what
Rilke means when he says in one of his letters that the Notebook
.

should be read against the current (XII, p. 197). This is elucidated by the following passage which I am borrowing from a
letter addressed to L.H., November 8th, 1915: "What is expressed
in the Notebook of Malte Laurid Brigge is simply this; how is it
possible to live when the fundamentals of this life are so completely incomprehensible? When we are always inadequate in
love, wavering in our determination and impotent in the face of

death, how is it possible to exist (dazusein)?" Rilke declares that
he has been unable to express in this book the greatness of the
surprise which he feels at the discovery that although man has

had contact with

life for thousands of years he is still such a
between fright and an attitude of complete inward
evasion when he faces his great obligations. It fills him with a
sort of terror, but behind it something is hiding (I will translate
literally), "close, more than close, so intense that he cannot
decide in the name of feeling whether it is burning or icy". He
once said that the book appeared to him himself like a hollow
form, like a negative whose every depression and recess would be
sorrowful intuition, inconsolable suffering, but of which the
positive counterpart, like a figure poured into a mould, would
perhaps be happiness, assent a state of blessed assurance, "Who
knows, I wonder, whether we do not take the gods the wrong

novice, so torn

(Perhaps it is only by ourselves that we are separated
from their august and glorious countenance.) Who knows
whether we are not very near to seeing the expression that we
1 To Karl and Elizabeth von dcr
Heydt, Selected Letters, p. 249.

way about?

HOMO VIATOR

240

aspire to contemplate, only we are at the back? and is not the
only explanation this that our faces and the divine eyes are
under
turned in the same direction and only make one?

How

we come towards him from

the depths
of the space which is before him?" This passage, which may at
first seem confusing is, I believe, extraordinarily significant in
reality; it marks with extreme clearness why in Rilke's poetry
these conditions could

there can be no objective meeting between man and God; and
all the rest of this letter helps us to catch a glimpse of what is to
be understood by that. Ever since his remotest origin, man has
imagined gods in whom the forces of anger, threat and terror,

gathered into a composite whole, were concentrated. One might
say that this whole was alien to man, yet at the same time man
only became conscious of it and could only recognise it by virtue
of a certain mysterious kinship between the alien and himself.
Man was this element also, but it incarnated that part of his own
experience which was beyond his grasp and with which therefore
he could have no dealings. Rilke asks whether we could not
consider the history of God as an unapproached part of the
human soul, kept in reserve for the future, but not to be forced
down with impunity by man? In the same way with death, and
here I will translate as literally as possible: "Familiar, and yet
in its reality unfathomable for us, knowing us through and
through, and yet not truly recognised by us, mortifying and surpassing the meaning of life from its very origin death also we
have, as it were, rejected, in order to stop it from continually
interrupting us in the discovery of this meaning; death which is
probably so close to us that we cannot fix any interval between
it and the very heart of our life; it has become an outsider,
kept
at a distance, watching somewhere in the void, fixing its malevolent choice on this one or that and then pouncing down upon

him. . ." Thus God and death became the Other which our life
has to face, our life made human, it would seem, by this very
separation, and hence familiar, possible, practicable, ours in fact
in a restrictive sense. The consequence of this kind of exclusion
was that life began to turn more and more quickly in a circle
that was narrower and narrower, and, moreover, increasingly
artificial, for nature knows nothing of this separation, and when
a tree grows, death grows in it just as life does. Love recks not
.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

241

of our subdivisions either; it sweeps us trembling into the infinite
consciousness of the AIL Lovers do not really draw the elements
of their

life

from the separated world of here-below: "God is
them" and "death has no hold on them"; "for

truly present to

they are

full

of death in that they are

full

of life".

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL:

PART

II

IFYOUWILL

allow me, I am going to begin this second and
on Rilke by giving you part of a letter to Use Jahr of
February ssnd, 1923, in which Rilke discusses his inner evolution. This essentially important letter gives us in advance a
valuable commentary on the Duino Elegies and the Sonnets to
Orpheus with which this lecture is almost exclusively concerned:
"I began with things, which had been the veritable familiars of
my lonely childhood, and it was indeed something that I was
able without outside help, to get as far as animals. But then Russia
opened out for me and gave me the brotherliness and darkness
of God, in whom alone there is fellowship. That was how I named
him then, the God who has dawned upon me, and I lived long
in the antechamber of his name, on my knees.
Now, you
would hardly ever hear me name him, there is an indescribable
discretion between us, and where closeness and penetration once
were, new distances stretch out as in the atom which the new

last talk

.

science also conceives as a universe in

little.

.

.

The Tangible

slips

away, changes; instead of possession one learns the relativity of
things, and there arises a namelessness that must begin again

God if it is to become perfect and without deceit. Sensuous
experience retires behind an infinite longing for the perceptible
world; God, now become unutterable, is stripped of all attributes,
with

and

fall back into creation, into love and death
what was accomplished over and over again in

these

this is

,

.

.

perhaps

the Stunden-

bucfi, this ascent of God from the breathing heart, covering the
whole heavens and descending as rain. But any open avowal of
this would be too much. Less and less can the Christian experience
be considered; the primordial Godhead outweighs it infinitely.
The notion of being sinful and then needing redemption as a
pre-condition of God is more and more repugnant to a heart
that has understood the earth. It is not sinfulness and error in
things earthly but, on the contrary, the pure nature of the earth

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

243

that will lead to the most essential consciousness; sin is certainly
the most wonderful roundabout way to God, but why should
those go a-travelling who have never left him? The strong,
inward, vibrating bridge of the Mediator has meaning only
when the abyss between God and ourselves is admitted, but
even this abyss is full of the darkness of God, and if ever anyone
feels it, let him go down into it and howl there (this is more
necessary than crossing over it). Only for him to whom even the
abyss was a dwelling place will the paradise we have sent on
ahead of us be retrieved, and everything deeply and passionately
here, which the Church has pirated and pawned to a Beyond,
come back once more; then all angels will decide to sing the
1
praises of the earth."
I should like to go back a little now and to glance briefly at an
aspect of the creation of Rilke that we have not yet approached.
What I have specially in mind here is all that Rilke learned from
his prolonged intercourse with Rodin; teaching which appears
to have played a large part in making it possible for him to write
the Neue Gedichle.
In quite a general sense it would be possible to say that Rodin
taught him the meaning of work with all its implications. "How
should we live? Your answer to me was: by working" (Letter to
Rodin, p. 1 6). Patience, humility in the presence of the object,
in the presence of truth, but also the joy which is born in the
presence of the object, of the two-fold act by which the artist
opens up to it and by which it opens up to the artist. There, I
think, we have what Rilke gained through contact with Rodin.
Mme. Kippenberg in her book on Rilke goes so far as to say
that Rodin is the only man who ever had a deep influence on

him and who gave a new direction to his creative effort. It is
because Rodin was more than a master for him; he was an
example, a lighthouse in the Baudelairean sense, or as he said
himself, "a marvel, visible from afar". "What he contemplates
exists for him to the exclusion of all the rest, it is the world where
everything is happening; when he carves out a hand, this hand
is alone in space, there is nothing else. In six days God only
made a hand, he spread the seas around it, above it he stretched
the sky; he rested upon

it

when

all

1 Selected
Letters,

was accomplished" (quoted

pp. 373-4.

HOMO VIATOR

244

by Lou Andreas Salome,
Rilke was initiated into

p. 36). This

was the way by which
what I should be

the experience of

inclined to call creative absorption.
Rilke's love, his reverence for things, is already clearly visible
in the Book of Images and even in the earlier poems. "I want to
love things as persons." It is a great pity that we have not two
words for thing as they have in German: Ding and Sache. Of
which we are concerned with here, Sache being
course, it is

Ding

the humanised, and thus in a certain sense despiritualised thing.
In a fragment written in April, 1900, he speaks of the lizards that
look at us through the cracks in the little stone walls separating
the vineyards; "A thousand lizards saw me, and do you know
I think? All walls are like that, and not only walls; all
"
The eye of the lizard, as Giinther says, becomes a
things

what

and more
symbol of things real living cosmic things. And more
the poet becomes conscious of his mission which consists of
a thing, that meant having been
saying these things. "To recreate
everywhere, having kept nothing back, left nothing out, betrayed
of profiles, all the
nothing; it meant knowing the hundreds
a thing there, as
then
was
sections.
different
all
the
Only
aspects,
an island cut off on all sides from the continent of not-knowing."
These words which refer to the art of Rodin are what he tried
to justify or illustrate in his poet's world, the world of his own.
And little by little the thing, becoming animated from within

when viewed with
becomes

the ardent attention the poet dedicates to it,
is to say, a living structure; we could even

GestaU> that

by starting from the thing thus recreated and by
in a sense his model, that he was to bring Alcestis or
Eurydice to life on his Neue Gedichte. It is as well to insist upon this
in order to show to what a point Rilke saw the spiritual, not as
say that

making

it is

it

cut off but as being involved in things themselves by the ever
which the poet makes with them, for they only give
themselves to him in response to an ardent precision practically
unknown to the romantics.
It has been very rightly pointed out that there is a close concloser pact

nection between the Neue Gedichte and the Notebook; but Malte,
as Giinther says so well, is only an antenna, nothing but an
antenna, a trebling antenna, feeling its way amid the experience
which surges upon it from all sides; in the Neue Gedichte this

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

245

transformed into verse, becomes thing and from
experience
very fact loses its insidious and destructive character.
Once these works were finished a period of waiting and suspense began. Rilke seems at this time to have become acutely
conscious of his isolation; "when all is said and done", he said,
is

this

"I have no window opening upon man". During this period he
travelled widely, he translated certain works which specially
appealed to him; Le Centaure, by Maurice de Guerin, a sermon
sometimes attributed to Bossuet concerning the love of
Magdalene, the Letters of a Portuguese Nun, Le Retour de V Enfant
Prodigue, by Andre Gide. But above all, he composed the first
two of the Duino Eliges in 1912 at the house of the Princess von
Thurn und Taxis. The other eight were not written until nearly
ten years later when he was at Muzot in the Valais, and they
were produced in an extraordinary fever of inspiration. The

period of the war came in between.
As Angelloz says very well, during these years he did not find
that he was above the fray but that he was on both sides at once.
He was not to take an active part in the conflict and suffered
deeply from this inaction, and yet it seems to me that strictly
speaking he could not be said to have regretted not taking any
part in a massacre which he abhorred. "During these years",
he wrote later, "my only occupation was not understanding."
"This period", we read in a letter of May i8th, 1917, "with all
the restrictions it necessitates and the terrible destruction it
causes, weighs upon me like lead; I can no longer make any
movement outwardly or even inwardly, or at least I cannot bury
myself more deeply within myself. And if even at the roots of my
is still a little life, I am too obtuse and opaque to
or recognise myself there." Elsewhere he speaks of the
monstrous and incomprehensible state of the world which is
frustrating nearly all the tenderness of his nature. He has come
to envy "those who died earlier, so that they did not have to
experience it from here; for somewhere in space there must be

being there
feel

places from which this enormity appears only as Nature, as one
of the rhythmic convulsions of a universe which is sure of its
"
existence even if we perish. And, of course, we perish into it ... l
(Letters Written During the War, p. 55). Is it possible not to be
1

To Helene voa

Nostitz, Selected Letters, pp. 247-8.

HOMO VIATOR

246

moved when we read the following lines to-day "What can be
when everything that you touch is unutterable, unrecognisable, when nothing belongs to you any more; no feeling, no
hope, where terrible reserves of pain, despair, sacrifice and
\

written

reach their fulfilment all this in a general way, as
mass went on existing still, but no longer the indithe
though
vidual; nothing is measured in terms of the individual heart any
more, and yet it was the unit of heaven and earth, of all spaces
and all depths." " Whatever comes", he wrote to the Princess
von Thurn und Taxis on August 2nd, 1915, "the worst is that
a certain innocence of life in which we grew up will never
distress

." "Even if no one likes to admit
again be there for any of us.
out loud", he says again, "consolations are needed, the great
.

.

it

inexhaustible consolations whose possibility I have often felt in
the depths of my heart, and have been almost afraid to contain
them, boundless as they are, in so restricted a vessel. Certain it

that the divinest comfort is lodged in what is itself human, for
what could we do with the consolations of a God? But our eyes
would have to be a shade more seeing, our ears more receptive,
the flavour of fruit would have to penetrate us more perfectly,
we should have to be more acutely sensitive to smell, and to be
more present in spirit when we touch and are touched and less

is

forgetful,

before

we

could extract from our most immediate

experience those consolations which are more compelling, more
overmastering, and more true than all the suffering that can
ever shake us." And I will end these extracts with this simple
question which has never sounded with greater pathos than it
does to-day: "Would a God ever have enough consolation to
heal the enormous wound which the whole of Europe has now

become?"
I may say in passing that I believe if we adopted the general
view of Gtinther, we should almost inevitably be led unjustifiably
to underestimate these wartime letters in which for my own part
I see one of the finest evidences of humanity in existence. Here

who is trying to understand and is tormenting
man; or rather we are on one of the summits
here, where man and artist are no longer in any way separable
summits to which men of the greatest genius we know, such as
Beethoven or Tolstoy, have risen. This observation and the
it is

not the

himself;

artist

it is

the

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

247

which preceded it seem to me indispensable if we are to
penetrate the meaning of the Elegies. Unlike Mallarme's Herodiade
for instance or the Jeune Parque, these poems really contain a
message for all men; and it is upon this message, which as a
extracts

matter of fact can only be deciphered very imperfectly, that
we now have to concentrate our attention.

The

figure of the

Angel dominates the whole of the Duino
almost say that at this time the artist sees God
in the form of the Angel, We must neither think of the angels of
Scripture nor those of Milton or Klopstock. "The angels of the
Elegies", says Romano Guardini, "are not the messengers of the
living God, they are new gods. It might be stated quite generally
that the intuition of the Angel must have meant liberation for
95
Rilke." "Angels , Giinther says very truly, "are focuses, radiating
concentrations of being, essences of beauty, power and duration
which are at home in the two-fold kingdoms of life and death."
For my part, I should say we must not ask if Rilke believes in
angels. Indeed, if you remember, in his letter to Use BlumenthalWeiss which I quoted earlier, Rilke definitely takes up his
position against faith. Perhaps we should be right to say that his
is the realm of Schauen, not that of Glauben\ it is actually to be
wondered if this is not always true of the pure poet. Romano
Guardini has brought out admirably the central importance of
the image with Rilke; and the Angel is precisely the image which
Elegies,

we might

some sort liberates inexhaustible creative forces. Guardini's
commentary is of such importance here that I think it should be

in

quoted as

it

stands: "Perhaps", he says,

"one might describe the

particular impression made upon us by the culture which existed
before the irruption of technics if we said that in those days
images were charged with power. This power grows as we go

further back into past ages; it grows and it is surrounded with
mystery up to the point when it breaks forth into magic or

mysticism. Those who are attracted by ancient culture often only
dwell upon antiquities and the aesthetic element, but there are
also times when they give proof of genuine feeling, they feel that

ancient culture is guided by something which has essential value,
but which is destined to dissolve, something canonical which not

HOMO VIATOR

2^8

the emotions, for life,
only has value for thought or taste, but for
this point of view
From
of
intimate
most
the
for
things.
ordering
it is a real disaster when an ancient city dies or when deeply
rooted customs fall into disuse. Whenever this happens something
of value is lost to us, something of which very little if anything is
contained in what is new: this something is precisely, images.
What then are these images? Perhaps they are related to what

meant by the term "ideas"
Perhaps images are for the
heart (GemiitK) what ideas are for knowledge: presuppositions and
at the same time the final content of vital achievement; the conditions of a good life and at the same time the visible effect of a
well-ordered one; the means "of mastering life's irreducible
enemies, chaos, devastation and madness and the fruit of this
mastery. Ideas and images are perhaps one and the same reality
viewed from different realms of existence, that above or that
Plato

within.

They

are, as

it

were, radiated by the Logos

who

creates

from above by the
regulates
the deepening of life."
clarity of consciousness, from within by
This masterly passage is, I think, the best introduction to a study
of the texts which we are to consider. I am, however, in some
difficulty about how to present these to you. There can be no
question of reading the poems in translation, and I greatly dislike
cutting off, as I am obliged to do, a few selected passages, always
seriously weakened and even misrepresented by translation.
Again, I can scarcely dream of giving you a summary of them,
for poetry cannot be summarised. I must therefore content myself
with a rough-and-ready compromise consisting of developing a
few central themes which I will illustrate to the best of my power.
I shall, of course, make ample use of Angelloz's admirable

and

all finite

things through them;

commentaries.

The Elegies centre on the mystery of man's condition and
destiny in the cosmos. I am using these words, which may seem
relatively vague, on purpose. It is, in fact, evident that there is no
question here of a soluble problem which the poet is setting out to

We

should be guilty of a misinterpretation verging on
we tried to draw the elements of a metaphysical or
treatise
from the Elegies and the Sonnets. There is
theological
here
in
any way connected with didactic or gnomic
nothing
tackle.

absurdity

if

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

249

unless one takes

this last adjective in a wide
poetry
enough sense
to include the Vers Doris of Gerard de Nerval, which I should place
among the rare specimens of poetry akin to that of Rilke to be
found in French literature. There is nothing in the way of
demonstration or even exposition here; it is all questioning,
invocation and also evocation, it is the inward debate of a soul
which in a sense acknowledges the charge of the universe and, as
it were, the mission of making it grow or even of
repeopling it.
And this is why all that I shall be able to say about the Elegies
and the Sonnets is bound to be no more than an essentially

unfaithful exegesis.

man? What can he accomplish? If a task is specially
him, how does it come about that sometimes he evades
it? How could he, or how will he, be able to achieve it? Such are
perhaps the principal questions which beset the mind of the poet.
It is immediately made known to us that man can become conscious of his deficiencies when he sees himself contrasted with the
radiantly terrible figure of the Angel; and perhaps we should be

What

is

allotted to

more or

less right in saying that the idea or image of the Angel
here acts as a revealer. I will first give a few passages from the
Second Elegy, together with a translation which differs in points
of detail from the Angelloz version:

Fruhe GegMckte,

ihr Verwohnten der Schopfung,

Hshenztige, morgenrdtliche Grate
Pollen der bluhenden Gottheit,
alter Erschaffung
Gelenke des Lichtes, Gange, Treppen, Trone,

Raume

aus Wesen, Schilde aus Wonne, Tumulte,

sturmisch entguckten Gefuhls und ptitzlich> einzeln,
Spiegel: die die enstr&mte eigene SchQnheit

wiederschopfen zuruck in das eigene Antlitz*
wir, wo wirjuhlen, verfliichtigen; ach wir

Denn

atmen uns aus und dahin; von Holzglut zu Holzglut
geben wir schwfichern Geruch. Da sagt uns wohl einer:
du gehst mir ins Blut, dieses Dimmer, der FrUhling
jai,
Was hilfts> er kann uns nicht halten,
ftillt sich mit dir. .
.: .

wir schwinden in ihm und urn
o

wer h&t

sie

ihn*

Und, jene,

die schtin sind,

zuruck? Unaufhtirlich steht Anschein

aufin ihrem Gesicht und geht fort.

HOMO VIATOR

250

Early successes. Creation's pampered darlings,
ranges, summits, dawn-red ridges
of all beginning, pollen of blossoming godhead,
hinges of light, corridors, stairways, thrones,
spaces of being, shields of felicity, tumults

of eternity, rapturous feeling and suddenly separate
mirrors,

drawing up their own

outstreamed beauty into their foils again.
For we, when we feel evaporate; Oh, we
breathe ourselves out and away; from ember to ember,
yielding a fainter scent. True, someone may tell us;

"You've got in my blood, the room, the spring's
what's the use? He cannot retain us.
growing full of you"
We vanish within and around him. And those who have
.

.

.

beauty,

Oh, who shall hold them back? Incessant appearance
comes and goes in their faces." 1

And in a movement which seems already to herald in the celebrated verses of the Gimetilre Marin which Rilke was to translate
later, he wonders where the fleeting essence of ourselves goes to
and

if there is

into

itself.

any principle powerful enough to incorporate it
the truth, love seems to be self-sufficient and
self-contained. Does it not give us an example and a pledge of a
survival to be granted to the best part of ourselves? No: love itself
waxes and wanes, love has a history.

To

tell

Erstaunte euch nicht auf attischen Stelen die Vorsicht
war nicht Liebe undAbschied

menschlicher Geste?
so leicht
Stqffe

auf die Schultern

gemacht als

gelegt,

ah war es

aus anderm

bei uns?

On Attic stelae, did not the circumspection
of human gesture amaze you? Were not love and farewell
so lightly laid upon shoulders, they seemed to be made
of other stuff than with us? 2
1 Translation
by J. B. Leishman
2 Translation as
above, p. 37.

and Stephen Spender (Hogarth Press, 1948)

,

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

251

Elsewhere, in the Third Elegy, he shows that the beloved
maiden awakens a world of movement in her lover wherein all

our past

is

fermenting:

Ein andres, wehe,
Fluss-Gott
des Bluts.
jenen verborgenen schuldigen
Eines

...

ist,

die Geliebte

zu

singen.

Madchen,

dies: dass

wir liebten in uns, nicht Eines,
ein kunftiges, sondern

das zahllos Brauende; nicht ein einzelnes Kind,
sondern die Voter> die wie Trimmer Gebirgs
uns im Grunde beruhn; sondern das trockene Flussbett,
Mutter ; sondern die ganze

einstiger

lautlose Landschaft unter

reinen Verhdngnis

:

dem wolkigen oder
kam dir, Madchen,

dies

zuvor.

One

thing to sing the beloved, another alas!
that hidden guilty river-God of the blood,
oh, maid,
this: that we've loved, within us, not one, still to come, but all
the innumerable fermentation: not just a single child,
.

.

.

but the

mountain-ruins
but the dry river-bed

fathers, resting like

within our depths;
of former mothers;

yes, and the whole of that
soundless landscape under the cloudy or
this got the start of you, maid. 1
cloudless destiny;

It must then be recognised that if the Angel is always selfcontained, man never ceases to run to waste, nothing holds or can
hold him back. And even childhood is without salvation, for it is
perverted by the adult; the child seems to be condemned to turn
its back on life and to consider only forms and never the open
its being. Here, indeed, we have the
paradox that in the eyes of Rilke men are, in a certain sense, at an
ontological disadvantage compared with the animals. It is, as
Guardini saw very truly, that animals are apprehended here as

world where the animal has

pure existence,

still

rejoicing in a liberty or

1 Translation as

above, pp. 41 45
9

.

more

exactly

an

HOMO VIATOR

252

An

animal lives directly, future
pure from hope or apprehension. In passing it may be noticed here that Rilke seems very much
as though he accepts on his own account the strict opposition
established quite wrongly by Spinoza between hope and fear.
Animals have their place in what Rilke calls "the open"; and we
integrity

which

is

does not exist for

of paradise.
therefore

it,

it is

must try to define the meaning of this enigmatical word which
masks one of the central intuitions of the Elegies:
Mit

alien

Augen

sieht die Kreatur

das Offene. Nur unsre Augen sind
wie umgekeht und ganz um sie gestellt

Als Fallen, rings

um

ihrenfreien Ausgang:

With

all its eyes the creature world beholds
the open. But our eyes, as though reversed
encircle it on every side, like traps
set round its unobstructed path to freedom. 1

(Beginning of the Eighth Elegy.)

Here again
try to clarify

I will refer to

what

Romano

Guardini's commentary to

be understood by

this perplexing expression "the open".
The open is that which surrounds created things not however
in the manner of empty space or a fluid in which they are bathed;
it is the fact that the creature is finite, that it has a limit, or, more
is

to

exactly, it is the alternative aspect, complementary to the aspect
of its limitation.
are not, then, concerned with the relative
limit of a being, that is to say with all that is adjacent, but with its

We

absolute limit, with the Other, purely and simply, with the Other
in its utter otherness, that is to say with God, with the creative

power of God. This
view

if

is

elucidated from the psychological point of
acts which are shaped by the

one thinks that there are

object: the fact of considering a thing, of experiencing it, of
it, etc.; but there are also others which strictly speak-

fashioning

ing have no object, consisting either of penetrating within being
1 Translation as
above, p. 77.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL
and exploring

253

depths or of radiating beyond and above as
over
it. In both these cases the limit is
to
soar
though
passed, but
not in the sense of crossing over to what is beside us; it is passed
its

absolutely. This absolutely (Uberhaupf) is in the one case the
mystery of inwardness, in the other that of transcendence (Enthoberheif), and of absolute space (absolute Weite). In either case man
leaves himself behind, in so far as he is a particular being who
observes, judges, covets, etc. And in so doing he fulfils his being as

a pure creature. The being swells, begins to flower and thus
becomes itself. The open is the direction in which this comes about.
In our last paper we saw that, for Rilke, religion or God himself is
a direction of the heart. We see here that the open can be conceived of in terms of height and breadth yet also in the perspective
of inward hiddenness. But, adds Guardini, what the Christian
thinks of as the space where God reigns according to the testimony
of his Revelation, is for Rilke merely the other side of the finite or
the state to which man has access when he is able to step beyond
the confines of the self. Much light is thrown on this by the Elegies
themselves, but above all by the celebrated letter to Witold von

Hulewicz, which constitutes their indispensable commentary:
"Affirmation of life as well as of death prove themselves one in the
Elegies. To admit the one without the other would, it is here
realised, with exultance, be a limitation which would ultimately
exclude everything infinite. Death is the side of life that is turned
away from, and unillumined by us; we must try to achieve the
greatest possible consciousness of our being, which is at home in
both these immeasurable realms and is nourished inexhaustibly
by both. The true pattern of life extends through both domains,
the blood with the greatest circuit runs through both; there is
neither a This-side nor a That-side, but a single great unity in
which the beings who transcend us, the angels, have their
habitation" 1 (Letter from Muzot, pp. 371-2).
I do not by any means claim that this passage and all those that
support it are perfectly clear. Nevertheless, I think we can say
this: if animals have the advantage over men in that they live in

the open,
because as
is

it is

because the fear of death cannot touch them,

we have seen the future does not exist for them. Now it

precisely this fear, with all the secondary emotions
1 Translated
Letters, pp. 392-3.

it

arouses,

254

HOMO VIATOR

that sets up a barrier of unreality between the two Kingdoms,
thus destroying the great unity at the heart of which the angels
have their habitation. But perhaps, to avoid the danger of
ambiguity, it would be as well to add that animals are on this side

of the barrier which is erected and that the problem for man,
guided by the poet, is on the contrary to establish himself on the
other side; that is to say to break down the barrier without by so
doing falling back into the preconsciousness of animals. To be
quite frank, I must own that I am not absolutely sure that a certain ambiguity does not exist here in Rilke's own thought. He
says somewhere that when we are near to death we no longer see

and our own gaze is fixed ahead like that of the animals. Might
one not almost wonder whether such a statement did not purposely give rise to an uncertainty in our minds? Does it refer to a
senile and strictly retrogressive state or a prescience of heaven
which, like a grace, can sometimes illumine the evening of a
consecrated existence? I have used this term "prescience of
heaven", and I cannot help wondering whether in the end the
open is not for Rilke a sort of de-Christianised and infinitely
precarious substitute for the heaven he aspires to, and will not
it,

accept.

What

I think has a positive value is the idea which is ever
Rilke and founded on immediate and painful experiwith
present
of a mortifying subjection which the fact of existing
the
idea
ence,
opposite another being and of having this being as it were over the
way (gegeniiber) demands of consciousness; hence the tragic destiny

which weighs upon mutual love, or rather the need for love to be
returned. Here we have the key to one of Rilke's paradoxes: the

may say in passing that I should
not be surprised if the separation of Rilke and Clara Westhoff,
following so few years after their marriage, is not precisely to be
explained by this strange need for aeration: a need comparable
to the nostalgia which is seen in certain untameable animals whose
gentleness long misleads those who try to domesticate them. Did
Rilke realise that this was a personal idiosyncrasy of his own and
iii fact somewhat
exceptional? We should be tempted to doubt it
when we find him considering our incapacity for detaching and
releasing ourselves which as we know means to go towards the
open as fatally bound up with our nature.
exaltation of one-sided love. I

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL
Wer hat uns

255

also umgedreht, dass wir,

was wir auch

tun, in jener

Haltung sind

von einem, welcher fortgeht? Wie er auf

dem

letzten

Hugel, der ihm ganz sein Tal

nock einmal zeigt, sick wendet, anhalt^ weilt
so leben wir und nehmen immer Abschied.

Who's turned us round like this, so that we always,
do what we may, retain the attitude
of someone who's departing? Just as he,
on the last hill that shows him all his valley
for the last time, will turn and stop and linger,

we

live

our

lives, for

ever taking leave.

(Eighth Elegy.)

1

We must not, however, be misled about the meaning of this
statement and the blame or regret it implies. There is no question
in Rilke's mind of advocating a sort of liberation through oblivion
quite the reverse. What he deplores is that the fascination which
the other, or the past, or perhaps the things among which we live,
have for us by making us cling to them and immobilise them,
immobilises us ourselves and paralyses our inward growth. This
seems to be the point of view from which Rilke's condemnation of
the contemporary world and its inner degradation must be understood. Here we have to refer both to the Seventh and Ninth
Elegies, and to the unfailing letter to Witold von Hulewicz, in
order to recapture the intuition which pervades these writings
with an almost superhuman beauty.
Here the question becomes more definite and urgent. When we
could have passed through this brief period of leave existence
like a plant, a bay tree, why do we have to live it as men? It is
certainly not to secure a hazardous well-being which can only
count on inevitable and speedy destruction, but because we have
to reply to a particular call meant for us. I will read a passage
from the Ninth Elegy where this is expressed with unusual

pathos:
1

Translation as above, p. 88.

HOMO VIATOR

256
Aber weil Hiersein

viel ist,

und well uns scheinbar

Alles das Hiesige braucht, dieses Schwindende, das
Seltsam uns angeht, Uns, die Schwindendsten. Einmal
jades, nur einmal. Einmal und nicktmehr.
einmal.
wieder. Aber dieses

Und

wir auch

Me

einmal gewesen %u

sein, scheint nicht widerrufbar.

But because being here amounts to so much, because all
This Here and Now so fleeting seems to require us and
strangely

Us

the most fleeting of all. Just once,
Everything, only for once. Once and no more. And we, too,
once. And never again. But this
having been once, though only once,
1
having been once on earth can it ever be cancelled?

concerns us.

"Einmal
gong.

.

.

.

nur einmal" These

words ring out like a funeral
of Edgar Allan Poe.
us from the world in which we

We are reminded of the "never more"

And so an appeal is thrown out to
are involved; how are we to respond to this
been entrusted to us; how are we to fulfil it?

appeal?

A

task has

We have an essence to safeguard or to make effective, we try to
it within our own hands, to fix it by our satiated gaze, to
our hearts with it; this is still to say too little; is not the essence
really something we have to become? But to whom are we to give
what we have thus made our own? Can we take this nameless
treasure with us into the other world? It is neither the vision nor
the fact itself which lends itself to this mysterious transfer, but

contain

fill

perhaps only pain, the weight of experience and of love and all
this is inexpressible. Are we perhaps in the world in order to utter
the primitive words which clothe earthly experience with a body;
house, bridge, water-spring, orchard, window and again pillar or
tower, but also to translate that intimate inward being of which
things in themselves are unconscious? Has not the silent earth

found a way of self-expression, by constraining lovers to ravish
and transmute all things into their own impressions? The praise
which should rise from the depths of ourselves towards the angelic
1 Translation as
above, p. 83.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

257

that which exalts simple inexpressible things, things
presences,
which have taken form, from generation to generation and live in
our life, within reach of our hands and in the field of our vision.
All these things, for which life is only a perpetual decline, understand that we celebrate them; perishable in themselves, they grant
the power to save them to us, to us who are even more perishable
than they are. They want us to take them into our invisible heart,
whatever our being and our ultimate destiny may be.
is

Erde, ist es nicht dies, was du willst; unsichtbar
in uns erstehn?
Ist es dein Traum nicht,

Erde! unsichlbar!

einmal unsichtbar zu sein?

Was, wenn Verwandlung
Erde, du Hebe, ich will.

nicht, ist dein drangender
glaub, es bedurfte

nicht deiner Frulinge mehr, mich dir
ach, ein einziger ist schon dem Blute

Namenlos bin

ich

zu dir

Immer warst du im
ist

Auftrag?

Oh

zu gewinnen,
zu vieL

einer,

entschlossen, von weit her.

Recht,
der vertrauliche Tod.

und dein

heiliger Einfall

Woraus? Weder Kindheit nock gukunft
werden weniger. . . Uberzahliges Dasein
entspringt mir im Herzen.

Siehe, ich lebe.

.

Earth, is it not just this that you want: to arise
invisibly in us? Is not your dream
to be one day invisible? Earth! Invisible!

What is your

urgent command, if not transformation?
Earth, you darling, I will! Oh, believe me, you need
no more of your spring-times to win me over; a single one,
ah one, is already more than my blood can endure.

Beyond

all

names

am yours,

I

and have been

for ages.

You were

always right, and your holiest inspiration
is Death, that friendly Death.
Look, I am living. On what? Neither childhood nor future
are growing less . supernumerous existence
1
up in my heart.
.

.

wells

And

"We

Rilke himself comments thus: in his letter to Hulewicz:
are the bees of the invisible. Nous butinons tperdument le miel
1 Translation as
above,

I

Ninth Elegy, pp. 87-8.

HOMO VIATOR

258
du

visible,

And

pour Vaccumuler dans

la

grande ruche de d'or de

I' invisible. *

and accelerated by the increasingly
of
so much of the visible which we
to-day
rapid disappearance
cannot replace. Even for our grandfathers a house, a fountain, a
familiar tower, their very clothes, their coat, was more, infinitely
more intimate; almost every object a vessel in which they found
something human, or added their morsel of humanity. Now, from
America, empty indifferent things crowd over to us, counterfeit
things, the veriest dummies. A house in the American sense, an
American apple, or one of the vines of that country has nothing in
common with the house, the fruit, the grape into which we have
entered the hope and meditation of our forefathers. The lived and
living things, the things that share our thought, these are on the
decline and can no more be replaced. We are perhaps the last to
have known such things. The responsibility rests with us not only
to keep remembrance of them (that would be but a trifle and
this activity is sustained

unreliable), but also their human or laric value

e

laric* in the sense
The Angel of the Elegies is that Being in
of household gods).
whom the transmutation of the visible into the invisible, which we
seek to achieve, is consummated. For the Angel of the Elegies all
the towers and palaces of this Past are existent because they have
long been invisible, and the still existing towers and bridges of our
.

world

.

(

.

although still materially enduring for us.
of the Elegies is that Being who stands for the recognition in the Invisible of a higher degree of reality." 2
There would certainly be grounds for grafting into this commentary another more hypothetical one of which I can only
sketch the outlines here. Once more it might seem as though
Rilke was only thinking of the artist particularly the poet, but
perhaps also the painter whose mission consists of raising the
visible on to a higher plane of reality. We must not forget what
the discovery of Cezanne meant for him. But here again the
artist's vocation is taken to be but the vocation of man himself
when he has reached his highest degree of enlightenment. This
appears all the more clearly as we become more aware of the
insufficiency of a purely utilitarian theory of expression. Expresalready invisible,

The Angel

1 We
madly gather the honey of the visible to store
of the invisible.
2 Selected Letters
9 pp. 394-5.

it

in the great golden hive

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

259

not a simple method of intercourse in view of some ends we
have before us, it is of intrinsic value, one can even claim that it is
sion

is

of all ends, where it attains complete realisation.
no one would dispute that there is a degraded and
exclusively pragmatic use made of language; but such usage is
precisely the sign of a human deterioration which it is the business
of poets and philosophers to denounce; and it is to be wondered if

itself the greatest

To be

sure,

degradation of language is not connected with a loss of frankand purity of eye, a perversion of the being which comes
about as soon as man establishes his universe as an enclosed world
instead of turning towards the open. (I am not sure that the
expression le large would not be preferable at least in French, to
that of "the open" which seems very difficult to acclimatise to our
this

ness

language.) It appears that when the philosopher Heidegger came
to know the Elegies he declared that Rilke had expressed the same
ideas in poetry as he had in his great work Sein und eit. Perhaps
this assertion, at first rather surprising,

becomes clearer up

to a

we

consider that the enclosed world tends to
become that of chattering (Gerede), that of the everyday, or I
should prefer to say the bad kind of everyday. But then was
Heidegger aware that there could be a good or a bad everyday as
certain point if

there can be a good or a bad infinity? It would, however, still be
debatable whether there is not an essential opposition between
the Weltanschauung of the poet and that of the philosopher. As

book on Heidegger's philgum Tode} comes very near
of Nietzsche. At bottom it is a question of funda-

de Waelhens says very truly in

his fine

osophy, liberty in face of death (Freiheit
to the amor fati

mental readiness in relation to death. "To understand that we
are dying", says de Waelhens, "is the true attitude of genuine

means that at every moment of
should be projected on the screen of
death." Genuine awareness of ourselves is, indissolubly, linked
with the anguish of death. "Das Sein turn Tode ist wesenhaft Angst."
This formula seems to me as un-Rilkean as possible, although in
other places we trace striking analogies between the texts where
existence in face of death. This

reality, all

our

possibilities

death seems to be conceived by both alike as a personal comBut we could say that for Heidegger man always has his
death before him because he bears it within him. (I am tempted

pletion.

to recall

some

verses

by Val^ry

here, particularly in the Ebauche

HOMO VIATOR

26O

The

du Serpent.}

idea of a Doppelbereich, of a double kingdom,
this duality

an angelic super-consciousness which transcends
reabsorbs
letter

and
and

into a higher unity, seems to me contrary to both this
to the spirit of Heidegger. It may be objected that we

it

and

purely mythical and that it
a myth into technical
the
out
for
suitable
opposition I have in mind
bringing
language
at the moment. I agree. The myth here is untranscribable
when all is said and done. Nevertheless, it collects and concentrates the quintessence of a particular experience; this experience is what matters here, and I scarcely think that it can
be reduced to that which is reflected in the philosophy of
Heidegger. Either the Elegies and the Sonnets to Orpheus must
after all be considered as mere exercises, in Valery's sense of
the word, or as digressions and this interpretation is all the
more difficult to accept since the correspondence is there to
explain the meaning of these poems in detail, and to accentuate
their parenetic significance or else we must recognise that
for Rilke there is a Beyond not indeed to be confused with the
Christian beyond but none the less, for us unenlightened beings,
are here concerned with

would be unreasonable

what

is

to seek to transcribe

another aspect of the world to which we belong; that is to say
a kingdom of the dead where that metamorphosis takes place
which we have not so much to endure as to undertake; for it is
precisely of man's essence to have to consent to it and perhaps
to prepare

it:

Wolle die Wandlilng
drin sick ein

Ding

seifur dieflamme begeistert

dir entzieht, das mit Verwandlungen

prunkL

Choose to be changed. With the flame be enraptured,
where from within you a thing changefully splendid
escapes.

1

So we read in the Sonnets to Orpheus. All this Twelfth Sonnet of
the second series should be read and studied.

Was

sich ins Bleiben verschliesst schon ists das Erstarrte;
es sich sicker im Schutz des unscheinbaren Gran's?

wdhnt

Warte, ein Hartestes warnt aus der Feme das Harte
Wehe ; abwesender Hammer holt aus!
1 Sonnets to
Orpheus, translation

by J. B. Irishman (Hogarth

Press), p.

no*

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL
That which would
Does it feel safe in

261

what it is renounces existence;
shelter of lustreless grey?

stay
its

Wait, a hardest is warning the hard from a distance,
heaved is a hammer from far away. 1

To be

sure, such strains awaken within us memories of the
great themes of Nietzsche: consent, clinging to earth, desire for
and yet it is to be wondered if the analogy
metamorphosis
is not superficial after all. The sense of the words is
quite different.
I have specially in mind the desire for metamorphosis: There is
nothing here which could be compared with the Uebergang of
Nietzsche, that is to say with the development of the superman;
the myth of the superman is of a kind that cannot become
acclimatised in the universe of Rilke. And here it will be necessary
.

.

,

we be obliged to go a
reading of the text. Without perhaps
going as far as Angelloz, I should be quite ready to subscribe in
a general way to his theory concerning the value of suffering,
to

be

little

as explicit as possible, even should

beyond the

literal

very distinctly set forth in his large work on Rilke. "Rilke", he
says, "seems to us to have adopted the theosophical doctrine on

man is made to raise himself by means

of his suffering
degree, earthly existence only represents a stage in
the evolution which leads him onwards from a mysterious origin
to a total vanishing away.
By death we regain contact with
this point;

to

a higher

.

.

.

pure suffering in view of an after life" (loc. cit. y p. 339). And he
adds in a note that Rilke never spoke of reincarnation, to be sure,
but that if he had not accepted it, it would be useless trying to
understand him. In another place he recalls that very characteristic passage in Rilke's correspondence where, speaking about
the man who commits suicide, that is to say who deliberately
anticipates his own destiny, Rilke says that perhaps by such
action he

incur terrible obligations for his future existence.
also here insist deliberately on the part which the
occult played for Rilke, particularly the spiritualistic experiments

We

may

must

made at Duino when he was the guest of Princess Marie von
Thurn und Taxis. I am thinking above all of the stance where
something describing itself as "the Unknown" was manifested
through the medium of a planchette and asked to converse with
1 Translation as
above, p.

no.

HOMO VIATOR

262
the poet.

"A

long conversation followed; although the questions

were carefully concealed, the answers were nearly always intelligible: Rilke was interested and intrigued to a very high degree."
It was the answers of "the Unknown" which seem to have
decided him to go out to Spain and particularly to Toledo,
which, as a matter of fact had been attracting him for a long
time. The town was described by "the Unknown" with such precision that a few months later he was able to find his way about
in it from the first day as though he had already lived there.
But to know what he finally thought about phenomena of this
description, it seems that we should refer to a letter written some
twelve years later to Nora Purtscher-Wydenbruck: "... I am
convinced that these phenomena, if we accept them without
seeking refuge there, and if we remain willing to incorporate
them in the totality of our being which, indeed, is full of no
I am, I say, convinced
less miraculous secrets in all its workings

phenomena do not testify to a false curiosity on our
part but actually concern us to an indescribable degree, and,
were we to exclude them, would always be capable of making
themselves felt at one point or another. Why should they not,
like everything else unknown or absolutely unknowable, be an
object of our endeavour, our wonder, our awe and veneration?
"For a while I was inclined, as you yourself seem to be now,
to take the existence of 'external influences for granted in these
experiments; I no longer do to the same degree. However, extensive the external world may be, with all its sideral distances it
hardly bears comparison with the dimensions, the depth-dimensions>
of our inner being, which has no need even of the vastness of the
universe to be itself all but illimitable. When, therefore, the dead
or the unborn need a resting place, what refuge could be more
agreeable or more appropriate to them than this imaginary
that these

9

space? It seems to be more and more as though our ordinary
consciousness dwelt on the summit of a pyramid whose base
broadens out in us and beneath us so much that the more deeply
we see ourselves able to penetrate into it the more boundlessly

do we seem implicated in those factors of our earthly, and in the
widest sense, worldly being which are independent of space and
time. Since my earliest youth I have entertained the idea (and
have

also,

when

I

was adequate

to

it,

lived accordingly), that if

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL
a cross-section were

made

lower

down through

this

263

pyramid of

consciousness, Being, in its simplest form, would become 'eventual* in us, the inviolable presence and simultaneity of all that
e
we, on the upper normaP apex of consciousness, are only
-

permitted to experience as flux (Ablauf}"*
He adds that if he accepts these spiritualistic occurrences
obediently, reverently and sincerely, a curious instinct impels
him to call up counter-balances to them in his own consciousness
as soon as they pass over and into him: "To my mind nothing
would be more alien than a world in which these powers and
intrusive elements had the upper hand. And the strange thing
is: the more I act in this way
(after each nocturnal seance trying,
for instance, to see that the spectacle of the starry silent night is
equally marvellous and true), the more I believe myself in
harmony with the essence of those occurrences. They want, it
seems to me, rather to be suffered than acknowledged, rather not
repudiated than revoked; rather consented to and loved than
I am, fortunately, completely
questioned and made use o
unserviceable as a medium, but I do not doubt for one moment
that, in my own way, I keep myself open to the influence of those
often homeless powers, and that I never cease to enjoy or sustain
their companionship. How many words, how many decisions or
hesitations may not be ascribed to their working! For the rest,
it belongs to the original tendencies of my nature to accept the
Mysterious as such, not as something to be exposed, but as the
its very depths and is so everywhere,
sugar in every part. ... I -am (and
this might in the end be the only place in me from which a slow
wisdom could sprout) completely without curiosity concerning
What do we know of the
life, my own future and the gods. . .

Mystery that
just as a

is

mysterious to

lump of sugar

is

.

seasons of eternity and whether it will be harvest-time yet!" 2
I have no hesitation in saying that this letter, of which I have
only been able to quote the principal passages here, is one of the
exist for an understanding of the
perhaps have noticed that the last
lines are very reminiscent of the beautiful letter on Michael
Kramer which I read you the other day. Supreme patience,

most important documents that
attitude of Rilke.

You may

1 Selected
Letters, translation as above, p. 385.
2 Selected
Letters, pp. 387-8.

HOMO VIATOR

264

supreme humility in view of the Eternal
I should be strongly tempted to speak

overwhelming here.
That is
perhaps the reason for disagreeing in spite of everything with
Angelloz's sentence about successive lives; re-incarnation can
only be a matter of belief, a hypothesis. But there is no longer
any question of adopting a belief or a hypothesis when such a
height of patience has been reached, for this involves a perfect
accord with Being. What Rilke teaches us better than anyone,
and what I think such writers as Nietzsche or Kierkegaard have
generally either never known or in the end forgotten, is that
there exists a receptivity which is really creation itself under
another name. The most genuinely receptive being is at the same
time the most essentially creative. Our own poet, Val6ry, has at
least had a presentiment of this:
is

also of hope.

Patience, patience,
Patience dans Vazur!

Chaque atome de silence
Est la chance d^un fruit mur!
Viendra Vheureuse surprise;

Une colombe

la brise,

Uebrantement

Unefemme

Feront tornber

0& Von

le

plus doux,

qui s'appuie,
cette

sejette

pluie

a genoux*

But just because he was gifted to a supreme degree with this
creative receptivity and because he was, moreover, capable of
thinking about it and measuring its advantages, Rilke is one of
the only geniuses of the first order to have adopted a spiritually
sane attitude with regard to metaphysical realities: that is to
1

Patience, patience,

Patience in the blue sky!
Each atom of silence
is the chance of a ripe fruit!

The glad

surprise will come;

A dove, a stirring of the breeze,
The gentlest shaking,
A woman's touch
will bring this rain

When we shall fall on

our knees.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

265

say as far removed from systematic negation which is insane, as
from crazy infatuation which is fatal and absurd.
But to my mind nothing shows more clearly the profound
differences which separate Rilke from existentialist philosophers
such as Heidegger or Jaspers who, whether explicitly or not,
deny the reality ofthejenseits or the Beyond, than this disponibilite
(availability) in relation to the occult. It may be objected that
the declaration of faithfulness to the earth found, for instance, in
the Ninth Elegy seems to suggest as its counterpart a similar
denial of the other world. But we must be carefuly not to be
misled by formulae here. On the one hand, the earth is essentially
opposed in this case to the Christian heaven, and on the other
it is evident that nowhere in Rilke can the earth be conceived
of in a positivist way. We must remember that there is one side
of the world which is not turned towards us, that there is accordingly, as the Romantics guessed, a nocturnal world which is
precisely where the metamorphosis is carried out. It seems to me
to go without saying that this metamorphosis cannot be simply
transformation of the organic elements of our being as conceived
it is

materialistic pantheism. The Tenth Elegy, which describes
an almost Egyptian manner the stages of the journey which
each one of us will have to accomplish, would become incomprehensible if we considered it from this point of view. To be
sure, the Tenth Elegy can be interpreted as a funeral song,

by

in

celebrating "the majesty of human suffering"; but that does not
take into account the fact that there seems to be for Rilke a
trajectory of the dead as there is a trajectory of the stars which is
finally lost to view in the distance. Moreover, at the end of this
song of sombre grandeur there shines as a light or promise the
humble image of the catkin hanging from the bare hazel tree
which seems- to bring tidings of the hidden kingdom of the earth
the Vorfruhling that Rilke loved so dearly.
in spring
I can only say a few words before ending about the Sonnets
to Orpheus which Rilke dedicated to the memory of Vera
Ouckama Knoop, the young dancer whose life was cut short by
.

.

.

an untimely death. In the sonnets Paul Val&y's influence is
apparent at any rate from the technical point of view and in
this connection it is to be wondered exactly how much Rilfce
owed to the author of the Cimetiire Marin> whose poems we know

HOMO VIATOR

266

that he translated* Actually, I cannot dream of replying to this
question which falls outside the subject I set out to consider here.
What must be brought out here in connection with the Sonnets
that in them Orpheus tends to take the place which was that of
the Angel in the Elegies and of God in the earlier poems. From
this we can say not only that Rilke is ever moving further and
further away from the strictly Christian world, but that he
is

finally succeeds in freeing his

were

still

encumbering

it.

thought from the ambiguities which
"In the person of Orpheus", says

Giinther, "the poet confidently celebrates the transformer-God.
after the flowering, the fruit, as it

Beyond our divided evidence,

liberates the seeds of resurrection. Orpheus is 'alive
everywhere. He is in each rose that flowers as in everything which
fades into the Invisible,

shrivels,

1st er ein Hiesiger? Nein, aus beiden
Reichen erwuchs seine werte Natur.
(I, 6).

(Does he belong here? No, his spreading
nature from either domain has sprung.) 1

From Christianity to Orphism: perhaps that is how we could
best define this strange journey which from so many points of
view is like a return through the ages towards mysterious ancestors and towards our origins
so that we might sometimes be
tempted to speak of Rilke as a prophet of the past. And no doubt
there is a sense in which his evolution can be considered disappointing and may appear as a sort of retrogression. I believe,
however, that to think of it in this way is to misunderstand the
deep lesson which is to be gathered from his work and personality.
In reality the hackneyed and confused term of pantheism gives

no indication of the true character of the Sonnets
by which I mean not only their originality and

to

Orpheus,

their solidly

nutritive quality. The interconnected consciousness of death and
resurrection which pervades them like a breath of air from

another world is the principle of a pious reverence for souls and
things of which the secret has to be rediscovered to-day. Shall I
* Translation,

by J. G. Leishman, p.

45.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

267

say what I really think? I believe this to be true of most Christians,
even those who have been genuinely touched by grace. For to
tell the truth we are all to some extent infected by the baleful
influence of the world in which we are, as it were, immersed.
Perhaps it should also be added that the Christian of to-day is
very often tempted to over-accentuate the misery and degradation of the world left to itself, the better to emphasise the redemptive value of the supernatural forces which work upon it both
from above and from the depths of the soul. But in this way the
spirit is in danger of being led to judge things in a way which
is perhaps sacrilegious in its principle and which, moreover,
contributes effectually to a progressive unhallowing of the
of all indeed, that the word "world" stands for.

human

world

Sieh 9 die Maschine;

wie

sie sick

und uns

walgt und racht

enstellt

und schwdchL
(I, 18.)

(See the machines:
Source of our weakness

now, and in vengeful rage
1
ruining our heritage.)

The machine
to

It claims

spirit

understand

to

mechanism which
resolution.

.

.

Aber nock

we have acquired as long as it dares
and not an obedient servant, ... It is life.

threatens all

be a guiding

orders,

this

life

creates,

better than

and

anybody

this

destroys with equal

.

ist

uns das Dasein verzaubert; an hundert

Stellen ist es noch Ursprung. Ein Spielen von reinen
JtCrqften, die keiner beriihrt, der nicht kniet und bewundert.

Worte gehen noch zart am Unsaglichen aus. . . .
die Musik, immer neu, aus den bebendsten Sttinen,
baut im unbrauchbaren Raum ihr vergottlichtes Haus.

Und

(II, 10.)
1 Translation as
above, p. 106,

HOMO VIATOR

268

Even

to-day, though, existence

is

magical, pouring

a playing of purest
freshly from hundreds of well-springs,
forces, which none can surprise without humbly adoring.
Words still melt into something beyond their embrace.
.

.

.

Music, too, keeps building anew with the insecurest
stones her celestial house in unusable space. 1

Nowhere could we find better expressed than in these two
Tenth Sonnet of the Second Part, the reverential love
for the created which men of my generation have seen drying up
before their eyes in so many souls doomed to aridity in the, most
verses of the

The mechanised world thus
world of pure consciousness, that which burns
without giving any light and gives light without any warmth.
Thus we see a gulf widening between the masses who are literally
denatured by a more and more inhuman way of life, and a very

^miserable desert of self-adulation.

becomes

also the

small company of super-naturalised elect whose life's foundations
are more and more fragile and unsteady and who for this reason
are in danger of falling a prey in the end to the most fatal mental
disorders, and the worst inner collapse. I should say that in so far
as we can conceive of the inconceivable, the balsamic influence
of Rilke's Orphism upon those who seek to become penetrated
with it, consists in restoring around and within us (more especially
in the interior cosmic space of the Weltinnenraum where this distinction does not exist) an atmosphere which will develop our
faculty for hoping against hope without which it must be admitted
that the Christian message itself, in the last analysis, would be in

danger of losing

its

meaning and

its

quality.

Da gehn wir umher wie Beschwerer,
uns selbst, vom Gewichte entzuckt;
was sind wir den Dingenfiir zehrende Lehrer,
well ihnen ewige Kindheit gluckt.

Alles will schweben.
legen auf alles

Ndhme

sie einer ins innige Schlafen und schliefe
:O wie kdme er leicht,
tiefmit den Dingen
anders gum anderen Tag, aus der gemeinsamen Tiefe*

(Sonnets, II, 14.)
1 Translation as
above, p. 106.

RILKE: A WITNESS TO THE SPIRITUAL

269

To all that would soar
we lay them on all we
what

our selves are the grand aggravation,
encounter, proud of their weight;
terrifying teachers we are for that part of creation

which loves its eternally childish state.
Could someone but take them right into

his

slumber and

sleep

deeply with things,

back

to

a

different

how

differently, lightly

day out of that

he'd wander

communal

sleep.

1

The Orphism of Rilke gives us one of its most pure secrets here;
not in things but in us. We must get free from it,
though shaking off a yoke too long endured, so that we can
attain to the reality of things which is candour and participate
with our very being in this imperishable innocence. Elsewhere, in
a sonnet where he recalls the strange fruits of consolation (II, 1 7),
he wonders whether we have not managed to disturb the peaceful
equanimity of the summer seasons by a false precocity and a
premature activity which soon dries up the fruit. .
To be sure, a very delicate work of transposition would be
necessary to convert all that is here only allusion, remembrance
or intuition into the conclusions of discursive thought. I am sure
that this work is not only possible, but should be undertaken by
anyone who wants to get out of the rut in which all Western
thought is in danger of sinking at the present time. And I feel
I cannot end better than with this invocation which closes the
Twenty-sixth Sonnet of the First Part:
the heaviness

is

as

.

.

du verlorener Gott! Du unendliche Spur!
Jiur weil dich reissens zuletzt die Feindschaft verteilte,
sind wir die Horenden jetgt und ein Mund der Natur.

O

you God that has vanished! You infinite track!
only because dismembering hatred dispersed you
are we hearers to-day and a mouth which else nature would
lack. 2

Although the Christian mind might be inclined to see in this
only the distorted refraction of a strictly sacred truth in a
1

J. B. Irishman's translation, p.

1

15.

a

ibid.,

p. 85.

270

HOMO VIATOR

mythological mirror, it seems to me that this image of a disintegrated God has the most moving significance for us, Frenchmen
and Europeans of 1944; the spectacle of a disjointed world where
it does not even seem to be given to most of us to discern all the
scattered currents of confidence which are ever issuing from the
very heart of real things, this spectacle invites us, indeed, to a
reintegration of the human and of the divine.
I should be sorry, however, to end this second and last lecture
on a note which, after all, was too easy. At the risk of surprising
some of you I feel obliged to close with an invocation which is
whispered rather than uttered an invocation which may find an
echo in the hearts of all of us, Christians and non-Christians alike.
Is not that the very best way of entering into communion with
the Angel of the Elegies or the Orpheus of the Sonnets? In the
presence of enemy forces whose devastating action is more widespread each day, on the eve of destruction which can reduce to
nothing the people and things we live for, let me invoke this
spirit of metamorphosis, which can draw forth the unchangeable
from our fleeting world. Let us place ourselves under its guidance
for a moment. Let us allow the hope to penetrate to our hearts
that this spirit may transmute us so intimately ourselves that we
shall be able to face the desolate prospect with a rejuvenated soul,
full of acceptance and in tune with the unfathomable.
Oh, spirit of metamorphosis!
When we try to obliterate the frontier of clouds which separates
us from the other world guide our unpractised movements! And,
when the given hour shall strike, arouse us, eager as the traveller
who straps on his rucksack while beyond the misty window-pane
the earliest rays of dawn are faintly visible!
PARIS.
January,

134281

