On the Vanity of Existence
Arthur Schopenhauer

This vanity finds expression in the whole way in which things exist; in the infinite nature of Time
and Space, as opposed to the finite nature of the individual in both; in the ever-passing present
moment as the only mode of actual existence; in the interdependence and relativity of all things;
in continual Becoming without ever Being; in constant wishing and never being satisfied; in
the long battle which forms the history of life, where every effort is checked by difficulties, and
stopped until they are overcome. Time is that in which all things pass away; it is merely the form
under which the will to live—the thing-in-itself and therefore imperishable—has revealed to
it that its efforts are in vain; it is that agent by which at every moment all things in our hands
become as nothing, and lose any real value they possess.
That which has been exists no more; it exists as little as that which has never been. But of
everything that exists you must say, in the next moment, that it has been. Hence something of
great importance now past is inferior to something of little importance now present, in that the
latter is a reality, and related to the former as something to nothing.
A man finds himself, to his great astonishment, suddenly existing, after thousands and
thousands of years of non-existence: he lives for a little while; and then, again, comes an equally
long period when he must exist no more. The heart rebels against this, and feels that it cannot
be true. The crudest intellect cannot speculate on such a subject without having a presentiment
that Time is something ideal in its nature. This ideality of Time and Space is the key to every
true system of metaphysics; because it provides for quite another order of things than is to be
met with in the domain of nature. This is why Kant is so great.
Of every event in our life we can say only for one moment that itis; for ever after, that it
was. Every evening we are poorer by a day. It might, perhaps, make us mad to see how rapidly
our short span of time ebbs away; if it were not that in the furthest depths of our being we are
secretly conscious of our share in the exhaustible spring of eternity, so that we can always hope
to find life in it again.
Consideration of the kind, touched on above, might, indeed, lead us to embrace the belief
that the greatest wisdom is to make the enjoyment of the present the supreme object of life;
because that is the only reality, all else being merely the play of thought. On the other hand, such
a course might just as well be called the greatest folly: for that which in the next moment exists
no more, and vanishes utterly, like a dream, can never be worth a serious effort.
The whole foundation on which our existence rests is the present—the ever-fleeting present.
It lies, then, in the very nature of our existence to take the form of constant motion, and to offer
no possibility of our ever attaining the rest for which we are always striving. We are like a man
running downhill, who cannot keep on his legs unless he runs on, and will inevitably fall if he
stops; or, again, like a pole balanced on the tip of one’s finger; or like a planet, which would fall
into its sun the moment it ceased to hurry forward on its way. Unrest is the mark of existence.
In a world where all is unstable, and nought can endure, but is swept onwards at once in
the hurrying whirlpool of change; where a man, if he is to keep erect at all, must always be
SophiaOmni						
www.sophiaomni.org

1

advancing and moving, like an acrobat on a rope—in such a world, happiness in inconceivable.
How can it dwell where, as Plato says, continual Becoming and never Being is the sole form of
existence? In the first place, a man never is happy, but spends his whole life in striving after
something which he thinks will make him so; he seldom attains his goal, and when he does, it is
only to be disappointed; he is mostly shipwrecked in the end, and comes into harbor with masts
and rigging gone. And then, it is all one whether he has been happy or miserable; for his life was
never anything more than a present moment always vanishing; and now it is over.
At the same time it is a wonderful thing that, in the world of human beings as in that of
animals in general, this manifold restless motion is produced and kept up by the agency of two
simple impulses—hunger and the sexual instinct; aided a little, perhaps, by the influence of
boredom, but by nothing else; and that, in the theatre of life, these suffice to form the primum
mobile of how complicated a machinery, setting in motion how strange and varied a scene!
On looking a little closer, we find that inorganic matter presents a constant conflict between
chemical forces, which eventually works dissolution; and on the other hand, that organic life is
impossible without continual change of matter, and cannot exist if it does not receive perpetual
help from without. This is the realm of finality; and its opposite would be an infinite existence,
exposed to no attack from without, and needing nothing to support it; [Greek: haei hosautos
dn], the realm of eternal peace; [Greek: oute giguomenon oute apollumenon], some timeless,
changeless state, one and undiversified; the negative knowledge of which forms the dominant
note of the Platonic philosophy. It is to some such state as this that the denial of the will to live
opens up the way.
The scenes of our life are like pictures done in rough mosaic. Looked at close, they produce
no effect. There is nothing beautiful to be found in them, unless you stand some distance off.
So, to gain anything we have longed for is only to discover how vain and empty it is; and even
though we are always living in expectation of better things, at the same time we often repent and
long to have the past back again. We look upon the present as something to be put up with while
it lasts, and serving only as the way towards our goal. Hence most people, if they glance back
when they come to the end of life, will find that all along they have been living ad interim: they
will be surprised to find that the very thing they disregarded and let slip by unenjoyed, was just
the life in the expectation of which they passed all their time. Of how many a man may it not be
said that hope made a fool of him until he danced into the arms of death!
Then again, how insatiable a creature is man! Every satisfaction he attains lays the seeds of
some new desire, so that there is no end to the wishes of each individual will. And why is this?
The real reason is simply that, taken in itself, Will is the lord of all worlds: everything belongs
to it, and therefore no one single thing can ever give it satisfaction, but only the whole, which is
endless. For all that, it must rouse our sympathy to think how very little the Will, this lord of the
world, really gets when it takes the form of an individual; usually only just enough to keep the
body together. This is why man is so very miserable.
Life presents itself chiefly as a task—the task, I mean, of subsisting at all, gagner sa vie. If
this is accomplished, life is a burden, and then there comes the second task of doing something
with that which has been won—of warding off boredom, which, like a bird of prey, hovers over
us, ready to fall wherever it sees a life secure from need. The first task is to win something; the
second, to banish the feeling that it has been won; otherwise it is a burden.
Human life must be some kind of mistake. The truth of this will be sufficiently obvious if we
only remember that man is a compound of needs and necessities hard to satisfy; and that even
when they are satisfied, all he obtains is a state of painlessness, where nothing remains to him
but abandonment to boredom. This is direct proof that existence has no real value in itself; for
what is boredom but the feeling of the emptiness of life? If life—the craving for which is the
SophiaOmni						
www.sophiaomni.org

2

very essence of our being—were possessed of any positive intrinsic value, there would be no
such thing as boredom at all: mere existence would satisfy us in itself, and we should want for
nothing. But as it is, we take no delight in existence except when we are struggling for something;
and then distance and difficulties to be overcome make our goal look as though it would satisfy
us—an illusion which vanishes when we reach it; or else when we are occupied with some purely
intellectual interest—when in reality we have stepped forth from life to look upon it from the
outside, much after the manner of spectators at a play. And even sensual pleasure itself means
nothing but a struggle and aspiration, ceasing the moment its aim is attained. Whenever we are
not occupied in one of these ways, but cast upon existence itself, its vain and worthless nature is
brought home to us; and this is what we mean by boredom. The hankering after what is strange
and uncommon—an innate and ineradicable tendency of human nature—shows how glad we
are at any interruption of that natural course of affairs which is so very tedious.
That this most perfect manifestation of the will to live, the human organism, with the cunning
and complex working of its machinery, must fall to dust and yield up itself and all its strivings
to extinction—this is the naïve way in which Nature, who is always so true and sincere in what
she says, proclaims the whole struggle of this will as in its very essence barren and unprofitable.
Were it of any value in itself, anything unconditioned and absolute, it could not thus end in mere
nothing.
If we turn from contemplating the world as a whole, and, in particular, the generations of
men as they live their little hour of mock-existence and then are swept away in rapid succession;
if we turn from this, and look at life in its small details, as presented, say, in a comedy, how
ridiculous it all seems! It is like a drop of water seen through a microscope, a single drop teeming
with infusoria; or a speck of cheese full of mites invisible to the naked eye. How we laugh as they
bustle about so eagerly, and struggle with one another in so tiny a space! And whether here, or
in the little span of human life, this terrible activity produces a comic effect.
It is only in the microscope that our life looks so big. It is an indivisible point, drawn out and
magnified by the powerful lenses of Time and Space.

Arthur Schopenhauer. Studies in Pessimism. Trans. T. Bailey Saunders. London: Sonnenschein, 1891.
© SophiaOmni, 2005. The specific electronic form of this text is copyright. Permission is granted to print out
copies for educational purposes and for personal use only. No permission is granted for commercial use.

SophiaOmni						
www.sophiaomni.org

3

