https://TheVirtualLibrary.org

On the Sufferings of the World
Arthur Schopenhauer

Translated by T. Bailey Saunders, M. A.
From book “Essays of A. Schopenhauer”, A. L. Burt Company, New York, 1902

On the Sufferings of the World.
Unless suffering is the direct and immediate object of life, our existence must entirely fail
of its aim. It is absurd to look upon the enormous amount of pain that abounds everywhere
in the world, and originates in needs and necessities inseparable from life itself, as serving
no purpose at all and the result of mere chance. Each separate misfortune, as it comes,
seems, no doubt, to be something exceptional; but misfortune in general is the rule.
I know of no greater absurdity than that propounded by most systems of philosophy in
declaring evil to be negative in its character. Evil is just what is positive; it makes its own
existence felt. Leibnitz is particularly concerned to defend this absurdity; and he seeks to
strengthen his position by using a palpable and paltry sophism.(1) It is the good which is
negative; in other words, happiness and satisfaction always imply some desire fulfilled,
some state of pain brought to an end.
(1) Translator’s Note, cf. Thèod, §153. — Leibnitz argued that evil is a negative quality —
i.e., the absence of good; and that its active and seemingly positive character is an
incidental and not an essential part of its nature. Cold, he said, is only the absence of the
power of heat, and the active power of expansion in freezing water is an incidental and
not an essential part of the nature of cold. The fact is, that the power of expansion in
freezing water is really an increase of repulsion amongst its molecules; and Schopenhauer
is quite right in calling the whole argument a sophism.]
This explains the fact that we generally find pleasure to be not nearly so pleasant as we
expected, and pain very much more painful.
The pleasure in this world, it has been said, outweighs the pain; or, at any rate, there is an
even balance between the two. If the reader wishes to see shortly whether this statement is
true, let him compare the respective feelings of two animals, one of which is engaged in
eating the other.
The best consolation in misfortune or affliction of any kind will be the thought of other
people who are in a still worse plight than yourself; and this is a form of consolation open
to every one. But what an awful fate this means for mankind as a whole!
We are like lambs in a field, disporting themselves under the eye of the butcher, who
chooses out first one and then another for his prey. So it is that in our good days we are all
unconscious of the evil Fate may have presently in store for us — sickness, poverty,
mutilation, loss of sight or reason.
No little part of the torment of existence lies in this, that Time is continually pressing upon
us, never letting us take breath, but always coming after us, like a taskmaster with a whip.
If at any moment Time stays his hand, it is only when we are delivered over to the misery

of boredom.
But misfortune has its uses; for, as our bodily frame would burst asunder if the pressure of
the atmosphere was removed, so, if the lives of men were relieved of all need, hardship
and adversity; if everything they took in hand were successful, they would be so swollen
with arrogance that, though they might not burst, they would present the spectacle of
unbridled folly — nay, they would go mad. And I may say, further, that a certain amount
of care or pain or trouble is necessary for every man at all times. A ship without ballast is
unstable and will not go straight.
Certain it is that work, worry, labor and trouble, form the lot of almost all men their whole
life long. But if all wishes were fulfilled as soon as they arose, how would men occupy
their lives? what would they do with their time? If the world were a paradise of luxury and
ease, a land flowing with milk and honey, where every Jack obtained his Jill at once and
without any difficulty, men would either die of boredom or hang themselves; or there
would be wars, massacres, and murders; so that in the end mankind would inflict more
suffering on itself than it has now to accept at the hands of Nature.
In early youth, as we contemplate our coming life, we are like children in a theatre before
the curtain is raised, sitting there in high spirits and eagerly waiting for the play to begin.
It is a blessing that we do not know what is really going to happen. Could we foresee it,
there are times when children might seem like innocent prisoners, condemned, not to
death, but to life, and as yet all unconscious of what their sentence means. Nevertheless,
every man desires to reach old age; in other words, a state of life of which it may be said:
“It is bad to-day, and it will be worse to-morrow; and so on till the worst of all.”
If you try to imagine, as nearly as you can, what an amount of misery, pain and suffering
of every kind the sun shines upon in its course, you will admit that it would be much better
if, on the earth as little as on the moon, the sun were able to call forth the phenomena of
life; and if, here as there, the surface were still in a crystalline state.
Again, you may look upon life as an unprofitable episode, disturbing the blessed calm of
non-existence. And, in any case, even though things have gone with you tolerably well,
the longer you live the more clearly you will feel that, on the whole, life is a
disappointment, nay, a cheat.
If two men who were friends in their youth meet again when they are old, after being
separated for a life-time, the chief feeling they will have at the sight of each other will be
one of complete disappointment at life as a whole; because their thoughts will be carried
back to that earlier time when life seemed so fair as it lay spread out before them in the
rosy light of dawn, promised so much — and then performed so little. This feeling will so
completely predominate over every other that they will not even consider it necessary to
give it words; but on either side it will be silently assumed, and form the ground-work of
all they have to talk about.
He who lives to see two or three generations is like a man who sits some time in the
conjurer’s booth at a fair, and witnesses the performance twice or thrice in succession. The
tricks were meant to be seen only once; and when they are no longer a novelty and cease
to deceive, their effect is gone.
While no man is much to be envied for his lot, there are countless numbers whose fate is

to be deplored.
Life is a task to be done. It is a fine thing to say defunctus est; it means that the man has
done his task.
If children were brought into the world by an act of pure reason alone, would the human
race continue to exist? Would not a man rather have so much sympathy with the coming
generation as to spare it the burden of existence? or at any rate not take it upon himself to
impose that burden upon it in cold blood.
I shall be told, I suppose, that my philosophy is comfortless — because I speak the truth;
and people prefer to be assured that everything the Lord has made is good. Go to the
priests, then, and leave philosophers in peace! At any rate, do not ask us to accommodate
our doctrines to the lessons you have been taught. That is what those rascals of sham
philosophers will do for you. Ask them for any doctrine you please, and you will get it.
Your University professors are bound to preach optimism; and it is an easy and agreeable
task to upset their theories.
I have reminded the reader that every state of welfare, every feeling of satisfaction, is
negative in its character; that is to say, it consists in freedom from pain, which is the
positive element of existence. It follows, therefore, that the happiness of any given life is
to be measured, not by its joys and pleasures, but by the extent to which it has been free
from suffering — from positive evil. If this is the true standpoint, the lower animals
appear to enjoy a happier destiny than man. Let us examine the matter a little more
closely.
However varied the forms that human happiness and misery may take, leading a man to
seek the one and shun the other, the material basis of it all is bodily pleasure or bodily
pain. This basis is very restricted: it is simply health, food, protection from wet and cold,
the satisfaction of the sexual instinct; or else the absence of these things. Consequently, as
far as real physical pleasure is concerned, the man is not better off than the brute, except in
so far as the higher possibilities of his nervous system make him more sensitive to every
kind of pleasure, but also, it must be remembered, to every kind of pain. But then
compared with the brute, how much stronger are the passions aroused in him! what an
immeasurable difference there is in the depth and vehemence of his emotions! — and yet,
in the one case, as in the other, all to produce the same result in the end: namely, health,
food, clothing, and so on.
The chief source of all this passion is that thought for what is absent and future, which,
with man, exercises such a powerful influence upon all he does. It is this that is the real
origin of his cares, his hopes, his fears — emotions which affect him much more deeply
than could ever be the case with those present joys and sufferings to which the brute is
confined. In his powers of reflection, memory and foresight, man possesses, as it were, a
machine for condensing and storing up his pleasures and his sorrows. But the brute has
nothing of the kind; whenever it is in pain, it is as though it were suffering for the first
time, even though the same thing should have previously happened to it times out of
number. It has no power of summing up its feelings. Hence its careless and placid temper:
how much it is to be envied! But in man reflection comes in, with all the emotions to
which it gives rise; and taking up the same elements of pleasure and pain which are

common to him and the brute, it develops his susceptibility to happiness and misery to
such a degree that, at one moment the man is brought in an instant to a state of delight that
may even prove fatal, at another to the depths of despair and suicide.
If we carry our analysis a step farther, we shall find that, in order to increase his pleasures,
man has intentionally added to the number and pressure of his needs, which in their
original state were not much more difficult to satisfy than those of the brute. Hence luxury
in all its forms; delicate food, the use of tobacco and opium, spirituous liquors, fine
clothes, and the thousand and one things than he considers necessary to his existence.
And above and beyond all this, there is a separate and peculiar source of pleasure, and
consequently of pain, which man has established for himself, also as the result of using his
powers of reflection; and this occupies him out of all proportion to its value, nay, almost
more than all his other interests put together — I mean ambition and the feeling of honor
and shame; in plain words, what he thinks about the opinion other people have of him.
Taking a thousand forms, often very strange ones, this becomes the goal of almost all the
efforts he makes that are not rooted in physical pleasure or pain. It is true that besides the
sources of pleasure which he has in common with the brute, man has the pleasures of the
mind as well. These admit of many gradations, from the most innocent trifling or the
merest talk up to the highest intellectual achievements; but there is the accompanying
boredom to be set against them on the side of suffering. Boredom is a form of suffering
unknown to brutes, at any rate in their natural state; it is only the very cleverest of them
who show faint traces of it when they are domesticated; whereas in the case of man it has
become a downright scourge. The crowd of miserable wretches whose one aim in life is to
fill their purses but never to put anything into their heads, offers a singular instance of this
torment of boredom. Their wealth becomes a punishment by delivering them up to misery
of having nothing to do; for, to escape it, they will rush about in all directions, traveling
here, there and everywhere. No sooner do they arrive in a place than they are anxious to
know what amusements it affords; just as though they were beggars asking where they
could receive a dole! Of a truth, need and boredom are the two poles of human life.
Finally, I may mention that as regards the sexual relation, a man is committed to a peculiar
arrangement which drives him obstinately to choose one person. This feeling grows, now
and then, into a more or less passionate love,(2) which is the source of little pleasure and
much suffering.
(2) I have treated this subject at length in a special chapter of the second volume of my
chief work.]
It is, however, a wonderful thing that the mere addition of thought should serve to raise
such a vast and lofty structure of human happiness and misery; resting, too, on the same
narrow basis of joy and sorrow as man holds in common with the brute, and exposing him
to such violent emotions, to so many storms of passion, so much convulsion of feeling,
that what he has suffered stands written and may be read in the lines on his face. And yet,
when all is told, he has been struggling ultimately for the very same things as the brute has
attained, and with an incomparably smaller expenditure of passion and pain.

But all this contributes to increase the measures of suffering in human life out of all
proportion to its pleasures; and the pains of life are made much worse for man by the fact
that death is something very real to him. The brute flies from death instinctively without
really knowing what it is, and therefore without ever contemplating it in the way natural to
a man, who has this prospect always before his eyes. So that even if only a few brutes die
a natural death, and most of them live only just long enough to transmit their species, and
then, if not earlier, become the prey of some other animal — whilst man, on the other
hand, manages to make so-called natural death the rule, to which, however, there are a
good many exceptions — the advantage is on the side of the brute, for the reason stated
above. But the fact is that man attains the natural term of years just as seldom as the brute;
because the unnatural way in which he lives, and the strain of work and emotion, lead to a
degeneration of the race; and so his goal is not often reached.
The brute is much more content with mere existence than man; the plant is wholly so; and
man finds satisfaction in it just in proportion as he is dull and obtuse. Accordingly, the life
of the brute carries less of sorrow with it, but also less of joy, when compared with the life
of man; and while this may be traced, on the one side, to freedom from the torment of care
and anxiety, it is also due to the fact that hope, in any real sense, is unknown to the brute.
It is thus deprived of any share in that which gives us the most and best of our joys and
pleasures, the mental anticipation of a happy future, and the inspiriting play of phantasy,
both of which we owe to our power of imagination. If the brute is free from care, it is also,
in this sense, without hope; in either case, because its consciousness is limited to the
present moment, to what it can actually see before it. The brute is an embodiment of
present impulses, and hence what elements of fear and hope exist in its nature — and they
do not go very far — arise only in relation to objects that lie before it and within reach of
those impulses: whereas a man’s range of vision embraces the whole of his life, and
extends far into the past and future.
Following upon this, there is one respect in which brutes show real wisdom when
compared with us — I mean, their quiet, placid enjoyment of the present moment. The
tranquillity of mind which this seems to give them often puts us to shame for the many
times we allow our thoughts and our cares to make us restless and discontented. And, in
fact, those pleasures of hope and anticipation which I have been mentioning are not to be
had for nothing. The delight which a man has in hoping for and looking forward to some
special satisfaction is a part of the real pleasure attaching to it enjoyed in advance. This is
afterwards deducted; for the more we look forward to anything, the less satisfaction we
find in it when it comes. But the brute’s enjoyment is not anticipated, and therefore,
suffers no deduction; so that the actual pleasure of the moment comes to it whole and
unimpaired. In the same way, too, evil presses upon the brute only with its own intrinsic
weight; whereas with us the fear of its coming often makes its burden ten times more
grievous.
It is just this characteristic way in which the brute gives itself up entirely to the present
moment that contributes so much to the delight we take in our domestic pets. They are the
present moment personified, and in some respects they make us feel the value of every
hour that is free from trouble and annoyance, which we, with our thoughts and
preoccupations, mostly disregard. But man, that selfish and heartless creature, misuses this
quality of the brute to be more content than we are with mere existence, and often works it

to such an extent that he allows the brute absolutely nothing more than mere, bare life.
The bird which was made so that it might rove over half of the world, he shuts up into the
space of a cubic foot, there to die a slow death in longing and crying for freedom; for in a
cage it does not sing for the pleasure of it. And when I see how man misuses the dog, his
best friend; how he ties up this intelligent animal with a chain, I feel the deepest sympathy
with the brute and burning indignation against its master.
We shall see later that by taking a very high standpoint it is possible to justify the
sufferings of mankind. But this justification cannot apply to animals, whose sufferings,
while in a great measure brought about by men, are often considerable even apart from
their agency.3 And so we are forced to ask, Why and for what purpose does all this
torment and agony exist? There is nothing here to give the will pause; it is not free to deny
itself and so obtain redemption. There is only one consideration that may serve to explain
the sufferings of animals. It is this: that the will to live, which underlies the whole world
of phenomena, must, in their case satisfy its cravings by feeding upon itself. This it does
by forming a gradation of phenomena, every one of which exists at the expense of another.
I have shown, however, that the capacity for suffering is less in animals than in man. Any
further explanation that may be given of their fate will be in the nature of hypothesis, if
not actually mythical in its character; and I may leave the reader to speculate upon the
matter for himself.
(3) Cf. Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, vol. ii. p. 404.]
Brahma is said to have produced the world by a kind of fall or mistake; and in order to
atone for his folly, he is bound to remain in it himself until he works out his redemption.
As an account of the origin of things, that is admirable! According to the doctrines of
Buddhism, the world came into being as the result of some inexplicable disturbance in the
heavenly calm of Nirvana, that blessed state obtained by expiation, which had endured so
long a time — the change taking place by a kind of fatality. This explanation must be
understood as having at bottom some moral bearing; although it is illustrated by an exactly
parallel theory in the domain of physical science, which places the origin of the sun in a
primitive streak of mist, formed one knows not how. Subsequently, by a series of moral
errors, the world became gradually worse and worse — true of the physical orders as well
— until it assumed the dismal aspect it wears to-day. Excellent! The Greeks looked upon
the world and the gods as the work of an inscrutable necessity. A passable explanation: we
may be content with it until we can get a better. Again, Ormuzd and Ahriman are rival
powers, continually at war. That is not bad. But that a God like Jehovah should have
created this world of misery and woe, out of pure caprice, and because he enjoyed doing
it, and should then have clapped his hands in praise of his own work, and declared
everything to be very good — that will not do at all! In its explanation of the origin of the
world, Judaism is inferior to any other form of religious doctrine professed by a civilized
nation; and it is quite in keeping with this that it is the only one which presents no trace
whatever of any belief in the immortality of the soul.(4)

(4) See Parerga, vol. i. pp. 139 et seq.]
Even though Leibnitz’ contention, that this is the best of all possible worlds, were correct,
that would not justify God in having created it. For he is the Creator not of the world only,
but of possibility itself; and, therefore, he ought to have so ordered possibility as that it
would admit of something better.
There are two things which make it impossible to believe that this world is the successful
work of an all-wise, all-good, and, at the same time, all-powerful Being; firstly, the misery
which abounds in it everywhere; and secondly, the obvious imperfection of its highest
product, man, who is a burlesque of what he should be. These things cannot be reconciled
with any such belief. On the contrary, they are just the facts which support what I have
been saying; they are our authority for viewing the world as the outcome of our own
misdeeds, and therefore, as something that had better not have been. Whilst, under the
former hypothesis, they amount to a bitter accusation against the Creator, and supply
material for sarcasm; under the latter they form an indictment against our own nature, our
own will, and teach us a lesson of humility. They lead us to see that, like the children of a
libertine, we come into the world with the burden of sin upon us; and that it is only
through having continually to atone for this sin that our existence is so miserable, and that
its end is death.
There is nothing more certain than the general truth that it is the grievous sin of the world
which has produced the grievous suffering of the world. I am not referring here to the
physical connection between these two things lying in the realm of experience; my
meaning is metaphysical. Accordingly, the sole thing that reconciles me to the Old
Testament is the story of the Fall. In my eyes, it is the only metaphysical truth in that
book, even though it appears in the form of an allegory. There seems to me no better
explanation of our existence than that it is the result of some false step, some sin of which
we are paying the penalty. I cannot refrain from recommending the thoughtful reader a
popular, but at the same time, profound treatise on this subject by Claudius(5) which
exhibits the essentially pessimistic spirit of Christianity. It is entitled: Cursed is the ground
for thy sake.
(5) Translator’s Note. — Matthias Claudius (1740-1815), a popular poet, and friend of
Klopstock, Herder and Leasing. He edited the Wandsbecker Bote, in the fourth part of
which appeared the treatise mentioned above. He generally wrote under the pseudonym of
Asmus, and Schopenhauer often refers to him by this name.]
Between the ethics of the Greeks and the ethics of the Hindoos, there is a glaring contrast.
In the one case (with the exception, it must be confessed, of Plato), the object of ethics is
to enable a man to lead a happy life; in the other, it is to free and redeem him from life
altogether — as is directly stated in the very first words of the Sankhya Karika.
Allied with this is the contrast between the Greek and the Christian idea of death. It is
strikingly presented in a visible form on a fine antique sarcophagus in the gallery of

Florence, which exhibits, in relief, the whole series of ceremonies attending a wedding in
ancient times, from the formal offer to the evening when Hymen’s torch lights the happy
couple home. Compare with that the Christian coffin, draped in mournful black and
surmounted with a crucifix! How much significance there is in these two ways of finding
comfort in death. They are opposed to each other, but each is right. The one points to the
affirmation of the will to live, which remains sure of life for all time, however rapidly its
forms may change. The other, in the symbol of suffering and death, points to the denial of
the will to live, to redemption from this world, the domain of death and devil. And in the
question between the affirmation and the denial of the will to live, Christianity is in the
last resort right.
The contrast which the New Testament presents when compared with the Old, according
to the ecclesiastical view of the matter, is just that existing between my ethical system and
the moral philosophy of Europe. The Old Testament represents man as under the dominion
of Law, in which, however, there is no redemption. The New Testament declares Law to
have failed, frees man from its dominion,(6) and in its stead preaches the kingdom of
grace, to be won by faith, love of neighbor and entire sacrifice of self. This is the path of
redemption from the evil of the world. The spirit of the New Testament is undoubtedly
asceticism, however your protestants and rationalists may twist it to suit their purpose.
Asceticism is the denial of the will to live; and the transition from the Old Testament to
the New, from the dominion of Law to that of Faith, from justification by works to
redemption through the Mediator, from the domain of sin and death to eternal life in
Christ, means, when taken in its real sense, the transition from the merely moral virtues to
the denial of the will to live. My philosophy shows the metaphysical foundation of justice
and the love of mankind, and points to the goal to which these virtues necessarily lead, if
they are practised in perfection. At the same time it is candid in confessing that a man
must turn his back upon the world, and that the denial of the will to live is the way of
redemption. It is therefore really at one with the spirit of the New Testament, whilst all
other systems are couched in the spirit of the Old; that is to say, theoretically as well as
practically, their result is Judaism — mere despotic theism. In this sense, then, my
doctrine might be called the only true Christian philosophy — however paradoxical a
statement this may seem to people who take superficial views instead of penetrating to the
heart of the matter.
(6) Cf. Romans vii; Galatians ii, iii.]
If you want a safe compass to guide you through life, and to banish all doubt as to the
right way of looking at it, you cannot do better than accustom yourself to regard this world
as a penitentiary, a sort of a penal colony, or [Greek: ergastaerion] as the earliest
philosopher called it.(7) Amongst the Christian Fathers, Origen, with praiseworthy
courage, took this view,(8) which is further justified by certain objective theories of life. I
refer, not to my own philosophy alone, but to the wisdom of all ages, as expressed in
Brahmanism and Buddhism, and in the sayings of Greek philosophers like Empedocles
and Pythagoras; as also by Cicero, in his remark that the wise men of old used to teach
that we come into this world to pay the penalty of crime committed in another state of

existence — a doctrine which formed part of the initiation into the mysteries.(9) And
Vanini — whom his contemporaries burned, finding that an easier task than to confute him
— puts the same thing in a very forcible way. Man, he says, is so full of every kind of
misery that, were it not repugnant to the Christian religion, I should venture to affirm that
if evil spirits exist at all, they have posed into human form and are now atoning for their
crimes.(10) And true Christianity — using the word in its right sense — also regards our
existence as the consequence of sin and error.
(7) Cf. Clem. Alex. Strom. L. iii, c, 3, p. 399.]
(8) Augustine de cìvitate Dei., L. xi. c. 23.]
(9) Cf. Fragmenta de philosophia.]
(10) De admirandis naturae arcanis; dial L. p. 35.]
If you accustom yourself to this view of life you will regulate your expectations
accordingly, and cease to look upon all its disagreeable incidents, great and small, its
sufferings, its worries, its misery, as anything unusual or irregular; nay, you will find that
everything is as it should be, in a world where each of us pays the penalty of existence in
his own peculiar way. Amongst the evils of a penal colony is the society of those who
form it; and if the reader is worthy of better company, he will need no words from me to
remind him of what he has to put up with at present. If he has a soul above the common,
or if he is a man of genius, he will occasionally feel like some noble prisoner of state,
condemned to work in the galleys with common criminals; and he will follow his example
and try to isolate himself.
In general, however, it should be said that this view of life will enable us to contemplate
the so-called imperfections of the great majority of men, their moral and intellectual
deficiencies and the resulting base type of countenance, without any surprise, to say
nothing of indignation; for we shall never cease to reflect where we are, and that the men
about us are beings conceived and born in sin, and living to atone for it. That is what
Christianity means in speaking of the sinful nature of man.
Pardon’s the word to all! (11) Whatever folly men commit, be their shortcomings or their
vices what they may, let us exercise forbearance; remembering that when these faults
appear in others, it is our follies and vices that we behold. They are the shortcomings of
humanity, to which we belong; whose faults, one and all, we share; yes, even those very
faults at which we now wax so indignant, merely because they have not yet appeared in
ourselves. They are faults that do not lie on the surface. But they exist down there in the
depths of our nature; and should anything call them forth, they will come and show
themselves, just as we now see them in others. One man, it is true, may have faults that are
absent in his fellow; and it is undeniable that the sum total of bad qualities is in some
cases very large; for the difference of individuality between man and man passes all
measure.

(11) “Cymbeline,” Act v. Sc. 5.]
In fact, the conviction that the world and man is something that had better not have been,
is of a kind to fill us with indulgence towards one another. Nay, from this point of view,
we might well consider the proper form of address to be, not Monsieur, Sir, mein Herr, but
my fellow-sufferer, Socî malorum, compagnon de miseres! This may perhaps sound
strange, but it is in keeping with the facts; it puts others in a right light; and it reminds us
of that which is after all the most necessary thing in life — the tolerance, patience, regard,
and love of neighbor, of which everyone stands in need, and which, therefore, every man
owes to his fellow.

