, {i",

,t 3

rt r, {"..$

r

Michel Foucault
DISCIPLINE AND

PUNISH

Michel Foucault was born in Poitiers, France, in 1926.He
lectured in universities throughout the world; served as the
director at the Institut Frangaisin Hamburg, Germany, and
at the Institute de Philosophie at the Facult6 des Lertres in
the. University of Clermont-Ferrand, France; and wrote
frequently for French newspapers and reviews. At the
time of his death in 1984,he held a chair at France's most
prestigious institution, the Colldge de France.

I ,

'

Michel Foucault

DISCIPLINE AND PUNISH
The Birth of the Prison

Translatedfrom the French

b, Alan Sheridan

VINTAGE BOOKS
A DIVISION

OF RANDOM I{OUSE. INC.

NEW YORK

I

SECOND VINTAGE BOOKS EDITION, MAY r99t
Trwlation

copjmght @ py

6y Alan Shendan

All nghts resenedunderInternatronaland
Pan-AmencanCopyright Convenbons.Published
rn the Unlted Statesby RandomHouse,Inc., New York,
and rn Canadaby RandomHouseofCanadaLrmited,
Toronto. Originally pubhshedtn France
asSurveilleret Puntr:NeusmcedeIapruonby
EdrtionsGallimard,Paris.CopyrrghtO r975
by EdrtronsGallimard.Enghshtranslauon
onginally publishedin GreatBntatn
by PengurnBooks,Ltd.
FrrstAmericaneditronoublishedby Pantheon
Booksrn lunuary ,97a.
Data
Library of CongressCataloging-in-Publicatron
of Surveiller
Foucault,Michel.Translatron
et pumr.Brbliography: p.
r. Pnsons.z. Pnsondrscioline.
I. Title.
I. Punishment.
HV8666"F68r3197936178-rtz57
ISBN o-629-ztztt-z
Manufactured in the United States of America

23456789C

Contents

List of Plates
Translator's Note

vlt
lx

PART ONE TORTURE

r. The body ofthe condemned
e. The spectacleof the scafiold
PART TWO

3
32

PUNISHMENT

r. Generalized
punishment
z. The gentle way in punishment
PART THREE

73
ro4

DISCIPLINE

r. Docile bodies

,tt

The art of distributions r4r
The controlof acirrity r4g
TheorganiTationof geneses ry6
Thecomposition
offorces 16z
z. The meansof correct training

r70

Hierarchhal obseryation r:,o
NormaliTingjulgemnt ry7
Theexanzittation r84
3. Panopticism

r9t

PART FOUR

PRISON

r. Complete and austereinstitutions

2tr

z. Illegalities and delinquency

2t7

3. The carceral

29t

Notes

tq

Bibliography

326

List of Plates

(betutcen4ages169 and 170)
r

Medal commemoratingLouis XIV's first military revue in 1668.

z Handwriting model.
3 Plan of the Panopticonby J. Bentham,1843.
4 Plan for a penitentiaryby N. Harou-Romain,r84o.
t

The Maison centraleat Rennesin $77.

6 Interior of the penitentiary at Stateville, United Sates, twentieth
century.
7 Bedtime at the reformatory of Mettray.
8 Lecture on the evils of alcoholism in the auditorium of Frcsnes
prison.
'celeriferous' correcrion young
of
boys and
9 Steammachinefor the
girls.
IO

L'orthopidie ou I'art dc pdvenir et de corriger &ns hs cnfanu hs
diformiuis du corps(Orthopaedicsor the an of preventingandcorrecting deformitiesof the body in children) by N. Andry, 1749.

Translator'sNote

Any closertranslation of the French title of this book, Surueilleretpunir,
has proved unsatisfactoryon various counts.To begin with, Foucault
usesthe infinitive, which, as here,may have the effectof an 'impersonal
imperative'.Sucha nuanceis deniedus in English.More seriouslytheverb
'surveilhr' has no adequateEnglish
equivalent.Our noun 'surveillance'
has an altogether too restricted and technicaluse. Jeremy Benthamused
tlre term 'inspect' - which Foucault translatesas 'sufleiller' - but the
rangeof connotationsdoesnot correspond.'Supervise'is perhapsclosest
'Observe' is rather
of all, but again the word has different associations.
too neural, though Foucaultis awareofthe aggressioninvolved in any
one-sidedobservation.In the end Foucault himself suggestedDisciplke
and Punish,which relatescloselyto the book's structure.
Anotherproblemwasposedby the Frenchword'supplice',which heads
the first patt of the book. For the sakeof breviry I have entitled this
first part'Torture', but no singleEnglish word will cover the full range
of the French.Here 'supplice'refersspecificallyto the public torture and
executionof criminalsthat providedone of the mostpopularspectacles
of
eighteenth-centuryFrance. By extensionthe word can also refer to any
prolongedtorture, mentalaswell asphysical.Dependingon the context,
I have translatedthe word by 'torture', 'public execution'or 'scaffold'.
The authoralsorefersto anotherform of torture, ' la question'
, the extraction of confessionsby interrogation and the systematicapplicationof
pain. Here I havefollowed the acceptedranslation, 'judicial torture'.
References
to other works areusuallygiven not in footnotesbut in an
abbreviatedform in the text itself. These references,in brackets,consist
of the author'snameand a pagenumber;datesof publicationareusedto
distinguishmore than one work by an author,and roman numeralsrefer
to volumenumbers.Full references
are to be found in the Bibliography.

PART ONE

Torture

r. The bodv of the condemned

On z March 1757Damiensthe regicidewas condemned'to make
the amn& hotnrablebeforethe main door of the Church of Paris',
wherehe nas to be 'aken and conveyedin a cart, wearingnothing
but a shirt, holding a torch of burningwax weighingtwo pounds';
then, 'in the said cart, to the Placede Grdve, where, on a scaffold
that will be erectedthere, the flesh will be torn from his breasts,
arms,thighs andcalveswith red-hot pincers,his right hand,holding
the knife with which he committed the said parricide, burnt with
sulphur, and, on those placeswhere the fesh will be torn away,
poured molten lead, boiling oil, burning resin, wax and sulphur
melted together and then his body drawn and quarteredby four
horsesand his limbs and body consumedby fire, reducedto ashes
and his ashesthrown to the winds' (Pilcesoriginales..., 1;72-4).
'Finalln he was quarteredr'rlecounts
the GaTetted'Amsterdamof
r April r7;7. 'This last operationwasvery long, becausethe horses
used were not accustomedto drawing; consequently,instead of
four, six were needed;and when that did not suffice,they were
forced, in order to cut off the wretch's thighs, to severthe sinews
andhackat the ioins. ..
'It is said that, though he
was alwaysa great swearer,no blasphemy escapedhis lips; but the excessivepain made him utter
honible cries,and he often repeated:"My God, havepity on me!
Jesus,help me!" The spectatorswere all edifiedby the solicitude
of the parishpriest of St Paul'swho despitehis greatagedid not
sparehimselfin offeringconsolationto the patient.'
Bouton,an oficer of the watch,left us his accoune'The sulphur
waslit, but the flamewasso poor that only the top skin of the hand
wasburnt, and that only slighdy.Then the executioner,
his sleeves
rolled up, took the steelpincers,which had beenespeciallymade

Torture
for the occasion,and which were about a foot and a half long, and
pulled first at the calf of the right leg, then at the thigh, and from
there at the two feshy parts of the right arm; then at the breasts.
Though a strong, sturdy fellow, this executionerfound it so difficult
to tear av/ay the piecesof flesh that he set about the samespot two or
three times, twisting the pincers as he did so, and what he took away
formed at each part a wound about the size of a six-pound crown
piece.
'After
these tearings with the pincers, Damiens, who cried out
profusely, though without swearing, raised his head and looked at
himself; the sameexecutioner dipped an iron spoon in the pot containing the boiling potion, which he poured liberally over each
wound. Then the ropes that were to be harnessedto the horses were
attached with cords to the patient's body; the horses were then
harnessedand placed alongside the arms and legs, one at each
limb.
'Monsieur
Le Breton, the clerk of the court, went up to the
patient several times and asked him if he had anything to say. He
said he had not; at each torrnent, he cried out, as the damned in hell
are supposed to cry out, "Pardon, my God! Pardon, Lord."
Despite all this pain, he raisedhis head from time to time and looked
at himself boldly. The cords had been tied so tightly by the men
who pulled the ends that they caused him indescribable pain.
Monsieur le Breton went up to him again and asked him if he had
anything to say; he said no. Severalconfessorswent up to him and
spoke to him at length; he willingly kissed the crucifix that was held
out to him; he opened his lips and repeated:"Pardon, Lord."
'The
horses tugged hard, each pulling straight on a limb, each
horse held by an executioner.After a quarter of an hour, the same
ceremony was repeated and finally, after several attempts, the
direction of the horses had to be changed, thus: those at the arms
were made to pull towards the head, those at the thighs towards the
arms, which broke the arms at the ioints. This was repeatedseveral
times without success.He raised his head and looked at himself.
Two more horseshad to be added to those harnessedto the thighs,
which made six horses in all. Without success.
'Finally, the executioner, Samson, said to Monsieur Le Breton
that there was no way or hope of succeeding,and told him to ask
4

The body of the condemned
their Lordshipsif they wishedhim to have the prisonercut into
pieces.MonsieurLe Breton,who had comedown from the town,
ordered that renewedefforts be made,and this was done; but the
horsesgaveup and one of thoseharnessed
to the thighs fell to the
ground. The confessors
returnedand spoketo him again.He said
to them (I heardhim): "Kiss me, gentlemen."The parishpriestof
St Paul'sdid not dareto, so Monsieurde Marsillyslippedunderthe
rope holding the left arm and kissedhim on the forehead.The
executioners
gatheredround and Damienstold them not to swear,
to carry out their task and that he did not think ill of them; he
bugg"dthem to pray to God for him, and askedthe parishpriest
of St Paul'sto pray for him at the first mass.
'After two or threeattempts,
theexecutionerSamsonandhe who
hadusedthe pincerseachdrew out a knife from his pocketand cut
the body at the thighsinsteadofseveringthe legsat the ioints; the
four horsesgave a tug and carried off the two thighs after them,
namely,that of the right side firstothe other following; then the
samewasdoneto the arms,the shoulders,the arm-pitsand the four
limbs;the fleshhadto be cut almostto the bone,the horsespulling
hardcarriedoffthe right arm first and the otherafterwards.
'When the four limbs
hadbeenpulledaway,the confessorc
came
to speakto him; but his executionertold them that he was dead,
though the truth wasthat I sawthe manmove,his lower jaw moving
from sideto sideasif he weretalking.One of the executioners
even
saidshortly afterwardsthat when they had lifted the trunk to throw
it on the stake,he wasstill alive.The four limbs wereuntied from
the ropesand thrown on the stakeset up in the enclosurein line
with the scaffold,then the trunk and the rest werecoveredwith logs
and faggots, and fire was put to the sraw mixed with this wood.
'. .. In accordance
with the decree,the whole was reducedto
ashes.The lastpieceto be found in the emberswasstill burning at
half-pastten in the evening.The piecesof fleshand the trunk had
takenabout four hours to burn. The officersof whom I was one,
as alsowas my son, and a detachmentof archersremainedin the
squareuntil nearlyeleveno'clock.
'There
were thosewho madesomethingof the fact that a dog
had lain the day before on the grasswhere the 6re had been,had
beenchasedaway severaltimes,and had alwaysretumed. But it is

Torture
not difficult to understand that an animal found this place warmer
than elsewhere' (quoted in Zevaes, zor-r4).
Eighry years later, L!on Faucher drew up his rules'for the House
of young prisoners in Paris':
'Art.
17. The prisoners' day will begin at six in the morning in
winter and at five in summer. They will work for nine hours a day
throughout the year. Two hours a day will be devoted to instruction. Work and the day will end at nine o'clock in winter and at
eight in summer.
Art. r8. Nskg At the first drum-roll, the prisoners must rise and
dressin silence,as the supervisor,opensthe cell doors. At the second
drum-roll, they must be dressedand make their beds. At the third,
they must line up and proceed to the chapel for morning prayer.
There is a five-minute interval between each drum-roll.
Art. 19. The prayers are conducted by the chaplain and followed
by a moral or religious reading. This exercisemust not last more
than halfan hour.
Art. zo. Work. At a quarter to six in the summer, a quarter to
seven in winter, the prisoners go down into the courtyard where
they must wash their hands and faces,and receive their first ration
of bread. Immediately afterwards, they form into work-teams and
go off to work, which must begin at six in summer and seven in
winter.
Art. zr. Meal. ltt ten o'clock the prisoners leave their work and
go to the refectory; they wash their hands in their courtyards and
assemblein divisions. After the dinner, there is recreation until
twenty minutes to eleven.
Art. ze. School.At twenty minutes to eleven, at the drum-roll,
the prisoners form into ranks, and proceed in divisions to the
school. The classlaststwo hours and consistsalternately of reading,
writing, drawing and arithmetic.
Art. 23. At twenty minutes to one, the prisoners leave the
school, in divisions, and return to their courtyards for recreation.
At five minutes to one, at the drum-roll, they form into workteatns.
Art. 24.At one o'clock they must be back in the workshops: they
work until four o'clock.
6

The body of the condemned
Art. z;. At four o'clock the prisoners leave their workshops and
go into the courtyards where they wash their hands and form into
divisions for the refectory.
Art. 26.'supper and the recreation that follows it last until five
o'clock: the prisoners then return to the workshops.
Art 27. At seven o'clock.in the summer, at eight in winter,
work stops; bread is distributed for the last time in the workshops.
For a quarter of an hour one of the prisoners or supervisorsreads a
passagefrom some instructive or uplifting work. This is followed
by evening prayer.
Art. i8. At half-past seven in summer, half-past eight in winger,
the prisoners must be back in their cells after the washing of hands
and the inspection of clothes in the courtyard; at the first drum-roll,
they must undress, and at the second get into bed. The cell doors
are closed and the supervisors go the rounds in the corridors, to
ensure order and silence' (Faucher, 274-82).
We have, then, a public execution and a time-table. They do not
punish the same crimes or'the same type of delinquent. But they
each define a certain penal style. Less than a century separatesthem.
It was a time when, in Europe and in the United States,the entire
economy of punishment was redistributed. It was a time of great
'scandals'
for traditional justice, a time of innumerable projects for
reform. It saw a new theory of law and crime, a new rnoral or political justification of the right to punish; old laws were abolished, old
customs died out. 'Modern' codes were planned or drawn up:
Russia, 1769; Prussia, r78o1 Pennsylvania and Tuscany, ry86;
Austria, 1788;Francet r79rt Year IV, r8o8 and r8ro. It was a new
age for penal iustice.
Among so many changes,I shall consider one: the disappearance
of torture as a public spectacle.Today we are rather inclined to ig,
nore itl perhaps,in its time, it gave rise to too much inflated rhetoric;
perhapsit has been attributed too readily and too emphatically to a
processof 'humanization', thus dispensingwith the need for further
analysis.And, in any case,how important is such a change, when
compared with the great institutional transformations, the formulation of explicit, general codes and unified rules of procedure; with
the almost universal adoption of the jury system, the definition of

Torture
the essentiallycorrective characterofthe penalty and the tendency,
which has become increasingly marked since the nineteenth century,
to adapt punishment to the individual offenderl Punishment of a
less immediately physical kind, a certain discretion in the art of
inflicting pain, a iombination of more subtle, more subdued sufferings, deprived of their visible display, should not all this be treated
as a specialcase,an incidental effect ofdeeper changesl And yet the
fact remains that a few decades saw the disappearance of the tortured, dismembered,amputated body, symbolically branded on face
or shoulder, exposedalive or dead to public view. The body as the
maior target ofpenal repressiondisappeared.
By the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth
cenrury, the gloomy festival of punishment was dying out, though
here and there it fickered momentarily into life. In this transformation, two processeswere at work. They did not have quite the same
chronology or the sameraisond'6te. The first was the disappearance
of punishment as a spectacle.The ceremonial of punishment tended
to decline; it survived only as a new legal or administrative practice.
The attuttde honorablewas first abolished in France in r79r, then
again in r83o after a brief revival; the pillory was abolished in
France in ry8g and in England in 1837. The use of prisoners in
public works, cleaning city streets or repairing the highways,,was
practised in Austria, Switzerland and certain of the United States,
such as Pennsylvania. These convicts, distinguished by their
'infamous
dress'and shavenheads,'were brought before the public.
The sport of the idle and the vicious, they often become incensed,
and naturally took violent revenge upon the aggressors.To prevent
them from returning iniuries which might be inflicted on them,
they were encumberedwith iron collars and chains to which bombshellswere attached,to be dragged along while they performed their
degrading service, under the eyes of keepers armed with swords,
blunderbussesand other weapons of destruction' (Roberts Vaux,
Notices,zr, guoted in Teeters, gJ7r 24).This practicewas abolished
practically everywhere at the end of the eighteenth or the beginning
of the nineteenth cen1ury. The public exhibition of prisoners was
maintained in France in r83rr,despite violent criticism - 'a disgusting scene', said R6al (cf. Bibliography); it was finally abolished in
April rSaS. While the chain-gang, which had dragged convicts
8

The body of the condemned
across the whole of France, as far as Brest and Toulon, was replaced
in 1837 by inconspicuous black-painted cell-carts. Punishment had
gradually ceasedto be a spectacle.And whatever theatrical elements
it still retained were now downgraded, as if the functions of the
penal ceremony were gradually ceasingto be understood, as if this
'concluded
rite that
the crime' was suspected of being in some
undesirable way linked with it. It was as if the punishment was
thought to equal, if not to exceed, in savagery the crime itself, to
accustom the spectators to a ferocity from which one wished to
divert them, to show them the frequency of crime, to make the
executioner resemblea criminal, judges murderers, to reverse roles
at the last moment, to makb the tortured criminal an object of piry
or admiration. As early as 1764, Beccariaremarked: 'The murder
that is depicted as a horrible crime is repeated in cold blood,
remorselessly'(Beccaria, ror). The public execution is now seenas
a hearth in which violence bursts again into fame.
Punishment, then, will tend to become the most hidden part of
the penal process. This has several cons!quences:it leaves the
domain of more or less everyday perception and enters that of
abstract consciousness;its effectivenessis seenas resulting from its
inevitability, not from its visible intensity; it is the certainty of being
punished and not the horrifying spectacleof public punishment that
must discourage crime; the exemplary mechanics of punishment
changesits mechanisms.As a result, justice no longer takes public
responsibility for the violence that is bound up with its practice.
Ifit too strikes, if it too kills, it is not asa glorification of its strength,
but as an element of itself that it is obliged to rolerate, that it finds
difficult to account for. The apportioning of blame is redistributed:
in punishment-as-spectaclea confused horror spread from the
scaffold; it enveloped both executioner and condemned; and, although it was always ready to invert the shame inflicted on the
victim into pity or glory, it often turned the legal violence of the
executioner into shame. Now the scandal and the light are to be
distributed differently; it is the conviction itself that marks the
offender with the unequivocally negative sign: the publicity has
shifted to the trial, and to the sentence;the execution itselfis like an
additional shame that iustice is ashamed to impose on the condemned man; so it keepsits distancefrom the act, tending always to

Torture
entrust it to others, under the sealof secrecy.It is ugly to be punishable, but there is no glory in punishing. Hence that double system
of protection that justice has set up between itself and the punishment it imposes. Those who carry out the penalty tend to
become an autonomous sector; justice is relieved of responsibility
for it by a bureaucratic concealment of the penalty itself. It is
typical that in France the administration of the prisons should for so
long have been the responsibility of the Minisry of the Interior,
while responsibility for the bagnes,for penal servitude in the convict
ships and penal settlements,Iay with the Ministry of the Navy or
the Ministry of the Colonies. And beyond this distribution of roles
operatesa theoretical disavowal: do not imagine that the sentences
that we iudges pass iue activated by a desire to punish; they are
'cure';
intended to corect, reclaim,
a technique of improvement
represses,in the penalty, the strict expiation of evil-doing, and
relieves the magistrates of the demeaning task of punishing. In
modern iustice and on the part of those who dispenseit there is a
shame in punishing, which does not always preclude zeal. This
senseof shame is constantly growing: the psychologists and the
minor civil servantsof moral orthopaedicsproliferate on the wound
it leaves.
of public executionsmarks thereforethe decline
The disappearance
of the spectacle;but it also marks a slackening of the hold on the
body. In ry87, in an addressto the Society for Promoting Political
'I
Enquiries, Benjamin Rush remarked: can only hope that the time
is not far away when gallows, pillory, scaffold, flogging and wheel
will, in the history of punishment, be regarded as the marks of the
barbariry of centuries and of countries and as proofs of the feeble
influence of reason and religion over the human mind' (Teeters,
r9l!, 3o). Indeed, sixty years later, Van Meenen,opening the second
penitentiary congress,in Brussels,recalledthe time of his childhood
'I
have seen the ground strewn with wheels,
as of a past age:
gibbets, gallows, pillories; I have seenhideously stretchedskeletons
on wheels' (Annales de la Charitd, 12g-1'o). Branding had been
abolishedin England (r834) and in France(I832); in r8zo, England
no longer dared to apply the full punishment reserved for traitors
(Thistlewood was not quartered). Only flogging still remained in a
number of penal systems(Russia, England, Prussia).But, generally

IO

The body of the condemned
speaking, punitive practices had become more reticent. One no
longer touched the body, or at least as little as possible, and then
only to reach something other than the body itself. It might be
objected that imprisonment, confinement, forced labour, penal
servitude, prohibition from entering certain areas, deportation which have occupiedso important a placein modern penal systems'physical' penalties:
are
unlike fines, for example, they directly
affect the body. But the punishment-body relation is not the same
as it was in the torture during public executions. The body now
serves as an instrument or intermediary: if one intervenes upon it
to imprison it, or to make it work, it is in order to deprive the
individual ofa liberty that is regardedboth asa right and asproperty.
The body, according to this penality, is caught up in a system of
constraints and privations, obligations and prohibitions. Physical
pain, the pain of the body itself, is no longer the constituent element
ofthe penalty. From being an art ofunbearable sensationspunishment has become an economy of suspended rights. If it is still
necessaryfor the law to reach and manipulate the body of the convict, it will be at a distance, in the proper way, according to strict
'higher'aim.
rules, and with a much
As a result of this new restraint,
a whole army of technicians took over from the executioner, the
immediate anatomist of pain: warders, doctors, chaplains, psychiatrists, psychologists, educationalists;by their very presencenear the
prisoner, they sing the praises that the law needs: they reassureit
that the body and pain are not the ultimate objects of its punitive
action. Today a doctor must watch over those condemned to death,
right up to the last moment - thus iuxtaposing himself as the agent
of welfare, as the alleviator of pain, with the official whose task it is
to end life. This is worth thinking about. When the moment of
execution approaches,the patients are in1'ectedwith tranquillizers.
A utopia of judicial reticence:take away life, but prevent the patient
from feeling it; deprive the prisoner of all rights, but do not inflict
pain; impose penaltiesfree of all pain. Recourse to psycho-pharmacology and to various physiological 'disconnectors', even if it is
temporary, is a logical consequenceof this 'non-corporal' penality.
The modern rituals of execution attest to this double process:the
disappearanceof the spectacleand the elimination of pain. The same
movement has affected the various European legal systems,each at
II

,

Torture

its own rate: the iame death for all - the execution no longer bears
the specific mark of the crime or the social status of the criminal; a
death that lasts only a moment - no torture must'be added to it in
advance,no further actionsperformed upon the corpse;an execution
that affects life rather than the body. There are no longer any of
those long processesin which death was both retarded by calculated
interruptions and multiplied by a seriesof successiveattacks. There
are no longer any of those combinations of tortures that were
organized for the killing of regicides, or of the kind advocated, at
the beginning of the eighteenth century, by the anonymous author
of Hanging not PunishmentEnough (r7or), by which the condemned
man would be broken on the wheel, then fogged until he fainted,
then hung up with chains, then finally left to die slowly of hunger.
There are no longer any of those executionsin which the condemned
man was dragged along on a hurdle (to prevent his head smashing
against the cobble-stones), in which his belly was opened up, his
entrails quickly ripped out, so that he had time to seethem, vzith his
own eyes,being thrown on the fire; in which he was finally decapitated and his body quartered.r The reduction of these 'thousand
deaths' to strict capital punishment defines a whole new morality
concerning the act of punishing.
As early as 176o, a hanging machine had been tried out in
England (for the execution of Lord Ferrer). It madeuse of a support,
which opened under the feet of the condemned man, thus avoiding
slow deaths and the altercations that occurred between victim and
executioner. It was improved and finally adopted in 1783,the same
year in which the traditional procession from Newgate to Tyburn
was abolished,and in which the opportunity offered by the rebuilding of the prison, after the Gordon Riots, was used to set up the
scaffolds in Newgate itself (see Hibbert, 8y-6). The celebrated
'Every man
article 3 of the French Code of ry9t condemned to
death will have his head cut off'- bears this triple signification: an
equal death for all ('Crimes of the samekind will be punished by the
samekind of punishment, whatever the rank and state of the guilty
man may be,'in the words of the motion proposed by Guillotin and
passed on r December 1789); one death per condemned man,
'long
obtained by a single blow, without recourse to those
and
conseguently cruel' methods of execution, such as the gallows,
tz

The body of the condemned
denounced by Le Peletier; lastly, punishment for the condemned
man alone, sincedecapitation,the capital punishment of the nobility,
was the least shaming for the criminal's family (Le Peletier, 7zo).
The guillotine, first used in March r7g2,was the perfect vehicle for
these principles. Death was reduced to a visible, but instantaneous
event. Contact between the law, or those who carry it out, and the
body of the criminal, is reduced to a split second. There is no
physical confrontation; the executioner need be no more than a
'Experience
medculous watchmaker.
and reason demonstrate that
the method used in the past to cut off the head of a criminal exposed
him to a torture more frightful than the loss of life alone, which is
the expressintention of the law; the execution should therefore be
carried out in a single moment and with a single blow; examples
show how difficult it is to achieve this. For the method to work
perfectly, it must necessarily depend on invariable mechanical
means whose force and effect may also be determined. . . It is an
easyenough matter to have such an unfailing machine built; decapitation will be performed in a moment according to the intention of
the new law. If this apparatus seems necessary,it will cause no
sensation and will be scarcely noticed' (Saint-Edme, 16r). The
guillotine takes life almost without touching the body, iust as prison
deprives of liberty or a fine reduceswealth. It is intended to apply
the law not so much to a real body capable of feeling pain as to a
juridical subject, the possessor,among other rights, of the right to
exist. It had to have the abstraction of the law itself.
No doubt something of the old public execution was, for a time,
superimposedin France on the sobriety of the new method. Parricides - and the regicides who were regarded as such - were led to
th6 scaffold wearing a black veill there, until 1832, one of their
hands was cut off. Thereafter, nothing remained but the ornamental
cr!pe. Thus it was in the caseof Fieschi, the would-be assassinof
'He
Louis-Philippe, in November 1836:
will be taken to the place
of execution wearing a shirt, barefoot, his head covered with a black
veil; he will be exhibited upon a scaffold while an usher reads the
sentenceto the people, and he will be immediately executed.' We
should remember Damiens - and note that the last addition to penal
death was a mourning veil. The condemned man was no longer to
be seen.Only the reading of the sentenceon the scaffold announced

rt

Torture
the crime - and that crime must be faceless.(The more monstrous a
criminal was, the more he must be deprived of lighr he must not see,
or be seen.This was a common enough notion at the time. For the
parricideone should 'constructan iron cageor dig an impenetrable
dungeon that would serve him as an eternal retreat' - De Moldne,
27t-7.) The last vestigeof the great public executionwas its annulment: a drapery to hide a body. Benoit, triply infamous (his
mother's murderer, a homosexual, an assassin),was the first of the
parricides not to have a hand cut off: 'As the sentencewas being
read, he stood on the scaffold supported by the executioners.It was
a horrible sight; wrapped in a large white shroud, his face covered
with black cr!pe, the parricide escapedthe gazeof the silent crowd,
and beneath these mysterious and gloomy clothes, life was manifested only by frightful cries, which soon expired under the knife'
(Gagettedestibunaux, 3o August r83z).
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, then, the great
spectacleof physical punishment disappeared;the tortured body
was avoided; the theatrical representationof pain was excludedfrom
punishment. The age of sobriety in punishment had begun. By
r83o-48, public executions,precededby torture, had almostentirely
disappeared.Of course, this generalization requires some qualification. To begin with, the changesdid not come about at once or as
part of a single process.There were delays. Paradoxically, England
was one of the countries most loath to seethe disappearanceof the
public execution: perhaps becauseof the role of model that the
institution ofthe jury, public hearingsand respectofhabeascorpus
had given to her criminal law; above all, no doubt, becauseshe did
not wish to diminish the rigour of her penal laws during the great
socialdisturbancesof the years r78o-r8zo. For a long time Romilly,
Mackintosh and Fowell Buxton failed in their attempts to attenuate
the multiplicity and severity of the penalties laid down by English
'horrible
law - that
butchery', as Rossi describedit Its severity (in
fact, the juries regarded the penalties laid down as excessiveand
were consequently more lenient in their application) had even
increased: in ry6o, Blackstone had listed 16o capital crimes in
English legislation,while by r8r9 there were zzj. One should also
take into account the advancesand retreats that the process as a
whole underwent between ry6o and r84o; the rapidity of reform
r4

The body of the condemned
in certain countries such as Austria, Russia, the United States,
France under the Constituent Assembly, then the rerear at'the
time of the counter-revolutions in Europe and the great social fear
ofthe years r8zo-48; more or lesstemporary changesintroduced by
emergency courts or laws; the gap between the laws and the real
practice of the courts (which was by no meansa faithful reflection
of the state of legislation). All these factors account for the irregularity of the transformation that occurred at the turn of the century.
It should be added that, although most of the changeshad been
achievedby r84o, although the mechanismsof punishment had by
then assumedtheir new way of functioning, the process was far
from complete. The reduction in the use of torture was a tendency
that was rooted in the great transformation of the years r76o-184o,
but it did not end there; it can be said that the practice ofthe public
execurion haunted our penal system for a long time and still haunts
it today. In France, the guillotine, that machine for the production
ofrapid and discreet deaths,repiesenteda new ethic oflegal death.
But the Revolution had immediately endowed it with a grear theatrical ritual. For years it provided a spectacle.It had to be removed to
the Barridre Saint-Jacques;the open cart was replaced by a closed
carriagel the condemned man was hustled from the vehicle straight
to the scaffold;hasry executionswere organized at unexpectedtimes.
In the end, the guillotine had to be placed inside prison walls and
made inaccessibleto the public (after the execution of Weidmann
in 1939),by blocking the streets leading to the prison in which the
scaffoldwas hidden, and in which the execution would take place in
secret(the execution of Buffet and Bontemps at rhe Sant!in r97z).
Witnesseswho describedthe scenecould even be prosecuted,thereby ensuring that the execution should ceaseto be a spectacleand
remain a strangesecretbetween the law and those it condemns.One
has only to point out so many precautions to realize that capital
punishment remains fundamentally, even today, a spectacle that
must actually be forbidden.
Similarly, the hold on the body did not entirely disappearin the
mid-nineteenth century. Punishment had no doubt ceased to be
centred on torture as a technique of pain; it assumedas its principal
object loss of wealth or rights. But a punishment like forced labour
or even imprisonment * mere loss of liberty - has never functioned

rt

Torture
without a certain additional element of punishment that certainly
concerns the body itselfi rationing of food, sexual deprivation,
corporal punishment, solitary confinement. Are these the unintentional, but inevitable, consequenceof imprisonmentl In fact, in its
most explicit practices,imprisonment has always involved a certain
degree of physical pain. The criticism that was often levelled at the
penitentiary system in the early nineteenth century (imprisonment
is not a sufficient punishment prisoners are less hungry, less cold,
less deprived in general than many poor people or even workers)
suggestsa postulate that was never explicitly denied: it is just that a
condemnedman should suffer physically more than other men. It is
difficult to dissociate punishment from additional physical pain.
What would a non-corporal punishment bel
'torture'
in the modern
There remains, therefore, a trace of
mechanismsof criminal justice - a trace that has not been entirely
overcome,but which isenveloped,increasingly, by the non-corporal
nature of the penal system.
The reduction in penal severity in the last 2oo years is a phenomenon with which legal historians are well acquainted. But, for a
long time, it has been regarded in an overall way as a quantitative
phenomenon: less cruelty, less pain, more kindness, more respect,
'humanity'. In fact, these changesare accompaniedby a dismore
placement in the very object of the punitive operation. Is there a
diminution of intensityi Perhaps. There is certainly a change of
obiective.
If the penality in its most severeforms no longer addressesitself
to the body, on what does it lay holdl The answer of the theoreticians - those who, about 176o,opened up a new period that is not
yet at an end - is simple, almost obvious. It seemsto be contained
in the question itself: since it is no longer the body, it must be the
soul. The expiation that once rained down upon the body must be
replaced by a punishment that acts in depth on the heart, the
thoughts, the will, the inclinations. Mably formulated the principle
'Punishment,
if I may so put it, should strike the
once and for all:
soul rather than the body'(Mably, )26).
It was an important moment. The old partners of the spectacle
of punishment, the body and the blood, gave way. A new character
r6

The body of the condemned
came on the scene, masked. It was the end of a certain kind of
tragedy; comedy began, with shadow play, facelessvoices, impalpable entities. The apparatusof punitive justice must now bite into
this bodiless reality.
Is this any more than a mere theoretical assertion, contradicted
by penal practicel Such a conclusion would be over-hasty. It is true
that, today, to punish is not simply a matter of converting a soull
but Mably's principle has not remained a pious wish. Its effects can
be felt throughout modern penality.
To begin with, there is a substitution of objects. By this I do not
mean that one has suddenly set about punishing other crimes. No
doubt the defnition of offences,the hierarchy of their seriousness,
the margins of indulgence, what was tolerated in fact and what was
legally permitted - all this has considerably changed over the lasr
2oo years; many crimes have ceasedto be so becausethey were
bound up with a certain exercise of religious authority or a particular type of economic activiry; blasphemy has lost its status as a
crime; smuggling and domestic larceny some of their seriousness.
But these displacementsare perhaps not the most important facr:
the division between the permitted and the forbidden has preserved
a certain constancy from one century to another. On the other
hand, 'crime', the object with which penal practice is concerned,has
profoundly altered: the quality, the nature, in a sensethe substance
of which the punishable element is made, rather than its formal
definition. Undercover of the relative stability of the law, a massof
subtle and rapid changes has occurred. Certainly the 'crimes' and
'offences'
on which judgement is passedare juridical objects defined
by the code, but judgement is also passedon the passions,insrincts,
anomalies, infirmities, maladjustments, effects of environment or
heredity; acts of aggressionare punished, so also, through them, is
aggressivity; rape, but at the same time perversionsl murders, but
also drives and desires. But, it will be objected, judgement is not
actually being passedon them; if they are referred to at all it is to
explain the actions in question, and to determine to what extent the
the subject's will was involved in the crime. This is no answer. For
it r'stheseshadowslurking behind the caseitself that are judged and
punished. They are judged indirectly as 'attenuating circumstances'
that introduce into the verdict not only 'circumsuntial' evidence,

r7

Torture
but something quite different, which is not juridically codifiable:
the knowledge of the criminal, one's estimation of him, what is
known about the relations between him, his past and his crime, and
what might be expectedof him in the future. They are also judged
by the interplay of all those notions that have circulated between
'monmedicine and jurisprudence since the nineteenth century (the
'psychical
anomalies', the
sters' of Georget's times, Chaumi!'s
'perverts'and'maladjusted'of
our own experts)and which, behind
the pretext of explaining an action, are ways of defining an individual. They are punished by means of a punishment that has the
function of making the offender'not only desirous,but also capable,
of living within the law and of providing for his own needs'; they
are punished by the internal economy of a penalty which, while
intended to punish the crime, may be altered (shortened or, in
certain cases, extended) according to changes in the prisoner's
behaviour; and they are punished by the'security measures'that
accompany the penalry (prohibition ofentering certain areas,probation, obligatory medical treatment), and which are intended not
to punish the offence, but to supervise the individual, to neutralize
his dangerousstate of mind, to alter his criminal tendencies,and to
continue even when this change has been achieved. The criminal's
soul is not referred to in the trial merely to explain his crime and
as a factor in the juridical apportioning of responsibility; if it is
brought before the court, with such pomp and circumstance,such
'scienti6c'
application, it is because
concern to understand and such
it too, as well as the crime itself, is to be judged and to share in the
punishment. Throughout the penal ritual, from the preliminary
investigation to the sentenceand the final effects of the penalty, a
domain has been penetratedby objects that not only duplicate, but
also dissociatethe juridically defined and coded objects. Psychiatric
expertise,but also in a more generalway criminal anthropology and
the repetitive discourse of criminology, find one of their precise
functions here: by solemnly inscribing offencesin the field of objects
susceptible of scientific knowledge, they provide the mechanisms
of legal punishment with a justifiable hold not only on offences,but
on individuals;not only on what they do, but alsoon what they are,
will be, may be. The additional factor of the offender's soul, which
the legal systercihas laid hold of, is only apparently explanatory
r8

The body of the condemned
and limitative, and is in fact expansionist. During the r5o or 2oo
years that Europe has been setting up its new penal systems, the
judges have gradually, by meansofa processthat goes back very far
indeed, taken to judging something other than crimes, namely, the
'soul'
of the criminal.
And, by that very fact, they have begun to do something other
than passjudgement. Or, to be more precise,within the very iudicial
modality of judgement, other types of assessmenthave slipped in,
profoundly altering its rules of elaboration. Ever since the Middle
Ages slowly and painfully built up the great procedure of investigation, to judge was to establishthe truth of a crime, it was to determine its author and to apply a legal punishment. Knowledge of the
offence, knowledge of the offender, knowledge of the law: these
three conditions made it possible to ground a judgement in truth.
But now a quite different question of truth is inscribed in the course
'Has
of the penal judgement. The question is no longer simply:
the
'What
ri this act,
act been establishedand is it punishablel' But also:
what rs this act of violence or this murderl To what level or to what
field ofreality doesit belongl Is it a phantasy,a psychotic reaction, a
'Who
delusional episode,a perverseactionl'It is no longer simply:
'How
committed itl' Bue
can we assign the causal process that
produced itl Where did it originate in the author himselfl Instinct,
'What
unconscious,environment, heredityl' It is no longer simply:
'What
law punishesthis offencel' But:
would be the most appropriate
measuresto takel How do we see the future development of the
'What
offenderl
would be the best way of rehabilitating himi' A
whole set of assessing,diagnostic, prognostic, normative judgements concerning the criminal have become lodged in the framework of penal iudgement. Another truth has penetrated the truth
that was required by the legal machinery; a truth which, entangled
with the first, has turned the assertion of guilt into a strange
scientifico-iuridical complex. A significant fact is the way in which
the question of madnesshas evolved in penal practice. According
to the t8to code, madnesswas dealt with only in terms of article 64.
Now this article statesthat there is neither crime nor offence if the
offender was of unsound mind at the time of the act. The possibility
of ascertainingmadnesswas, therefore, a quite separatematter from
the definition of an act as a crimel the gravity of the act was not

r9

Torture
altered by the fact that its author was insane, nor the punishment
reduced as a consequencegthe crime itself disappeared.It was impossible, therefore, to declare that someone was both guilty and
madl once the diagnosis of madnesshad been accepted,it could not
be included in the judgementl it interrupted the procedure and
loosenedthe hold of the law on the author of the act. Not only the
examination of the criminal suspected of insaniry, but the very
effects of this examination had to be external and anterior to the
sentence.But, very soon, the courts ofthe nineteenth century began
to misunderstandthe meaning of article 64. Despite severaldecisions
of the supreme court of appeal confirming that insanity could not
result either in a light penalty, or even in an acquittal, but required
that the casebe dismissed,the ordinary courts continued to bring
the question of insanity to bear on their verdicts. They accepted
that one could be both guilty and mad; less guilty the madder one
was; guilty certainly, but someoneto be put away and treated rather
than punished; not only a guilty man, but also dangerous, since
quite obviously sick, etc. From the point ofview ofthe penal code,
the result was a massof iuridical absurdities.But this was the starting
point of an evolution that jurisprudence and legislation itself was to
precipitate in the course of the next rto years: already the reform
of r83,2,introducing attenuating circumstances,made it possible to
modify the sentenceaccording to the supposeddegreesof an illness
or the forms of a semi-insanity. And the practice of calling on
psychiatric expertise,which is widespread in the assizecourts and
sometimesextended to courts of summary jurisdiction, means that
the sentence,even if it is always formulated in terms of legal punishment, implies, more or less obscurely, judgements of normality,
attributions of causality, assessments
of possible changes,anticipations as to the offender's future. It would be wrong to say that all
these operations give substanceto a judgement from the outside;
they are directly integrated in the processof forming the sentence.
Instead of insaniry eliminating the crime according to the original
meaning of article 64, every crime and even every offence now
carrieswithin it, as a legitimate suspicion,but also as a right that may
be claimed, the hypothesis of insanity, in any caseof anomaly. And
the sentencethat condemnsor acquits is not simply a iudgement of
guilt, a legal decision that lays down punishment; it bears within it
20

The body of the condemned
anassessment
of normalityanda technicalprescriptionfor a possible
normalization.Today thejudge- magistrate
or iuror - certainlydoes
morethan'judge'.
And he is not alonein iudging.Throughout the penalprocedure
and the implementationof the sentencethere swarms a whole
series of subsidiary authorities. Small-scalelegal systemsand
paralleliudges have multiplied around the principal judgement:
psychiatricor psychologicalexperts,magistratesconcernedwith
the implementationof sentences,
educationalists,
membersof the
prison service,all fragmentthe legalpower to punish;it might be
obiectedthatnoneof themreallysharestheright to iudge;thatsome,
after sentence
is passed,haveno other right than to implementthe
punishmentlaid down by the court and,aboveall, that others- the
experts- intervenebeforethe sentencenot to passjudgement,but
to assistthe iudgesin their decision.But assoonasthe penaltiesand
the securitymeasures
definedby the court arenot absolutelydetermined, from the moment they may be modified along the way,
from the momentoneleavesto othersthanthe iudgesof the offence
the task of decidingwhetherthe condemnedman 'deserves'to be
placedin semi-liberryor conditional liberty, whether they may
bring his penal tutelageto an end, one is handingover to them
mechanismsof legal punishmentto be used at their discretion:
subsidiaryjudgesthey may be, but they are judgesall the same.
The whole machinerythat has beendevelopingfor yearsaround
theimplementation
of sentences,
andtheiradjustmentto individuals,
createsa proliferationof the authoritiesof judicialdecision-making
and extendsits powersof decisionwell beyondthe sentence.
The
psychiatricexperts,for their part, may well refrain from judging.
Let us examinethe threequestionsto which, sincethe 1958ruling,
they haveto addressthemselves:
Does the convictedpersonrepresenta dangerto societylIs he susceptible
to penalpunishmentlIs he
curableor readjustablelThesequestionshavenothing to do with
article64, nor with the possibleinsanityof the convictedpersonat
the momentof the act. They do not concern'responsibility'.They
concernnothing but the administrationof the penalty,its necessity,
its usefulness,
its possibleeffectiveness;
they make it possibleto
show,in an almosttransparent
vocabulary,whetherthe mentalhospital would be a moresuitableplaceof confinementthanthe prison,
2l

Torture
whether this confinement should be short or long, whether medical
treatment or security measuresare called for. What, then, is the role
of the psychiatrist in penal mattersl He is not an expert in responsibility, but an adviser on punishment; it is up to him to say whether
'dangerous',
in what way one should be protected
the subject is
from him, how one should intervene to alter him, whether it would
be better to try to force him into submission or to treat him. At the
very beginning of its history, psychiatric expertisewas called upon
'true'
propositions as to the part that the liberty of the
to formulate
offender had played in the act he had committed; it is now called
'medicoupon to suggesta prescription for what might be called his
judicial treatment'.
To sum up, ever since the new penal system- that defined by the
great codes ofthe eighteenth and nineteenth centuries- has been in
operation, a general process has led judges to judge something
other than crimesl they have been led in their sentencesto do something other than judge; and the power of judging has been transferred, in part, to other authorities than the judges of the offence.
The q/hole penal operation has taken on extra-juridical elementsand
personnel. It will be said that there is nothing extraordinary in this,
that it is part of the destiny of the law to absorb little by little
elementsthat are alien to it. But what is odd about modern criminal
justice is that, although it has taken on so many extra-iuridical
el!ments, it has done so not in order to be able to define them
juridically and gradually to integrate them into the actual power to
punish: on the contrary, it has done so in order to make them function within the penal operation as non-juridical elements; in order
to stop this operation being simply a legal punishment; in order to
exculpate the judge from being purely and simply he who punishes,
'Of
course, we pass sentence, but this sentence is not in direct
relation to the crime. It is quite clear that for us it functions as a way
of treating a criminal. We punish, but this is a way of saying that
we wish to obtain a cure.' Today, criminal justice functions and
justifies itself only by this perpetual reference to something other
than itself, by this unceasingreinscription in non-juridical systems.
Its fate is to be redefined by knowledge.
Beneath the increasing leniency of punishment, then, one may
map a displacementof its point of application; and through this
22

The body of the condemned
displacement,a whole field of recent objects, a whole new system of
truth and a massof roles hitherto unknown in the exerciseofcriminal
justice. A corpus of knowledge, techniques,'scienti6c' discoursesis
formed and becomesentangled with the practice of the power to
punish.
This book is intended as a correlative history of the modern soul
and ofa new power to iudge; a genealogy ofthe presentscientificolegal complex from which the power to punish derives its bases,
justifications and rules, from which it extendsits effectsand by which
it masks its exorbitant singularity.
But from what point can such a history of the modern soul on
trial be writtenl If one confined oneself to the evolution of legislation or of penal procedures, one would run the risk of allowing a
change in the collective sensibility, an increasein humanization or
the development of the human sciencesto emerge as a massive,
external, inert and primary fact. By studying only the general social
forms, as Durkheim did (cf. Bibliography), one runs the risk of
positing as the principle of greater leniency in punishment processesof individualization that are rather one of the effects of the
new tacdcsof power, among which are to be included the new penal
mechanisms.This study obeys four general rules:
r. Do not concentrate the study of the punitive mechanismson
their'repressivereffectsalone,on their'punishment' aspectsalone,
but situate them in a whole seriesof their possible positive effecs,
even ifthese seem marginal at first sight. As a consequence,regard
punishment as a complex social function.
z. Analyse punitive methods not simply as consequencesof
legislation or as indicators of social stmctures, but as techniques
possessingtheir own specificity in the more general field of other
ways of exercising power. Regard punishment as a political tactic.
3. Instead oftreating the history ofpenal law and the history of
the human sciencesastwo separateserieswhose overlapping appears
to have had on one or the other, or perhips on both, a disturbing
or useful effect, according to one's point of view, seewhether there
is not some common matrix or'whether they do not both derive
from a single process of 'episremologico-juridical' formation; in
short, make the technology.of power the very principle both of the
humanization of the penal system and of the knowledge of man.

2'

Torture
4. Try to discover vihether this entry ofthe soul on to the scene
of penal justice, and with it the insertion in legal practice of a whole
'scientific'knowledge, is not the eflect of a transformation
corpus of
of the way in which the body itself is invested by power relafions.
In short, try to study the metamorphosisof punitive methods on
the basis of a political technology of the body in which might be
read a common history of power relations and object relations.
Thus, by an analysis of penal leniency as a technique of power,
one might understand both how man, the soul, the normal or
abnormal individual have come to duplicate crime as objects of
penal intervention; and in what way a specific mode of subjection
was able to give birth to man as an object of knowledge for a dis'scientific'
status.
course with a
But I am not claiming to be the first to have worked in this
direction.2
Rusche and Kirchheimer's great work, Punishment and Social
Stuctures, provides a number of essentialreferencepoints. We must
6rst rid ourselvesof the illusion that penality is above all (if not
exclusively) a meansof reducing crime and that, in this role, according to the social forms, the political systems or beliefs, it may be
severeor lenient, tend towards expiation of obtaining redress,towards the pursuit of individuals or the attribution of collective
'concrete
systems of
responsibility. We must analyse rather the
punishment', study them as social phenomena that cannot be
accountedfor by the juridical structure of society alone,nor by its
fundamental ethical choices; we must situate them in their field of
operation,in which the punishmentof crime is not the soleelement;
'negative'
we must show that punitive measuresare not simply
mechanismsthat make it possible to repress,to prevent, to exclude,
to eliminate; but that they are linked to a whole series of positive
and usefuleffectswhich it is their task to support (and, in this sense,
although legal punishment is carried out in order to punish offences,
one might say that the definition of offencesand their prosecution
are carried out in turn in order to maintainthe punitive mechanisms
and their functions). From this point of view, Rusche and Kirchheimer relate the different systemsof punishment with the systems
of production within which they operate:thus, in a slaveeconomy,
24

The body of the condemned
punitive mechanisms serve to provide an additional labour force 'civil'slaves
and to constitute a body of
in addition to those provided
by war or trading; with feudalism, at a time when money and production were still at an eSrly stage of development, we find a sudden
increasein corporal punishments - the body being in most casesthe
only property accessible;the penitentiary (the H6pital Gdn6ral, the
Spinhuis or the Rasphuis), forced labour and the prison factory
appear with the development of the mercantile economy. But the
industrial system requires a free market in labour and; in the nineteenth century, the role of forced labour in the mechanisms of
punishment diminishes accordingly and 'corrective' detention takes
its place. There are no doubt a number of observations to be made
about such a strict correlation.
But we can surely accept the general proposition that, in our
societies,the systems of punishment are to be situated in a certain
'political
economy' of the body: even if they do not make use of
violent or bloody punishment, even when they use'lenient' methods
involving confinement or correction, it is always the body that is at
issue- the body and its forces, their utility and their dociliry, their
distribution 3nd their submission. It is certainly legitimate to write
a history of punishment against the background of moral ideas or
legal structures. But can one write such a history against the background of a history of bodies, when such systems of punishment
claim to have only the secret souls of criminals as their objectivel
Historians long ago began to write the history of the body. They
have studied the body in the field of historical demography or
pathology; they have consideredit as the seatofneeds and appetites,
as the locus of physiological processesand metabolisms,as a target
for the attacks of germs or virusesl they have shown to what extent
historical processeswere involved in what might seem to be the
purely biologieal baseof existenceland what place should be given
in the history of society to biological 'events' such as the circulation
of bacilli, or the extension of the life-span (cf. Le Roy-Ladurie).
But the body is also directly involved in a political field; power
relations have an immediate hold upon it; they invest ir, mark it,
train it, torture it, force it to carry out tasks,to perform ceremonies,
to emit signs. This political investment of the body is bound up,
in accordancewith complex reciprocal relations, with its economic
2t

Torture
use; it is largely as a force of production that the body is invested
with relations of power and dominationl but, on the other hand, its
constitution as labour power is possible only if it is caught up in a
system of subjection (in which need is also a political instmment
meticulously prepared, calculated and used); the body becomes a
useful force only ifit is both a productive body and a subjectedbody.
This subjection is not only obtained by the instruments of violence
or ideology; it can also be direct, physical, pitting force against
force, bearing on material elements, and yet without involving
violencel it may be calculated, organized, technically thought out;
it may be subtle, make use neither of weapons nor of terror and yet
remain of a physical order. That is to say, there may be a'knowledge'
of the body that is not exactly the scienceof its functioning, and a
mastery of its forces that is more than the ability to conquer them:
this knowledge and this mastery constinrte what might be called the
political technology of the body. Of course, this technology is
diffuse, rarely formulated in continuous, systematicdiscourse; it is
often made up of bits and pieces;it implements a disparate set of
tools or methods. In spite of the coherence of its results, it is
generally no more than a multiform instrumentation. Moreover, it
cannot be localized in a particular type of institution or state
apparatus.For they have recourse to it; they use, select or impose
certain of its methods. But, in its mechanismsand its effects, it is
situated at a quite different level. What the apparatusesand institutions operate is, in a sense,a micro-physics of power, whose field
of validiry is situated in a sensebetween these great functionings
and the bodies themselveswith their materiality and their forces.
Now, the study of this micro-physics presupposesthat the power
exercised on the body is conceived not as a property, but as a
'approstrategy, that its effectsof domination are attributed not to
priation', but to dispositions, manoeuvres, tactics, techniques,
functionings; that one should decipher in it a network of relations,
constantly in tension, in activiry, rather than a privilege that one
might possesslthat one should take as its model a perpetual battle
rather than a contract regulating a transaction or the conquest ofa
territory. In short this power is exercised rather than possessed;
'privilege',
acquired or preserveil, of the dominant
it is not the
class,but the overall effect of its strategic positions - an effect that
z6

The body of the condemned
is manifestedand sometimesextendedby the position of those who
are dominated. Furthermore, this power is not exercised simply as
an obligation or a prohibition on those who 'do not have it'; it
invests them, is transmitted by them and through them; it exerts
pressureupon them, just as they themsilves, in their struggle against
it, resist the grip it has on them. This means that these relations go
right down into the depths of society, that they are not localized in
the relations between the state and its citizens or on the frontier
between classesand that they do not merely reproduce, at the tevel
ofindividuals, bodies, gesturesand behaviour, the general form of
the law or government; that, although there is continuity (they are
indeed articulated on this form through a whole series of complex
mechanisms),there is neither analory nor homology, but a specificity of mechanismand modality. Lastly, they are not univocal; they
define innumerable poins of ionfrontation, focuses of instability,
each of which has its own risks of conflict, of struggles, and of an
at leasttemporary inversion of the power relations. The overthrow
'micro-powers'
of these
does not, then, obey the law of all or
nothing; it is not acquired once and for all by a new control ofthe
apparatusesnor by a new functioning or a destruction of the institutions; on the other hand, none of its localized episodesmay be
inscribed in history except by the effectsthat it induceson the entire
network in which it is caught up.
Perhaps, too, we should abandon a whole tradition that allows
us to imagine that knowledge can exist only where the power relations are suspendedand that knowledge can develop only outside its
injunctions, its demandsand its interests. Perhapswe should abandon the belief that power makes mad and that, by the same token,
the renunciation of power is one of the conditions of knowledge.
We should admit rather that power produces knowledge (and not
simply by encouraging it becauseit servespower or by applying it
becauseit is useful); that power and knowledge directly imply one
another; that there is no power relation without the correlative
constitution of a field of knowledge, nor any knowledge that does
not presupposeand constitute at the same time pow-r relations.
'power-knowledge
These
relations' are to be analysed, therefore,
not on the basis of a subject of knowledge who is or is not free in
relation to the power system, but, on the contrary, the subject who

Torture
knows, the objects to be known and the modalities of knowledge
must be regarded as so many effects of these fundamental implications of power-knowledge and their historical transformations. In
short, it is not the activity of the subject of knowledge that produces a corpus of knowledge, useful or resistant to power, but
power-knowledge, the processesand struggles that traverse it and
of which it is made up, that determines the forms and possible
domains of knowledge.
To analysethe political investment of the body and the microphysics ofpower presupposes,therefore, that one abandons- where
power is concerned- the violence-ideology opposition, the metaphor of property, the model of the contract or of conquestl that where knowledge is concerned - one abandons the opposition
'disinterested',the model of
betweenwhat is'interested' and what is
knowledge and the primacy of the subject. Borrowing a word from
Petty and his contemporaries,but giving it a different meaning from
the one current in the seventeenthcentury, one might imagine a
'anatomy'. This would
political
not be the study of a statein terms of
'body'
(with its elements,its resourcesand its forces), nor would
a
it be the study of the body and its surroundings in terms of a small
'body politic', as a set of
state. One would be concerned with the
material elements and techniques that serve as weapons, relays,
communication routes and supports fior the power and knowledge
relations that invest human bodies and subjugate them by turning
them into objects of knowledge.
It is a question of situating the techniques of punishment whether they seize the body in the ritual of public torture and
execution or whether they are addressedto the soul - in the history
of this body politic; of considering penal practices less as a consequence of legal theories than as a chapter of political anatomy.
Kantorowitz gives a remarkable analysis of 'The King's Body':
a double body according to the juridical theology of the Middle
Ages, since it involves not only the transitory element that is born
and dies, but another that remains unchanged by time and is maintained as the physical yet intangible support of the kingdom;
around this duality, which was originally close to the Christological
model, are organizedan iconography, a political theory ofmonarchy,
legal mechanismsthat distinguish between as well as link the person
z8

The body of the condemned
of the king and the demandsof the Crown, and a whole ritual that
reachesits height in the coronation, the funeral and the ceremonies
of submission. At the opposite pole one might imagine placing the
body of the condemned manl he, too, has his legal status; he gives
rise to his own ceremonial and he calls forth a whole theoretical
discourse,not in order to ground the 'surplus power' possessedby
the person ofthe sovereign, but in order to code the 'lack ofpower'
with which those subjectedto punishment are marked. In the darkest
region of the political field the condemnedman representsthe symmetrical, inverted figure of the king. We should analysewhat might
be called, in homage to Kantorowitzr'the least body of the condemned man'.
If the surplus power possessedby the king gives rise to the
duplication of his body, has not the surplus power exercisedon the
subjectedbody of the condemnedman given rise to another type of
duplicationl That of a 'non-corporal', a 'soul', as Mably called it.
The history of this'micro-physics'of the punitive power would then
be a genealogy or an element in a genealogy of the modern 'soul'.
Rather than seeing this soul as the reactivated remnants of an ideology, one would see it as the present correlative of a certain technology of power over the body. It would be wrong to say that the
soul is an illusion, or an ideological effect. On the contrary, it exists,
it has a reality, it is produced permanently around, on, within the
body by the functioning of a power that is exercised on those
punished - and, in a more general v/ay, on those one supervises,
trains and corrects, over madmen, children at home and at school,
the colonized, over those who are stuck at a machine and supervised
for the rest of their lives. This is the historical reality of this soul,
which, unlike the soul represented by Christian theology, is not
born in sin and subject to punishment, but is born rather out of
methods of punishment, supervision and constraint. This real, noncorporal soul is not a substance;it is the element in which are
articulated the effects of a certain type of power and the reference
of a certain type of knowledge, the machinery by which the power
relations give rise to a possiblecorpus of knowledge, and knowledge
extends and reinforces the effects of this power. On this realityreference,various concepts have been constructed and domains of
analysiscarved ouu psyche,subjectivity, personality, consciousness,
29

Torture
!tc.; on it have been built scientific techniques and discourses,
and the moral claims of humanism. But let there be no misunderstanding: it is not that a real man, the object of knowledge, philosophical reflection or technical intervention, has been substituted
for the sout, the illusion of the theologians. The man described for
us, whom we are invited to free, is already in himself the effect of a
'soul'inhabits him
subjection much more profound than himself. A
and brings him to existence,which is itself a factor in the mastery
that power exercises over the body. The soul is the effect and
instrument of a political anatomy; the soul is the prison of the body.
That punishment in general and the prison in particular belong
to a political technology of the body is a lesson that I have learnt
not so much from history as from the present. In recent years,
prison revolts have occurred throughout the world. There was certainly something paradoxicalabout their aims, their slogansand the
way they took place. They were revolts against an entire state of
physical misery that is over a century old: against cold, suffocation
and overcrowding, against decrepit walls, hunger, physical maltreatment. But they were also revolts against model prisons, tranquillizers, isolation, the medical or educational services.Were they
revolts whose aims were merely material?Or contradictory revolts:
against the obsolete, but also against comfort; against the warders,
but also againstthe psychiatristsi In fact, all thesemovements- and
the innumerable discoursesthat the prison has given rise to since
the early nineteenth century - have been about the body and
material things. What has sustained these discourses,these memories and invectives are indeed those minute material details. One
may, if one is so disposed,seethem as no more than blind demands
or suspectthe existencebehind them ofalien strategies.In fact, they
were revolts, at the level of the body, against the very body of the
prison. What was at issuewas not whether the prison environment
was too harsh or too aseptic, too primitive or too efficient, but its
very materiality as an instrument and vector of poweq it is this
whole technology of power over the body that the technology of
'soul' the
that of the educationalists,psychologists and psychiatrists - fails either to concealor to compensate,for the simple reason
that it is one of its tools. I would like to write the historv of this

30

The body of the condemned
prison, with all the political investments 6f the body that it gathers
together in its closed architecture. Whyt Simply because I am
interestedin the pastl No, if one meansby that writing a history of
the past in terms of the present. Yes, if one means writing the
history of the present.3

tr

z. The spectacleof the scaffold

The ordinance of t67o regulated the general forms of penal practice
up to the Revolution. It laid down the following hierarchy of
'Death, judicial
penalties:
torture pending proof, penal servitude,
flogging, amende honorable,banishment.' A high proportion of
physical punishment. Customs, the nature of the crimes, the status
'Capital
of the condemned accounted for still more variations.
punishment comprisesmany kinds of death: some prisoners may be
condemned to be hanged, others to having their hands cut off or
their tongues cut out or pierced and then to be hanged; others, for
more serious crimes, to be broken alive and to die on the wheel,
after having their limbs broken; others to be broken until they die
a natural death, others to be strangled and then broken, others to
be burnt alive, others to be burnt after first being strangled; others
to be.drawn by four horses,others to have their headscut off, and
others to have their heads broken' (Soulatges, ft9-7r). And Soulatges adds, almost in passing, that there are also lighter penalties
not mentioned by the ordinance: satisfaction to the injured party,
warning, reprimand, a short period of imprisonment, prohibition
from entering a certain area and, lastly, pecuniary punishments fines or confiscation.
But we must not be misled. There was a considerablegap between
this arsenal of horrors and everyday penal practice. Public torture
and execution was by no means the most frequent form of punishment. To us today the proportion of death sentencesin the penal
practice of the classicalage may seemhigh: at the ChAteletr during
the period ryrt-9t under ro per cent of the sentencespassedinvolved capital punishment: the wheel, the gallows or the stake
(Petrovitch, zz6tr); the Parlement of Flanders passed thirty-nine
death sentences,out of a total of z(n sentences,between rTzr and

32

The spectacleof the scaffold
r73o (and twenty-six out of yoo between r78r and rygo - cf.
Dautricourt). But it must not be forgotten that the courts found
many ways of relaxing the rigours of the penal system, either by
refusing to prosecuteoffencesthat were too heavily punished or by
modifying the definition of the crimel sometimes too the royal
power indicated that some particularly severeordinance was not to
be applied too strictly (which was how Choiseul dealt with the
declaration of 3 August 1744 on vagabonds - Choiseul, rz81).
In any case,the maiority of the sentencesinvolved banishment or
6nes: in a court such as that of the ChAtelet (which dealt only with
relatively serious offences), banishment represented over half the
sentencespassedbetween rTyy and r78y. But many of these noncorporal penalties were accompanied by additional penalties that
involved a degree of torture: public exhibition, pillory, carcan,
flogging, branding; this was the casefor all sentencesto the'galleys'
or to what was the equivalent for women - reclusion in the hospital;
banishment was often precededby public exhibition and branding;
fines were sometimesaccompaniedby flogging. It was not only in
the great solemn executions, but also in this additional form of
punishment, that torture revealed the significant part it played in
penality: every penalty of a certain seriousnesshad to involve an
element of torture, of supplice.
What is a supplice?'Corporal punishment, painful to a more or
less horrible degreer' said Jaucourt in his Encyclopddiearticle and
'It
added:
is an inexplicable phenomenon that the extension of
man's imagination creates out of the barbarous and the cruel.'
Inexplicable, perhaps, but certainly neither irregular nor primitive.
Torture is a technique; it is not an extreme expression of lawless
rage. To be torture, punishment must obey three principal criteria:
first, it must produce a certain degree of pain, which may be measured exactly, or at least calculated, compared and hierarchized;
death is a torture in so far as it is not simply a withdrawal of the
right to live, but is the occasionand the culmination of a calculated
gradation of pain: from decapitation (which reduces all pain to a
single gesture, performed in a single moment - the zero.degree of
torture), through hanging, the stake and the wheel (all of which
prolong the agony), to quartering, which carries pain almost
to infinity; death-torture is the art of maintaining life in pain, by

t,

Torture
subdividing it into a 'thousanddeaths',by achievingbefore life
'the most exquisiteagonies'(cf. Ollytre). Torture restson a
ceases
wholequantitativeart of pain.But thereis moreto iu thisproduction
thetypeof corporaleffect,the
of painis regulated.Torture correlates
quality, intensity,duration of pain, with the gravity of the crime,
the personof the criminal,the rank of his victims.There is a legal
code of pain; when it involves torture, punishmentdoesnot fall
upon the body indiscriminatelyor equally;it is calculatedaccording
to detailedrules:the numberof lashesof the whip, the positioning
of the brandingiron, the durationof the deathagony on the sake
or the wheel (the court decideswhether the criminal is to be
strangledat onceor allowedto die slowly,.and the points at which
this gestureof pity must occur),the type of mutilationto be used
(hand cut off, lips or tongue pierced).All thesevariouselements
and arecombinedaccordingto the court
multiply the punishments
and the crime.'The poetry of Danteput into lawsr'washow Rossi
knowledge,in any case.
describedit; a long coursein physico-penal
Furthermore,torture forms part of a ritual. It is an elementin the
liturgy of punishmentand meetstwo demands.It must mark the
victim: it is intended,eitherby the scarit leaveson the body, or by
it, to brand the victim with infamy;
that accompanies
the spectacle
'purge' the crime, tornrre doesnot reconevenif its functionis to
cile; it tracesaroundor, rather,on the very body ofthe condemned
mansignsthat mustnot be effaced;in any case,menwill remember
public exhibition,the pillory, torture and pain duly observed.And,
from the point of view of the law that imposesit, public torture and
it must be seenby all almostas its
executionmust be spectacular,
triumph. The very excessof the violenceemployedis one of the
elementsof its glory: the fact that the guilty manshouldmoanand
cry out under the blows is not a shamefulside-effect,it is the very
in all its force.Henceno doubt
ceremonialof justicebeingexpressed
thosetorturesthat takeplaceevenafter death:corpsesburnt, ashes
thrown to the winds, bodiesdraggedon hurdlesand exhibitedat
the roadside.Justicepursuesthe body beyondall possiblepain.
The term 'penaltorture'doesnot coveranycorporalpunishment:
it is a differentiatedproductionof pain, an organizedritual for the
marking of victims and the expressionof the power that punishes;
not the expressionof a legal systemdriven to exasperationand,
34

The spectacle of the scaffold
forgetting its principles, losing all restraint. In the 'excesses'of
torture, a whole economy of power is invested.
The tortured body is first inscribed in the legal ceremonial that
must produce, open for all to see, the truth of the crime.
In France, as in most European countries, with the notable
exception of England, the entire criminal procedure, right up to the
sentence,remained secrec that is to say, opaque, not only to the
public but also to the accusedhimself. It took place without him,
or at least without his having any knowledge either of the charges
or of the evidence.In the order of criniinal justice, knowledge was
the absoluteprivilege of the prosecution. The preliminary investigation was carried out'as diligently and secretlyas may be', as the edict
of 1498put it. According to the ordinance of fi7o, which confirmed
and, on certain points, reinforced the severity of the preceding
period, it was impossible for the accusedto have accessto the documents of the case,impossible to know the identity of his accusers,
impossible to know the nature of the evidence before objecting to
witnesses,impossible to make use, until the last moments of the
trial, of the documents in proof, impossible to have a lawyer, either
to ensure the proper conduct of the case, or to take part, on the
main issue, in the defence. The magistrate, for his part, had the
right to accept anonymous denunciations, to conceal from the accused the nature of the action, to question him with a view to
catching him out, to useinsinuations. (Up to the eighteenthcentury,
lengthy arguments took place as to whether, in the course of
'captious'
guestioning, it was lawful for the judge to use false
promises, lies, words with double meaning - a whole casuistry of
legal bad faith.) The magisrate constituted, in solitary omnipotence,
a truth by which he invested the accusedland the judges received
this truth ready made, in the form of documents and written statements; for them, these factors alone were proof; they met the
accusedonly once in order to question him before passingsentence.
The secretand written form of the procedure reflects the principle
that in criminal matters the establishmentof truth was the absolute
right and the exclusive power of the sovereign and his judges.
Ayrault supposed that this procedure (which was more or less
establishedby the sixteenth century) originated in 'the fear of the

3t

Torture
uproar, shouting and cheering that the people usually indulge in,
the fear that there would be disorder, violence, and outbursts against
the parties, or even against the iudges'; the king wished to show in
'sovereign power' from which
this that the
the right to punish
'multitude'
(cf. Ayrault,
derived could in no case belong to the
LIII, chapters LXXII and LXIX). Before the justice of the sovereign, all voices must be still.
Yet, despite the use of secrecy,certain rules had to be obeyed in
establishingthe truth. Secrecyitself reguired that a rigorous model
of penal truth be defined. A whole tradition dating from the Middle
Ages and considerably developed by the great lawyers of the
Renaissancelaid down what the nature and the use of evidence
might be. Even in the eighteenth century, it was still common to
meet distinctions like the following: true, direct, or legitimate proof
(that provided by witnesses,for example) and indirect, coniectural,
artificial proof (obtained by argument); or, again, manifest proof,
considerable proof, imperfect or slight (Jousse, 66); or, again,
'urgent
or necessary'proof that did not allow one to doubt the
'full' proof: thus two irreproachablewittruth of the deed (this was
nessesaffirming that they saw the accused,carrying an unsheathed
and bloody sword, leave the place where, some time later, the body
of the dead man was found with stabwounds); approximate or semifull proof, which may be regardedas true as long asthe accuseddoes
not destroy it with evidenceto the conrary (the evidenceof a single
eye-witnessor death threats preceding a murdel); lastly, distant or
'adminicule'
clues, which consisted only of opinion (rumour, the
flight of the suspect,his manner when questioned,etc. - Muyart de
Vouglans, r7t7, t41-7). Now, these distinctions are not simply
theoretical subtleties. They have an operational function. First,
becauseeachofthese kinds ofevidence, taken in isolation, may have
'full'
a particular type of iudicial effecn
proof may lead to any
'peines
'semi-full'
sentence;
proof may lead to any of the
aflicives',
heavy
penalties,
imperfect
or
except death;
and slight clues are
enough for the suspectto have a writ issued against him, to have
the casedeferred for further inquiry or to have a fine imposed on
him. Secondly, becausethey are combined according to precise
arithmetical rules: two'semi-full' proofs may makeacomplete proof;
'adminicules',
providing there are several of them and they concur,

36

The spectacleof the scaffold
may be combined to form a semi-proof; but, however many there
may be of them, they can never, of themselves,constitute a complete
proof. We have, then, a penal arithmetic that is meticulous on many
points, but which still leavesa margin for a good deal of argument: in
order for a capital sentenceto be passed,is a single full proofenough
or must it be accompaniedby other slighter cluesi Are two approximate proofs always equivalent to a full proofl Should not three be
required or two plus distant cluesl Are there elements that may be
regarded.as clues only for certain crimes, in certain circumstances
and in relation to certain persons (thus evidence is disregardedif it
comes from a vagabond; it is reinforced, on the contrary, if it is
provided by 'a considerableperson' or by a master in the caseof a
domestic offence). It is an arithmetic modulated by casuistry, whose
function is to define how a legal proof is to be constructed. On the
'legal
one hand, this system of
proofs' makes truth in the penal
domain the result of a complex art; it obeys rules known only to
specialists,and, consequently, it reinforces the principle ofsecrecy.
'It
is not enough that the judge should have the conviction that any
reasonableman may have. . . Nothing is more incorrect than this
way of fudging, which, in truth, is no other than a more or lesswellfounded opinion.' But, on the other hand, it is a severe constraint
for the magistrate; in the absenceof this regularity, 'every sentence
would be reckless,and in a senseit may be said that it is unjust even
when, in truth, the accusedis guilty' (Poullain du Parc, r rz-r3 :- see
also Esmein, e6o-83 and Mittermaier, ry-r9). The day will come
when the singularity of this judicial truth will appear scandalous:
as if the law did not have to obey the rules of common truth. 'What
would be said of a semi-proof in the sciencescapableof demonstrationi What would a geometrical or algebraic semi-proof amount
tol' (Seigneux de Correvon, 63). But it should not be forgotten
that these.formalconstraints on legal proof were a mode of regulation internal to absolute power and exclusive of knowledge.
Written, secret, subjected, in order to construct its proofs, to
rigorous rules, the penal investigation was a machine that might
produce the truth in the absenceof the accused.And by this very
fact, though the law strictly speaking did not require it, this procedure was to tend necessarily to the confession. And for two
reasons:first, becausethe confession constituted so strong a proof

37

Torture
that there was scarcelyany need to add others, or to enter the diffcult and dubious combinatory of clues; the confession, provided it
was obtained in the correct manner, almost dischargedthe prosecution of the obligation to provide further evidence (in any case,the
most difficult evidence). Secondly, the only way that this procedure
might use all its unequivocal authority, and become a real victory
over the accused,the only way in which the truth might exert all its
power, was for the criminal to accept responsibility for his own
crime and himself sign what had been skilfully and obscurely
'It
constructedby the preliminary investigation. is not enodgh', as
Ayrault, who did not care for these secret procedures, remarked,
'that
wrong-doers be justly punished. They must if possible judge
and condemn themselves'(Ayrault, r. I, chapter r4). Within the
crime reconstituted by writing, the criminal who confessedcame to
play the role of living truth. The confession,an act of the criminal,
responsibleand speakingsubject,was the complement to the written,
secret prelimlnary investigation. Hence the importance that all this
procedure of an inquisitorial type accorded to the confession.
Hence, too, the ambiguities of its role. On the one hand, an
attempt was made to introduce it into the general arithmetic of
evidence;it was stressedthat it was no more than one proof among
many. It was not the evidentia rel nor was it the strongest of the
proofs, it was not in itself enough to bring conviction, it had to be
accompaniedby additional, circumstantial evidence;for it is a wellknown fact that the accused sornedmes declare themselves to be
guilty of crimes that they have not committed; the examining magistrate had therefore to carry out additional investigations if he
possessedno more than the confession of the accused.But, on the
other hand, the confession had priority over any other kind of
evidence. To a certain extent, it transcendedall other evidencel an
element in the calculation of the truth, it was also the act by which
the accusedacceptedthe charge and recognized its truth; it ransformed an investigationcarried out without him into a voluntary
affirmation. Through the confession, the accusedhimself took part
in the ritual of producing penal truth. As medieval law put it, the
'renders
the thing notorious and manifest'. To this first
confession
ambiguity was added a second: as a particularly strong proof,
requiring for a conviction only a few additional clues, thus reducing

38

The spectacleof the scaffold
to the minimum the work of investigation and the mechanics of
demonstration, the confession was therefore highly valued; every
possible coercion would be used to obtain it. But, although it had
to be, in the procedure, the living and oral counterpart of the
written preliminary investigation, although it had to be its reply,
its authentication, as it were, on the part of the accused,it had to be
surrounded by guaranteesand formalities. It preserved something
'spontaneous',
of a transaction: that is why it had to be
why it had
to be formulated before the competent court, why it had to be made
in full consciousness,why it should not concern impossible things,
etc.2Through the confession,the accusedcommitted himself to the
procedurel he signed the truth of the preliminary investigation.
This double ambiguity of the confession(an elementof proof and
the counterpart of preliminary investigation; the effect of constraint
and a semi-voluntary transaction)explains the two great meansused
by classicalcriminal law to obtain ir the oath that the accusedwas
asked to make before his interrogatory (and therefore under threat
of perjury before both human and divine justice; and, at the same
time, a ritual act of commitment); judicial torture (physical violence
to obtain truth, which, in any case,had then to be repeatedbefore
'spontaneous'
the judges, as a
confession, if it were to constitute
proof). At the end of the eighteenth century, torture was to be
denounced as a survival ofthe barbarities ofanother age: the mark
'Gothic'.
of a savagery that was denounced as
It is true that the
practice of torture is of ancient origin: it goes back at least as far
as the Inquisition, of course, and probably to the torture of slaves.
But it did not figure in classicallaw as a survival or defect. It occupied a strict place in a complex penal mechanism, in which the
procedure of an inquisitorial type was reinforced with elements of
the accusatorysystem; in which the written demonstration required
an oral .correlativel in which the techniques of proof administered
by the magistrateswere mingled with the methods of the ordeal to
which the accusedwas challenged;in which he was called upon - if
necessaiy by the most violent persuasion - to play the role of
voluntary partner in the procedurel in which it was a question, in
short, of producing truth by a mechanism consisting of two elements - that of the investigation carried out in secretby the judicial
authority and that of the act ritually performed by the accused.The

,9

Torture
body of the accused,the speaking and, if necessary,suffering body,
assured the interlocking of these two mechanismsl that is why,
until the classicalsystem of punishment was re-examinedfrom top
to bottom, there were so few raHicalcriticisms of torture (the most
famous being Nicolas's Si /a tortturcestun moyend ulrifer les uimes
of 168z). Much more frequent were simple recommendations of
prudence: 'Judicial torture is a dangerous means of arriving at
knowledge of the truth; that is why iudges must nor resort to it without due consideration. Nothing is more equivocal. There are guilty
men who have enough firmnessto hide a true crime . . . and innocent
victims who are made to confess crimes of which they were not
guilty' (Ferridre, 6r z).
On this basis one may see the functioning of judicial torture, or
interrogation under torture, as a torture of the truth. To begin with,
judicial torture was not a way of obtaining the truth at all costs;it
was not the unrestrained torture of modern interrogationsl it was
certainly cruel, but it was not savage.It was a regulated practice,
obeying a well-defined procedure; the various stages,their duration,
the instruments used, the length of ropes and the heavinessof the
weights used,the number of interventions madeby the interrogating
magistrate, all this was, according to the different local practices,
carefully codiFed (ln ry29, Aguesseauordered an investigation into
the meansand rules of torture used in France. For a summary of the
findings, cf. Joly de Fleury, 3zz-8.) Torture was a strict fudicial
game.And, as such,it was linked to the old testsor trials - ordeals,
judicial duels, judgementsof God - that were practisedin accusatory
procedureslong before the techniquesof the Inquisition. Something
of the joust survived, between the judge who ordered the judicial
'patient' torture and the suspectwho was torturedl the
this is the
term used to designatethe victim - was subjectedto a seriesof trials,
graduated in sevirity, in which he succeededif he 'held out', or
failed if he confessed.(The first degree of torture was the sight of
the instruments. In the caseof children or of persons over the age
of seventy, one did not go beyond this stage.) But the examining
magistratedid not employ torture without himself taking certain
risks (apart, that is, from the dangerofcausing the suspect'sdeath);
he had a stake in the game, namely, the evidencethat he had already
collected;for the rule was that if the accused'held out' and did not
40

The spectacle of the scaffold
confess, the magistrate was forced to drop the charges. The tortured
man had then won. Hence the custom, which had been introduced
'pending
for the most serious cases,of imposing iudicial torture
proof': in this casethe magistrate could continue with his investigation after the torture had failed; the suspect was not declared
innocent by his resistance;but at least his victory saved him from
being condemned to death. The judge kept all his cards, except the
principal one, Omnia citra morum. Hence the recommendation
often made to magistrates, in the case of the most serious crimes,
not to subject to judicial tofture a suspectagainstwhom the evidence
was sufficiently convincing for, if he managed to resist the torrure,
the magisrate would no longer have the right to pass the death
sentence,which he neverthelessdeserved; in such a ioust, justice
would be the loser: if the evidencewas sufficient'to condemn such a
guilty person to death', one should not 'leave the conviction to
chanceand to the outcome of a provisional interrogation that often
leads to nothing; for it is in the interest of public safety to make
examples of grave, horrible and capital crimes' (Rousseaud de la
Combe, 1o3).
Beneath an apparently determined, impatient search for truth,
one finds in classicaltorture the regulated mechanismof an ordeal:
a physical challenge that must define the truth; if the patient is
guilty, the pains that it imposesare not unjust; but it is also a mark
of exculpation if he is innocent. In the practice of torture, pain,
confrontation and tmth were bound together: they worked together on the patient's body. The searchfor truth through judicial
torture was certainly a way of obtaining evidence,the most serious
of all - the confessionof the guilty person; but it was also the battle,
and this victory of one adversary over the other, that 'produced'
truth according to a ritual. In torture employed to extract a confession, there was an element of the investigation; there also was an
element of the duel.
It is as if investigation and punishment had become mixed. And
this is not the least paradoxical thing about it. Judicial torture was
indeed defined as a way of complementing the demonstration when
'there
are not sufficient penalties in the trial'. For it was included
among the penalties;it was a penalty so grave that, in the hierarchy
of punishments, the ordinance of ry(n placed it immediately after

4r

Torture
death. How can a penalty be used as a meansl one was later to ask.
How can one treat as a punishment what ought to be a method of
demonstrationl The reason is to be found in the way in which
criminal justice, in the classicalperiod, operated the production of
truth. The different pieces of evidence did not constitute so many
neutral elements,until such time as they could be gathered together
into a single body of evidence that would bring the final certainty
of guilt. Each piece of evidence aroused a particular degree of
abomination. Guilt did not begin when all the evidencewas gathered
together; piece by piece, it was constituted by each of the elements
that made it possible to recognize a guilty person. Thus a semiproof did not leave the suspect innocent until such time as it was
completed; it made him semi-guilty; slight evidence of a serious
crime marked someoneas slightly criminal. In short, penal demonstration did not obey a dualistic system: true or false; but a
principle of continuous gradation; a degree reachedin the demonstration already formed a degreeof guilt and consequentlyinvolved
a degree of punishment. The suspect, as such, always deserved a
certain punishment; one could not be the obiect of suspicion and be
completely innocent. Suspicion implied an elementofdemonstration
as regards the judge, the mark ofa certain degreeofguilt as regards
the suspectand a limited form of penalty as regards punishment. A
suspect,who remaineda suspect,was not for all that declaredinnocent, but was partially punished. When one reacheda certain degree
of presumption, one could then legitimately bring into play a
practice that had a dual role: to begin the punishment in pursuance
of the information already collected and to make use of this first
stage of punishment in order to extort the truth that was still missing. In the eighteenth century, judicial torture functioned in that
strange economy in which the ritual that produced the truth went
side by side with the ritual that imposedthe punishment.The body
interrogatedin torture constituted the point of application of the
punishment and the locus of extortion of the truth. And just as
presumptionwas inseparablyan elementin the investigationand a
fragment of guilt, the regulated pain involved in judicial torture
was a meansboth of punishmentand of investigation.
Now, curiously enough, this interlocking of the two rituals
42

The spectacleof the scaffold
through the body continued, evidence having been confirmed and
sentencepassed,in the actual carrying out of the penalty; and the
body of the condemnedman was once again an essentialelement in
the ceremonial of public punishment. It was the task of the guilty
man to bear openly his condemnation and the truth of the crime
that he had committed. His body, displayed,exhibited in procession,
tortured, served as the public support of a procedure that had
hitherto remained in the shade;in him, on him, the sentencehad to
be legible for all. This immediate, striking manifestation of the
truth in the public implementation of penalties assumed, in the
eighteenth century, several aspects.
r. It made the guilty man the herald of his own condemnation.
He was given the task, in a sense,of proclaiming it and thus attesting
to the truth of what he had been charged with: the procession
through the streets, the placard attached to his back, chest or head
as a reminder of the sentence;the halts at various crossroads,the
reading of the sentence, the amendehonorableperformed at the doors
of churches,in which the condemnedman solemnly acknowledged
'Barefoot,
his crime
wearing a shirt, carrying a torch, kneeling, to
say and to declare that wickedly, horribly, treacherously, he has
committed the most detestable crime, etc.'; exhibition at a stake
where his deedsand the sentencewere read out; yet another reading
of the sentenceat the foot of the scaffold; whether he was to go
simply to the pillory or to the stake and the wheel, the condemned
man published his crime and the justice that had been meted out to
him by bearing them physically on his body.
z. It took up once again the sceneof the confession. It duplicated the forced proclamation of the amende honorable with a
spontaneous, public acknowledgement. It established the public
execution as the moment of truth. These last moments, when the
guilty man no longer has anything to lose, are won for the full light
of truth. After the passing of the sentence,the court could decide
on some new torture to obtain the names of possible accomplices.
It was also recognized that at the very moment he mounted the
scaffold the condemnedman could ask for a respite in order to make
new revelations.The public expectedthis new turn in the course of
truth. Many made use of it in order to gain time, as did Michel
Barbier, found guilry of armed assaul* 'He stared impudently at the

43

Torture
scaffold and said that it had certainly not been set up for him, since
he was innocent; he 6rst asked to return to the chamber, where he
beat about the bush for half an hour, still trying to justify himself;
then, when he was sent back to execution, he ascendedthe scaffold
with a purposeful air, but, when he saw himself undressedand tied
to the cross before being stretched, he asked to go back to the
chamber a second time and there made a full confession of his
crimes and even declared that he was guilty of another murder'
(Hardy, IV, 8o). The function of the public torture and execution
was to reveal the truth; and in this respectit continued, in the public
eye, the work ofthe iudicial tornrre conducted in private. It added
to the conviction the signature of the convicted man. A successful
public execution justified justice, in that it published the truth of the
crime in the very body of the man to be executed.An exampleof the
good condemnedman was Frangois Billiard, a senior postal official,
who murdered his wife in ry72. The executioner wanted to hide
'
his face to spare him the insults of the crowd: "This punishment,
which I have merited, has not been inflicted upon mer" he said, "so
that I should not be seen by the public. . ." He was still wearing
mourning dress in honour of his wife. . . He was wearing new
shoes,his hair had been recently curled and powdered, and he had a
countenance so modest and so dignified that ihose present who
found themselvesobserving him more closely said that he must be
the most perfect Christian or the greatest of all hypocrites. The
placard that he was wearing on his chest had gone askew, and it was
noticed that he had straightenedit himself, no doubt so that people
could read it the more easily' (Hardyrlr gzT).If each of the participana played his role well, the penal ceremony had the effectiveness
of a long public confession.
3. It pinned the public torture on to the crime itself; it established
from one to the other a seriesof decipherablerelations. It was an
exhibition of the corpse of the condemned man at the sceneof his
crime, or at one of the near-by crossroads.The execution was often
carried out at the very place where the crime had been committed as in the caseof the student who, in ryz3,had, killed severalpersons
and for whom the presidial court of Nantes decided to set up a
scaffold in front of the inn where he had committed his murders
(Nantes, F.F. rz4; cf. Parfouru, XXV). There was the use of
44

The spectacleof the scaffold
'symbolic'

torrure in which the forms of the execution referred to
the nature of the crime: the tonguesof blasphemerswere pierced, the
impure were burnt, the right hand of murderers was cut off; sometimes the condemned man was made to carry the instrument of his
crime - thus Damiens was made to hold in his guilty right hand the
famous dagger with which he had committed the crime, hand and
dagger being smeared with sulphur and burnt together. As Vico
'an
remarked, this old jurisprudence was
entire poetics'.
There were even some casesof an almost theatrical reproduction
of the crime in the execution of the guilty man - with. the same
instruments, the same gestures. Thus justice hid the crime reenacted before the eyes of all, publishing it in its truth and at the
same time annulling it in the death of the guilty man. Even as late
in the eighteenthcentury as rz72,one finds sentenceslike the following: a servant girl at Cambrai, having killed her mistreSs,was condemned to be taken to the place of her execution in a cart 'used to
collect rubbish at the crossroads'; there a gibbet was to be set up
'at
the foot of which will be placed the samechair in which the said
Laleu, her mistress,was sitting at the time of the murder; and having
seated the criminal there, the execurioner of the High Court of
Justice will cut off her right hand, throw it in her presenceinto the
6re, and, immediately afterwards, will strike her four blows with
the cleaver with which she murdered the said Laleu, the first and
second being on the head, the third on the left forearm and the
fourth on the chest; this done, she will be hung and strangled on the
said gibbet until she be dead; and when two hours have elapsedher
dead body will be removed and the head separatedfrom it at the
foot of the said gibbet on the said scaffold, with the same cleaver
she used to murder her mistress, and the same head exhibited
on a pole twenty feet high outside the gates of the said Cambrai,
within reachof the road that leadsto Douai, and the rest of the body
put in a sack, and buried near the said pole at a depth of ten feet'
(quoted in Dautricourt, 269-7o).
4. Lastly, the slownessof the processof torture and execution,
its sudden dramatic moments, the cries and sufferings of the condemned man serve as an ultimate proof at the end of the judicial
ritual. Every death agony expressesa certain truth: but, when it
takes place on the scaffold, it does so with more intensity, in ihat it

4t

Torture
is hastenedby pain; with more rigour, becauseit occurs exactly at
the juncture between the judgement of men and the iudgement of
God; with more oStentation,becauseit takes place in public. The
sufferings of the condemned man are an extension of those of the
judicial torture that precedesthem; in the judicial torture, however,
the game was not yet over and one could still save one's life; now
one will die, without any doubt, and it is one's soul that one must
save.The eternal game has already begun: the torture ofthe execution anticipatesthe punishments of the beyond; it shows what they
are; it is the theatre of hell; the cries of the condemned man, his
struggles, his blasphemies,already signify his irremediable destiny.
But the pains here below may also be counted as penitence and so
alleviate the punishments of the beyond: God will not fail to take
such a martyrdom into account, providing it is borne with resignation. The cruelty of the earthly punishment will be deducted from
the punishment to come: in it is glimpsed the promise of forgiveness. But, it might be said, are not such terrible sufferings a sign
that God has abandonedthe guilty man to the mercy of his fellow
creaturesl And, far from securing future absolution, do they not
prefigure imminent damnation; so that, if the condemned man dies
quickly, without a prolonged agony, is it not proof that God wishes
to protect him and to prevent him from falling into despairl There
is, therefore, an ambiguity in this suffering that may signify equally
well the truth of the crime or the error of the judges, the goodness
or the evil of the criminal, the coincidenceor the divergencebetween
the judgement of men and that of God. Hence the insatiablecuriosiry
that drove the spectatorsto the scaffold to witness the spectacleof
sufferings truly endured; there one could decipher crime and innocence,the past and the future, the here below and the eternal. It was
a moment of truth that all the spectatorsquestioned:eachword, each
cry, the duration of the agony, the resisting body, the life that clung
desperatelyto it, all this constituted a sign. There was the man who
'six
survived
hours on the wheel, and did not want the executioner,
who consoled and heartenedhim no doubt as best he could, to leave
him for a moment'; there was the man who died 'with true Christian
feeling, and who manifested the most sincere repentance';the man
who 'expired on the wheel an hour after being put there; it is said
that the spectatorsof his torture were moved by the outward signs

46

The spectacle of the scaffold
of religion and repentancethat he gave'; the man who had shown
the most marked signs of contrition throughout the iourney to the
'did not
scaffold, but who, when placed alive on the wheel,
cease
'had
to let forth the most horrible cries'; or again the woman who
preservedher calm up to the moment when the sentencewas read,
but whose wits then began to turnj she was quite mad by the time
she was hanged' (Hardyr I, 13; fV, 4z;Y, ry4).
We have come full circle: from the judicial torture to the execution, the body has produced and reproduced the truth of the crime
-or rather it constitutes the element which, through a whole set of
rituals and trials, confessesthat the crime took place,admits that the
accuseddid indeed commit it, shows that he bore it inscribed in
himself and on himself, supports the operation of punishment and
manifests its effects in the most striking way. The body, several
times tortured, provides the synthesisof the reality of the deedsand
the tmth of the investigation, of the documents of the caseand the
statementsof the criminal, of the crirne and the punishment. It is an
essentialelement, therefore, in a penal liturgy, in which it must
s!rve as the partner ofa procedure ordered around the formidable
rights ofthe sovereign, the prosecution and secrecy.
The public execution is to be understood not only as a iudicial,
but also as a political ritual. It belongs, even in minor cases,to the
ceremoniesby which power is manifested.
An offence, according to the law ofthe classicalage, quite apart
from the damage it may produce, apart even from the rule that it
'If
breaks, offends the rectitude of those who abide by the law:
one
commits something that the law forbids, even if there is neither harm
nor injury to the individual, it is an offencethat demandsreparation,
becausethe right of the superior man is violated and becauseit
offends the dignity of his character' (Risi, 9). Besidesits immediate
victim, the crime attacks the sovereign: it attacks him personally,
since the law representsthe will of the sovereign; it attacks him
physically, since the force of the law is the force of the prince.
'For
a law to be in force in this kingdom,.it must necessarilyhave
emanateddirectly from the sovereign, or at leastbeen confirmed by
the seal of his authority' (Muyart de Vouglans, xxxiv). The intervention of the sovereign is not, therefore, an arbitration between

Torture
two adversaries;it is much more, even, than an action to enforce
respect for the rights of the individual; it is a direct reply to the
person who has offended him. There can be no doubt that 'the
exerciseof the sovereign power in the punishment of crime is one
of the essentialparts of the administration of justice' (Jousse,vii).
Punishment, therefore, cannot be identified with or even measured
by the redressof the injury; in punishment, there must always be a
portion thdt belongs to the prince, and, even when it is combined
with the redresslaid down, it constitutesthe most important element
in the penal liquidation of the crime. Now, this portion belonging
to the prince is not in itself simple: on the one hand, it requires
redress for the injury that has been done to his kingdom (as an
element of disorder and as an example given to others, this considerable iniury is out of all proportion to that which has been
committed upon a private individual); but it also requires that the
king take revenge for an affront to his very person;
The right to punish, therefore, is an aspect of the sovereign's
'that
right to make war on his enemies: to punish belongs to
absolute power of life and death which Roman law calls ,nerum
imperium, a right by virtue of which the prince seesthat his law is
respectedby ordering the punishment of ciime' (Muyan de Vouglans, xxxiv). But punishment is also a way of exacting retribution
that is both personal and public, since the physico-political force
'One
of the sovereign is in a sensepresent in the law:
seesby the
very definition of the law that it tends not only to prohibit, but also
to avengecontempt for its authority by the punishment of those who
violate its prohibitions' (Muyart de Vouglans, xxxiv). In the execution of the most ordinary penalty, in the most punctilious respectof
legal forms, reign the active forces of revenge.
The public execution, then, has a juridico-political function. It is
a ceremonial by which a momentarily iniured sovereignty is reconstituted. It restores that sovereignty by manifesting it at its most
spectacular. The public execution, however hasty and everyday,
belongs to a whole seriesof great rituals in which power is eclipsed
and restored (coronation, entry of the king into a conquered city,
the submission of rebellious subjects); over and above the crime
that has placed the sovereign in contempt, it deploys before all eyes
an invincible force. Its aim is not so much to re-establisha balance

+8

The spectacle of the scaffold
as to bring into play, as its extreme point, the dissymmetry between
the subject who has dared to violate the law and the all-powerful
sovereign who displays his strength. Although redress of the private
iniury occasionedby the offencemust be proportionate, although the
sentencemust be equitable, the punishment is carried out in such a
way as to give a spectaclenot of measure, but of imbalance and
excess;in this liturgy of punishment, there must be an emphatic
affirmation of power and of its intrinsic superiority. And this superiority is not simply that of right, but that of the physical strength
ofthe sovereign beating down upon the body ofhis adversary and
mastering iu by breaking the law, the offender has touched the very
person of the prince; and it is the prince - or at least those to whom
he has delegated his force - who seizesupon the body of rhe condemned man and displays it marked, beaten,broken. The ceremony
of punishment, then, is an exerciseof 'terror'. When the jurists of
the eighteenth century began their polemic with the reformen, they
offered a restrictive, 'modemist' interpretation of the physical
cruelty of the penalties imposed by the law: if severepenalties are
required, it is becausetheir examplemust be deeply inscribed in the
hearts of men. Yet, in fact, what had hitherto maintained this
practice of tornrre was not an economy of example, in the sensein
which it was to be understood at the time of the idCologues(that the
representationofthe penalty should be greater than the interest of
the crime), but a policy of terror: to make everyone aware, through
the body of the criminal, of the unrestrained presenceof the sovereign. The public execution did not re-establishjustice; it reactivated
power. fn the seventeenthcentury, and even in the early eighteenth
century, it was not, therefore, with all its theatre of terror, a lingering hang-over from an earlier age. Its ruthlessness,its spectacle,its
physical violence, its unbalanced play of forces, its meticulous
ceremonial, its entire apparatus were inscribed in the political
functioning of the penal system.
This enablesus to understand some of the characteristicsof the
liturgy of torture and execution - above all, the importance of a
ritual that was to deploy its pomp in public. Nothing was to be
hidden of this triumph of the law Its episodeswere uaditionally the
same and yet the sentencesnever failed to list them, so important
were they in the penal mechanism:processions,halts at crossroads

49

Torture
and church doors, the public reading of the sentence,kneeling,
declarationsof repentancefor the offence to God and to the king.
Sometimesquestions of precedenceand ceremonial were settled by
'The
the court itselfi
officers will ride according to the following
order: namely, at the head two police sergeantslthen the patient;
after the patient, Bonfort and Le Corre on his left will walk together,
followed by the clerk of the court and in this manner shall go to the
market square at which place the judgement shall be carried out'
(quoted in Correr T). Now, this meticulous ceremonialwas not only
legal, but guite explicitly military. The justice of the king was
shown to be an armed justice. The sword that punished the guilty
was also the sword that destroyedenemies.A whole military machine
surrounded the scaffold: cavalry of the watch, archers,guardsmen,
soldiers. This was intended, of course, to prevent any escapeor
show of force; it was also to prevent any outburst of sympathy or
anger on the part of the people, any attempt to savethe condemned
or to have them immediately put to death; but it was also a reminder
that every crime constituted as it were a rebellion against the law
and that the criminal was an enemy of the prince. All thesereasonswhether a matter of precaution in particular circumstances or a
functional elementin the performanceof the ritual - made the public
execution more than an act of iustice; it was a manifestation of
forcel or rather, it was justice as the physical, material and awesome
force of the sovereign deployed there. The ceremony of the public
torture and execution displayed for all to see the power relation
that gave his force to the law.
As a ritual of armed law, in which the prince showed himself,
indissociably, both as head of justice and head of war, the public
execution had two aspects:one of victory, the other of struggle.
It brought to a solemn end a war, the outcome of which was
decided in advance,between the criminal and the sovereign; it had
to manifest the disproportion of power of the sovereign over those
whom he had reduced to impotence. The dissymmetry, the irreversible imbalanceof forces were an essentialelement in the public
execution.A body effaced,reducedto dust and thrown to the winds,
a body destroyed piece by piece by the infinite power of the sovereign constituted not only the ideal, but the real limit of punishment.
Take the celebratedtorture and execution of Massola,which took

to

The spectacleof the scaffold
place at Avignon and which was one of the first to arouse the
indignation of contemporaries.This was an apparently paradoxical
ceremony, since it took place almost entirely after death, and since
iustice did little more than deploy its magnificent theatre, the ritual
praise of its force, on ? corps!; The condemned man was blindfolded and tied to a stakel all around, on the scaffold, were stakes
'The
with iron hooks.
confessorwhispered in the patient's ear and,
had
given
him
after he
the blessing, the executioner, who had an
iron bludgeon of the kind usedin slaughter houses,delivered a blow
with all his might on the temple of the wretch, who fell dead: the
mortis exactor, who had a large knife, then cut his throat, which
spatteredhim with blood; it was a horrible sight to see;he severed
the sinews near the two heels, and then opened up the belly from
which he drew the heart, liver, spleenand lungs, which he stuck on
an iron hook, and cut and dissectedinto pieces,which he then stuck
on the other hooks as he cut them, as one does with an animal.
Look who can at such a sight' (Bruneau, z;9). In the explicit
referenceto the butcher's trade, the infinitesimal destruction of the
body is linked here with spectacle:each piece is placed on display.
The execution was accompanied by a whole ceremonial of
triumph; but it alsoincluded, asa dramatic nucleusin its monotonous
progress, a sceneof confrontation: this was the immediate, direct
'patient'.
action of the executioneron the body of the
It was a coded
action, of course, since custom and, often quite explicitly, the sentence prescribedits principal episodes.Nevertheless,it did preserve
something of the battle. The executionernot only implemented the
law, he also deployed the force; he was the agentof a violence applied,
in order to masterit, to the violence of the crime. Materially, physicallyrhewas the adversaryof this crime: an adversarywho could show
pity or ruthlessness.Damhoudtre complained, with many of his
contemporaries,that the executionersexercised'every cruelty with
regard to the evil-doing patients, reating them, buffeting and killing
them as if they had a beastin their hands'(Damhouddre,zr9). And
for a long time the habit did not die out.s There was still an element
of challenge and of iousting in the ceremony of public execution.
If the executionertriumphed, if he managedto cut off the head with
a single blow, he'showei it to the people,put it down on the ground
and then waved to the public who greatly applauded his skill by

tr

Torture
clapping'. (A sceneobservedby T. S. Gueulette, at the execution of
Montigny in ry37 - cf. Anchel,6z-9.) Conversely, if he failed, if he
'patient' as
reguired, he was liable to
did not succeedin killing the
the
case
of
Damiens's
executioner who, being
punishment. This was
his
patient
to
the
rules, had to cut him
according
unable to quarter
Damiens's
hair,
had been promresult,
which
up with a knife; as a
from the sale
and
the
money
obtained
ised to him, was confiscated
years
later,
an
executioner
at Avignon
Some
given to the poor.
who
pain
to
three
were
nevenheless
bandits,
caused excessive
formidable characters, whom he had to hang; the spectators became
angry; they denounced him; in order to punish him and also to
protect him from mob violence, he was put into prison (Duhamel,
zy). And, behind this punishment of the unskilful executioner,
standsa tradition, which is still close to us, according to which the
condemned man should be pardoned ifthe execution happened to
fail. It was a custom clearly established in certain countries: in
Burgundy, for instance (cf. Chassan6e,tt). The people often
expectedit to be applied, and would sometimesprotect a condemned
man who had escapeddeath in this way. In order to abolish both
custom and expectation, they had to revive the adage,'the gibbet
does not lose its prey', to introduce explicit insmrctions in capital
sentences,such as'hanged by the neck until he be dead'. And iurists
like Serpillon or Blackstone were insisting in the middle of the
eighteenth century that a failure on the part of the executioner did
not mean that the condemned man's life was spared(Serpillon, III,
r roo). In his Commentaries on the Laws of England, Blackstone
'ft
remarks:
is clear, that if, upon iudgement to be hanged by the
neck till he is dead, the criminal be not thoroughly killed, but
revives, the sheriff must hang him again. For the former hanging
was no execution of the sentencel and, if a false tenderness were to
be indulged in such cases,a multitude of collusions might ensue'
(Blackstone, r99). There was something of the ordeal and something
of God's judgement thatwas still indecipherablein the ceremony of
execution. In his confrontation with the condemnedman, the executionerwas a little like the king's champion. Yet he was an unacknowledgeableand unacknowledgedchampion: the traditionwasrit seems,
that when the executioner'sletters were sealed,they were not placed
on the table, but thrown on the ground. The various prohibitions
t2

The spectacleof the scaffold
'very
'unnatural'
surrounding this
necessary' yet
office are well
known (Loyseau, 8o-8I). The executioner may have been, in a
sense,the king's sword; but he shared the infamy of his adversary.
The sovereign power that enjoined him to kill, and which through
him did kill, was not present in him; it was not identified with his
own ruthlessness.And it never appeared with more spectacular
effect than when it intemrpted the executioner's gesturewith a letter
of pardon. The short time that usually elapsed between sentence
and execution (often a few hours) meant that the pardon usually
arrived at the very last moment. But the ceremony, by the very
slownessof its progress, was no doubt arranged to leave room for
this eventuality. (Cf. Hardy, 3o January U@,l, rz; and 14 December ry7g,lY, zzg; Anchel, 16z-3, tells the story of Antoine Boulleteix, who was already at the foot of the scaffold when a horseman
'God
arrived carrying the celebratedparchment. Shouts of
save the
King' arose and Boulleteix was taken to the tavern, while the clerk
of the court made a collection on his behalf.) The condemned
always hoped for a pardon and, in order to drag things out, they
would pretend, even at the foot of the scaffold, that they had further
revelations to make. When the people wanted a pardon they called
for it aloud and tried to postpone the last moment, looking out for
the arrival of the messengerbearing the letter with the green wal(
sealand if necessaryclaiming that he was on his way (this happened
during the execution of those condemned for the uprising against
child abduction on 3 August r75o). The sovereign was present at
the execution not only as the power exacting the vengeanceof the
law, but as the power that could suspendboth law and vengeance.
He alone must remain master,he alone could wash away the offences
committed on his person; although it is true that he delegatedto the
courts the task of exercising his power to dispensejustice, he had
not transfered it; he retained it in its entirety and he could suspend
the sentenceor increaseit at will.
We must regard the public execution, as it was still ritualized in
the eighteenth century, as a political operation. It was logically
inscribed in a systemof punishment, in which the sovereign,directly
or indirectly, demanded, decided and carried out punishments, in
so far as it was he who, through the law, had been injured by the
crime. In every offencethere was a oimen majestatisand in the least

tt

Torture
criminal a potential regicide. And the regicide, in turn, was neither
more nor less, than the total, absolute criminal since, instead of
attacking, like any offender, a pafticular decision or wish of the
sovereign power, he attacked the very principle and physical person
of the prince. The ideal punishment of the regicide had to constitute
the summumof all possible tortures. It would be an expression of
inGnite vengeance:French law, in any case,made provisions for no
fixed penalties for this sort of monstrosity. For the execution of
Ravaillac the form of the ceremony had to be invented, by combining all the cruellest tortures then practised in France. For Damiens,
an attempt was made to think up still more atrocious tortulres.
Suggestionswere made, but they were consideredto be lessperfect.
So the.form of Ravaillac's execution was repeated.And it must be
admitted that it was relatively modest if one thinks how in r584 the
assassinof William of Orange was abandonedto what seemslike an
'On
infinity of vengeance.
the 6rst day, he was taken to the square
where he found a cauldron of boiling water, in which was submerged
the arm with which he had committed the crime. The next day the
arrn was cut off, and, since it fell at his feet, he was constantly
kicking it up and down the scaffold; on the third day, red-hot
pincers were applied to his breastsand the front of his arml on the
fourth day, the pincers were applied similarly on the back of his
arm and on his buttocks; and thus, consecutively, this man was
tortured for eighteendays.' On the last day, he was put to'the wheel
and'mailloti' [beaten with a wooden club]. After six hours, he was
'Finally
still asking for water, which was not given him.
the police
magistrate was begged to put an end to him by strangling, so that
his soul should not despairand be lost' (Brant6me,II, r9r-z).
There can be no doubt that the existenceof public tortures and
executions were connected with something quite other than this
internal organization. Rusche and Kirchheimer are right to seeit as
the effect of a system of production in which labour power, and
therefore the human body, has neither the utility nor the commercial
value that are conferred on them in an economy of an industrial
'contempt'
type. Moreover, this
for the body is certainly related to
a general attitude to death; and, in such an attitude, one can detect
not only the values proper to Christianity, but a demographical,

t4

The spectacle of the scaffold
in a sensebiological, situation: the ravages of diseaseand hunger,
the periodic massacresof the epidemics, the formidable child mortality rate, the precariousnessof the bio-economic balances- all this
made death familiar and gave rise to rituals intended to integrate it,
to make it acceptable and to give a meaning to. its permanent
aggression.But in analysing why the public executionssurvived for
so long, one must also refer to the historical conjunctuie; it must
not be forgotten that the ordinance of ft7o that regulated criminal
iustice almost up to the Revolution had even increasedin certain
resPectsthe rigour of the old edics; Pussort, who, among the commissioners entrusted with the task of drawing up the documen$,
represented the intentions of the king, was responsible for this,
despite the views of such magistratesas Lamoignon; the number of
uprisings at the very height of the classicalage, the rumbling close
at hand of civil war, the king's desire to assert his power at the
expenseof the parlements go a long way to explain the survival of
so severea penal system.
In accounting for a penal systeminvolving so much tornrre, these
are general and in a senseexternal reasons;they explain not only
the possibility and the long survival of physical punishments, but
also the weaknessand the rather sporadic nature of the opposition
to them. Against this general background we must bring out their
precise function. If torture was so strongly embedded in legal
practice, it was becauseit revealed truth and showed the operation
of power. It assuredthe articulation of the written on the oral, the
secreton the public, the procedure ofinvestigation on the operation
of the confession;it made it possible to reproduce the crime on the
visible body of the criminal; in the same horror, the crime had to
be manifestedand annulled. It also made the body of the condemned
man the place where the vengeanceof the sovereign was applied,
the anchoring point for a manifestation of power, an opportunity
of affirming the dissymmetry of forces. We shall see later that the
truth-power relation remains at the heart of all mechanisms of
punishment and that it is still to be found in contemporary penal
practice- but in a quite different form and with very different effects.
The Enlightenment q/as soon to condemn public torture and execu'atrocity'tion as an
a term that was often used to describeit, but
without any critical intention, by jurists thernselves.Perhaps the

tt

Torture
'atrocity'
notion of
is one of those that best designatesthe economy
of the public execution in the old penal practice. To begin with,
atrocity is a characteristicof some of the great crimes: it refers to the
number of natural or positive, divine or human laws that they
attack, to the scandalousopennessor, on the conrary, to the secret
cunning with which they have been committed, to the rank and
status of those who are their authors and victims, to the disorder
that they presuppose or bring with them, to the horror they
arouse.In so far as it must bring the crime before everyone's eyes,
in all its severity, the punishment must take responsibility for this
atrocity: it must bring it to light by confessions,statements,inscriptions that make it public; it must reproduce it in ceremoniesthat
apply it to the body of the guilty person in the form of humiliation
and pain. Atrocity is that part of the crime that the punishment
turns back as torture in order to display it in the full light of day:
it is a figure inherent in the mechanism that produces the visible
truth of the crime at the very heart of the punishment itself. The
public execution formed part of the procedure that establishedthe
reality of what one punished. Furthermore, the atrocity of a crime
was also the violence of the challengeflung at the sovereign; it was
that which would move him to make a reply whose function was to
go further than this atrocity, to master it, to overcome it by an
excessthat annulled it. The atrocity that haunted the public execution played, therefore, a double role: it was the principle of the
communication between the crime and the punishment, it was also
the exacerbationof the punishment in relation to the crime. It provided the spectaclewith both truth and power; it was the culmination of the ritual of the investigation and the ceremony in which the
sovereign triumphed. And it joined both together in the tortured
body. The punitive practice of the nineteenth century was to strive
'serene'
to put as much distanceas possible between the
searchfor
truth and the violence that cannot be entirely effacedfrom punishment. It set out to mark the heterogeneity that separatesthe c-ime
that is to be punishedand the punishment imposed by the public
power. Between truth and punishment, there should no longer be
any other relation than one of legitimate consequence.The punishing power should not soil its hands with a crime greater than the
one it wished to punish. It should remain innocent of the penalty

16

The spectacle of the scaffold
'Let
that it inflicts.
us hasten to proscribe such tortures. They were
worthy only of the crowned monsters who governed the Romans'
(Pastoret, on the subject of the punishment of regicidesrllr 6r). But,
according to the penal practice of the preceding period, the proximity in the public execution of the sovereign and the crime, the mix'demonstration'
ture that was produced in it of
and punishment,
fuere not the result of a barbarous confusionl what joined them
together was the mechanism of atrocity and its necessaryconcatenations. The atrocity of the expiation organized the ritual destruction
of infamy by omnipotence.
The fact that the crime and the punishment were related and
bound up in the form.of atrocity was not the result of some obscurely acceptedlaw of retaliation. It was the effect, in the rites of
punishment, of a cerain mechanismof power: of a power that not
only did not hesitate to exert itself directly on bodies, but was
exalted and strengthened by its visible manifestations; of a power
that asserteditself as an armed power whose functions of maintaining order were not entirely unconnectedwith the functions of warl
of a power that presentedrules and obligations as persorialbonds, a
breach of which constituted an offence and called for vengeancel
of a power for which disobediencewas an act of hostility, the first
sign of rebellion, which is not in principle different from civil war;
of a power that had to demonsrate not why it enforced its laws,
but who were its enemies,and what unleashing of force threatened
them; of a power which, in the absenceof continual supervision,
sought a renewal of its effect in the spectacleof its individual manifestations;of a power that was rechargedin the ritual display of its
reality as'super-power'.
Of all the reasons why punishment that was not in the least
'atrocious'
ashamedof being
was replacedby punishment that was
to claim the honour of being 'humane' there is one that must be
analysedat once, for it is internal to the public execution itselft at
once an element of its functioning and the principle of its perpetual
disorder.
In the ceremoniesof the public execution, the main characterwas
the people, whose real and immediate presencewas required for the
performance.An execution that was known to be taking place, but

t7

Tornrre
which did so in secret,would scarcelyhave had any meaning. The
aim was to make an example,not only by making people aware that
the slightest offence was likely to be punished, but by arousing
feelingsof terror by the spectacleof power letting its anger fall upon
'In
the guilty person:
criminal matters, the most dilficult point is
the imposition of the penalty: it is the aim and the end of the
procedure, and its only fruit, by example and terror, when it is well
applied to the guilty person' (Bruneau, unnumbered preface to the
first part).
But, in this sceneof terror, the role of the people was an ambiguous one. People were summoned as specta'tors:they were assembled
to observe public. exhibitions and amendeshonorables;pillories,
gallows and scafioldswere erectedin public squaresor by the roadsidel sometimesthe corpsesof the executedpersonswere displayed
for several days near the scenesof their crimes. Not only must
people know, they must seewith their ov/n eyes.Becausethey must
be made to be afraid; but also becausethey must be the witnesses,
the guarantors, of the punishment, and becausethey must to a
certain extent take part in it. The right to be witnesseswas one that
they possessedand claimed; a hidden execution was a privileged
execution, and in such casesit was often suspectedthat it had not
taken place with all its customary severity. There were protests
when at the last moment the victim v/as taken away out of sight.
The senior postal official who had been put on public exhibitiqn
'He
for killing his wife was later taken away from the crowd.
was
put into a hired coach; it was thought that if he had not been well
escorted, it would have been difficult to protect him from being
ill-treated by the populace,who yelled and jeeredat him' (Hardy, I,
328). When the woman Lescombat was hanged, care was taken to
'a
hide her face; she had
kerchief over her neck and head, which
made the public murmur and say that it was not Lescombat'
(Anchel, 7o-7r). The people claimed the right to observe the execution and to seewho was being executed.The 6rst time the guillotine
was used the Chroniquede Paris reported that people complained
'Give
that they could not see anything and chanted,
us back our
gallows' (Lawrence, 7rfr). The people also had a right to take part
The condemned man, carried in procession, exhibited, humiliated,
with the horror of his crime recalled in innumerable ways, was

18

The spectacle of the scaffold
offered to the insults, sometimes to the attacks of the spectators.
The vengeance of the people was called upon to become an unobtrusive part of the vengeance of the sovereign. Not that it was
in any way fundamental,or that the king had to expressin his own
way the people's revenge; it was rather that the people had to bring
its assistanceto the king when the king undertook 'to be avenged
on his enemies', especially when those enemies were to be found
among the people. It was rather like a 'scaffold service' that the
people owed the king's vengeance.This 'service' had been specified
in the old ordinanceq the edict of 1347 concerning blasphemers
stipulated that they would be s&ibited at the pillory'from the hour
of prime, to that of their deaths. And mud and other refuse, though
no stone or anything injurious, could be thrown at their faces. . .
The secondtime, in caseof relapse,it is our will that he be put in the
pillory on a solemn marke: day, and that his upper lip be split so
that the teeth appear.' No doubt, at the classical period, this form
of participation in the torture was no more than tolerated and
attempts were made to limit ic becauseof the barbarities that it gave
rise to and the usurpation it involved of the power to punish. But it
belonged too closely to the general economy of the public execution
for it to be eliminated altogether. Even in the eighteenth century,
there were scenes like the one that accompanied the execution of
Montigny in 1737; as the executioner was carrying out the execution, the local fish-wives walked in procession, holding aloft an
effigy of the condemnedman, and then cut offits head (Anchel,63).
And very often, as they moved slowly in procession through it,
'protected'from
criminals had to be
the crowd - both as an example
and as a target, a possible threat and a 'prey', promised but also
forbidden. In calling on the crowd to manifest its power, the
sovereign tolerated for a moment acts of violence, which he accepted
as a gign of allegiance, but which were strictly limited by the sovereign's own privileges.
Now it was on this point that the people, drawn to the spectacle
intended to terrorize it, could expressits rejection of the punitive
power and sometimes revolt. Preventing an execution that was
regarded as uniust, snatching a condemned man from the hands of
the executioner, obtaining his pardon by force, possibly pursuing
and assaulting the executioners, in any cirseabusing the judges and

t9

Torture
causing an uproar against the sentence- all this formed part of the
popular practicesthat invested, traversed and often overturned the
ritual of the public execution. This often happened, of course, in the
caseof those condemned for rioting: there were the disturbances
that followed a famous caseof child abduction, when the crowd
wanted to prevent the executionof three supposedrioters, who were
'because
to be hanged at the cemetery of Saint-Jean,
there were
fewer entrancesand processionsto guard';{ the terrified executioner
cut down one of the condemnedmenl the archerslet fy their arrows.
It occurred again after the corn riots of ry71; and again in 1786,
when the day-labourersmarched on Versaillesand set about freeing
their arrestedcomrades.But apart from these cases,when the processof agitation had been triggered off previously and for reasons
that did not concern some measureof penal iustice, one finds many
ommples when the agitation was provoked directly by a verdict
'disrurbances
and an execution: small, but innumerable
around the
scaffold'.
In their most elementaryforms, thesedisturbancesbeganwith the
shouts of encouragement,sometimesthe cheering,that accompanied
the condemnedman to his execution. Throughout the long proces'the
compassionof the meek and tendersion, he was sustainedby
hearted, and with the applause,admiration and envy of all the bold
and hardened' (Fielding, 44il.lt the crowd gathered round the
scaffold,it was not simply to witnessthe sufferingsof the condemned
man or to excite the anger of the executioner:it was also to hear an
individual who had nothing more to lose curse the iudges, the laws,
the government and religion. The public execution allowed the
luxury of these momentary sarurnalia, when nothing remained to
prohibit or to punish. Under the protection of imminent death, the
criminal could say everything and the crowd cheered.'ff there were
annals in which the last words of the tortured and executed were
scrupulously recorded, and if one had the courage to read through
them, even if one did no more than question the vile populace that
gathersaround the scaffoldsout of cruel curiosity, one would be told
that no one who had died on the wheel did not accuseheavenfor the
misery that brought him to the crime, reproach his judges for their
barbarity, curse the minister of the altars who accompaniesthem
and blaspheme against the God whose organ he is' (Boucher
(n

The spectacleof the scaffold
d'Argis, rz8-9). In theseexecutions,which ought to show only the
terrorizing power of the prince, there was a whole aspect of the
carnival, in which rules were inverted, authority mocked and
criminals transformed into heroes. The shame was turned round;
the courage, like the tears and the cries of the condemned, caused
offence only to the law. Fielding notes with regret: 'To unite the
ideas of death and shame is not so easy as may be imagined . . . I
will appealto any man who hath seenan execution, or a procession
to an execution; let him tell me. When he hath beheld a poor
wretch, bound in a cart, just on the verge of eternity, all pale and
trembling with his approaching fate, whether the idea of shame
hath ever intruded on his mindl much less will the bold daring
rogue, who glories in his present condition, inspire the beholder
with any such sensation' (Fielding, 4yo). For the people who are
there and observe, there is always, even in the most extreme vengeanceofthe sovereign a pretext for revenge.
This was especially the case if the conviction was regarded as
uniust - or if one saw a man of the people put to death, for a crime
that would have merited, for someonebetter born or richer, a comparatively light penalty.It would seemthat certain practicesof penal
justice were no longer supported in the eighteenth century - and
perhaps
"for longer by the lower strata of the population. This
would explain why executions could easily lead to the beginnings
of social disturbances.Since the poorest - it was a magistrate who
made the observation (Dupary, ry86, za7) - could not be heard in
the courts of law, it was where the law was manifested publicly,
where they were called upon to act as witnessesand almost as coadjutors of this law, that they could intervene, physically: enter by
force into the punitive mechanismand redistribute its effects; take
up in another sensethe violence of the punitive rituals. There was
agitation against the differencein penaltiesaccording to social class:
in r78r, the parish priest of Champr!had been killed by the lord
of the manor, and an attempt was made to declare the murderer
'the
insanel
peasants,who were extremely attached to their pastor,
were furious and had at first seemedready to lay violent handsupon
their lord and to set 6re to the castle. . . Everyone protested, and
rightly, against the indulgence of the minister who deprived iustice
of the meansof punishing so abominable a crime' (Hardy, IV, 39a).
6t

Torrure
There was agitation, too, against the excessivesentencespassedon
certain common offencesthat were not regardedas serious (such as
house-breaking); or against punishments for certain offencesconnectedwith socialconditions such aspetty larceny; the deathpenalty
for this crime arouseda great deal of discontent, becausethere were
many domestic servants in a single household and it was difficult
for them, in such a case,to prove their innocence,and also because
they could easily be victims of their employers' spite and because
the indulgence of certain masters who shut their eyes to such
behaviour made the fate ofservants accused,condemnedand hanged
even more iniquitous. The execution of such servants often gave
rise to protests(cf. Hardy,l,3r9,167;IIT, zz7-8; IV, r8o). There
was a small riot in Paris in ry6 in favour of a servant woman who
had stolen a pieceof cloth from her master.Despite the fact that the
woman admitted her guilt, handedback the material and begged for
mercy, the master refused to withdraw his complaint; on the day
ofthe execution,the local peopleprevented the hanging, invaded the
merchant'sshop and looted it; in the end, the servantwas pardoned,
but a woman, who attempted, unsuccessfully,to stick a needleinto
the wicked master, was banished for three years (Anchel, zz6).
One remembersthe great legal affairs of the eighteenth century,
when enlightened opinion intervened in the persons of the philosophes and certain magistrates:Calas, Sirven and the Chevalier de La
Barre, for instance.But lessattention is given to the popular agitations causedby punitive practice. Indeed, they seldom spread beyond a town, or even a district. Yet they did have a real importance.
Sometimesthese movements, which originated from below, spread
and attracted the attention of more highly placed persons who,
taking them up, gave them a new dimension (in the years preceding
the Revolution, the affair of Catherine Espinas,falsely convicted of
parricide in r78y, or the caseof the three men of Chaumont, condemned to the wheel, for whom Dupaty, in 1786,wrote his celebrated memoir, or that of Marie Frangoise Salmon, whom the
parlement of Rouen in t78z had condemnedto the stake,for poisoning, but who in 1786 had still not been executed). More usually,
those disturbances had maintained around penal iustice and its
manifestations, which ought to have been exemplary, a state of
permanent unrest. How often had it proved necessary,in order to
6z

The spectacleof the scaffold
ensureorder around the scaffolds,to take stepsthat were'distressing
'humiliating
to the people' and
for the authorities' (Argenson, z4t)?
It was evident that the great spectacleof punishment trn the risk
of being rejected by the very people to whom it was addressed.In
fact, the terror of the public execution created centres of illegality:
on execution days, work stopped, the taverns were full, the authorities were abused,insults or stones were thrown at the executioner,
the guards and the soldiers; attempts were made to seize the condemned man, either to save him or to kill him more surely; fights
broke out, and there was no better prey for thieves than the curious
throng around the scaffold. (Hardy recounts a number of caseslike
the important theft that was commimed in the very house in which
the police magistratewas lodging - IV, y6.) But above all - and this
was why these disadvantages became a political danger - the people
never felt closer to those who paid the penalty than in those rituals
intended to show the horror of the crime and the invincibility of
por/er; never did the people feel more threatened, like them, by a
legal violence exercisedwithout moderation or restraint. The solidarity of a whole section of the population with those we would call
petty offenders - vagrants, false beggars, the indigent poor, pickpockets, receivers and dealers in stolen goods - was constantly
expressed:resistanceto police searches,the pursuit of informers,
attacks on the watch or inspectors provide abundant evidence of
this (cf. Richet, r r8-r9). And it was the breaking up of this solidarity that was becoming the aim of penal and police repression. Yet
out of the ceremony of the public execution, out of that uncertain
festival in which violence was instantaneouslyreversible, it was this
solidarity much more than the sovereign povier that was likely to
emerge with redoubled strength. The reformers of the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries were not to forget that, in the last resort,
the executions did not, in fact, frighten the people. One of their
first cries was to demand their abolition.
To clarify the political problem posed by the intervention of the
people in the spectacleof the executions, one need only cite rwo
events.The first took placeat Avignon at the end of the seventeenth
century. It contained all the principal elements of the theatre of
horror: the physical confrontation between the executionerand the
condemned man, the reversal of the duel, the executioner pursued

63

Torrure
by the people, the condemned man saved by the ensuing riot and
the violent inversion of the penal machinery. A murderer by the
'had
name of Pierre du Fort was to be hangedl several times he
caught his feet in the steps'and had not been able to swing freely.
'Seeing
this, the executioner had pulled his ierkin up over his face
and struck him below the knees, on the stomach and on the belly.
When the people saw that the executioner was causing him too
much pain, and even believing that he was killing him down there
with a bayonet . . . moved by compassionfor the patient and fury
at the executioner, they threw stones at the scaffold just as the
executioner knocked away the two ladders and threw the patient
down and leapedon to his shouldersand kicked him, while the wife
of the said executioner pulled at his feet from under the gallows.
In doing so, they made blood come from his mouth. But the hail
of stonescame thicker - one stone even struck the hanged man on
the head- which forced the executionerto dashto the ladder, which
he descendedso rapidly that half-way down he fell from it, and
struck his head on the ground. Then a crowd of people fell upon
him. He got to his feet, bayonet in hand, threatening to kill anyone
who came near him; after falling several times, he finally got to his
feet, only to be beaten by the crowd, rolled in the mud and nearly
drowned in the stream, then dragged by the excited and enraged
crowd to the University and to the Cordeliers Cemetery. His
servantwas also beatenand, with bruiseson his head and body, was
taken to the hospital where he died some days later. However, some
strangersand unknown people mounted the ladder and cut the rope
while others caught the hanged man from below after he had been
hanging there longer than it took to say a full Miserere. The crowd
then smashedthe gallows and broke the executioner's ladder into
pieces. . . Children carried off the gallows and threw it into the
'so
that
Rh6ne.' The condemnedman was then taken to a cemetery
he should not be recapturedby the law'and from there to the church
of Sainte-Antoine'. The archbishop gave him his pardon, had him
taken to the hospital and asked that particular care be taken ofhim.
'we had a new
Lastly, adds the writer of the account,
suit, two pairs
of stockings and shoes made for him. We dressed him in new
clothes from head to toe. Our colleaguesgave him shirts, breeches
and a wig' (Duhamel, y-6; scenesof this kind were still taking
64

The spectacle of the scaffold
place in the nineteenth century - cf. Lawrence, ;6 and r9t-8).
The other event took placein Paris, a century later. It was in 1771,
shortly after the corn riot. Becauseof the state of extreme tension
among the people, the authorities wanted the execution to take
place without interruption. Between the scaffold and the public,
kept at a safe distance, two ranks of soldiers stood on guard, one
facing the execution that was about to take place, the other facing
the people in case of riot. Contact was broken: it was a public
execution,but one in which the element of spectaclewas neutralized,
or rather reduced to absract intimidation. Protected by force of
arms, on an empty square,iustice quietly did its work. If it showed
'The
the death that it had dealt, it was from high and far:
rwo
gallows, which were eighteen feet high, no doubt by way of an
example, were not set up until three o'clock in the afternoon. From
two o'clock, the Place de Grdve and all the surrounding streetshad
been filled with detachmentsof different troops, some on foot, some
on horsel the Swiss and the French guards continued to patrol the
adacent streets. No one was allowed on to the Grdve during the
execution, and all around one could see a double row of soldiers,
bayonets at the ready, standing back to back, so that some looked
outwards and some into the sguare;the two wretches . . . cried out
all the way that they were innocent and continued to protest in like
manner as they mounted the ladder' (Hardy, IIl, (r/). Whatever the
part played by feelings of humanity for the condemned in the
abandonment of the liturgy of the public executions, there was, in
any case,on the part of the state power, a political fear of the effects
of these ambiguous rituals.
Such an equivocal attitude appeared clearly in what might be
called the'gallows speeches'.The rite of execution was so arranged
that the condemned man would himself proclaim his guilt by the
amendehonorable that he spoke, by the placard that he displayed
and also by the statementsthat he was no doubt forced to make.
Furthermore, at the moment of the execution, it seemsthat he was
given another opportunity to speak,not to proclaim his innocence,
but to acknowledgehis crime and the justice of his conviction. The
chronicles relate a good many speechesof this kind. Were they
actually deliveredl In a number of cases,certainly. Or were they

61

Torture
fictional speechesthat were later circulated by way of example and
exhortationl This, no doubt, was more often the case.What credit
are we to accord, for example,to the account of the death of Marion
Le Gof[, who had been a famous bandit leader in Brittany in the
mid-eighteenth centuryl She is supposedto have cried out from the
'Fathers
scaffold:
and mothers who hear me now, watch over your
children and teachthem well; in my childhood I was a liar and goodfor-nothing; I began by stealing a small sixliard knife. . . Then I
robbed pedlars and cattle dealers; finally, I led a robber band and
that is why I am here. Tell all this to your children and let it be an
exampleto them' (Corre, zy7). Such a speechis too close,even in its
turn of phrase, to the morality traditionally to be found in the
broadsheetsand pamphlets for it not to be apocryphal. But the
existenceof the 'last words of a condemned man' genre is in itself
significant. The law required that its victim should authenticatein
some sensethe tortures that he had undergone. The criminal was
asked to consecratehis own punishment by proclaiming the blackness of his crimes; he was made to say, as was Jean-Dominique
Langlade, three times a murderer: 'Listen to my horrible, infamous
and lamentabledeed, committed in the city of Avignon, where the
memory of me is execrable, for having inhumanly violated the
sacred rites of friendship' (Duhamel, 3z). In one sense,the broadsheet and the death song were the sequel to the trial; or rather they
pursued that mechanismby which the public execution transferred
the secret, written tmth of the procedure to the body, gesture and
speechof the criminal. Justice required theseapocrypha in order to
be grounded in truth.'Its decisions were thus surrounded by all
'proofs'.
theseposthumous
Sometimes,too, accountsof crimes and
infamous lives were published, simply as propaganda, before any
trial had taken place, in order to force the hand of a court that was
suspectedof being too tolerant. In order to discredit smugglers, the
Compagnie des Fermes published 'bulletins' recounting their
crimes: in 1768, it distributed broadsheetsagainst a certain Montagne, the leader of a gang, of whom the writer himself says: 'Some
thefts have been ascribed to him the truth of which is somewhat
uncertain . . .; Montagne has been depicted as a wild beast,a second
hyena to be hunted down; given the hotheadsof the Auvergne, this
idea has caught on' (cf. Juillard, z4).
66

The specacle of the scaffold
But the effect, like the use, of this literature was equivocal. The
condemned man found himself transformed into a hero by the sheer
extent of his widely advertised crimes, and sometimes the affirmation
of his belated repentance. Against the law, against the rich, the
powerful, the magistrates, the constabulary or the watch, against
taxes and their collectors, he appeared to have waged a struggle
with which one all too easily identified. The proclamation of these
crimes blew up to epic proponions the tiny stmggle that passed
unperceived in everyday life. If the condemned man was shown to
be repentant, accepting the verdict, asking both God and man for
forgiveness for his crimes, it was as if he had come through some
processof purification: he died, in his own way, like a saint.,But
indomitability was an alternative claim to greatness:by not giving
in under torture, he gave proof of a strength that no power had
succeededin bending: 'On the day of the execution - this will seem
scarcelycredible - I showed no trace of emotion, as I performed my
atnendehonorablerand,whenI finally lay down on the crossI showed
no fear' (the Complaiue of J.-D. Langlade, executed at Avignon
rz April 1768). Black hero or reconciled criminal, defender of the
tme right or an indomitable force, the criminal of the broadsheets,
pamphlets, almanacsand adventure stories brought with him, beneath the apparent morality of the example not to be followed, a
whole memory of strugglesand confrontations. A convicted criminal
could become after his death a sort of saint, his memory honoured
and his grave respected.(This was the caseof Tanguy, executedin
Brittany about r74o. Before being convicted, it is true, he had begun
a long penitence ordered by his confessor. Was this a conflict
between civil justice and religious penitencei Cf. Corre, zr.) The
criminal has been almost entirely transformed into a positive hero.
There were those for whom glory and abomination were not dissociated,but coexisted in a reversible figure. Perhapswe should see
this literature of crime, which proliferated around a few exemplary
figuresrsneither as a spontaneousform of'popular expression',nor
as a concerted programme of propaganda and moralization from
above; it was a locus in which two investments of penal practice
met - a sort of battleground around the crime, its punishment and
its memory. If theseaccountswere allowed to be printed and circulated, it was becausethey were expected to have the effect of an
67

Torture
ideological conrol - the printing and the distribution of these
almanacs,broadsheets,etc. nrasin principle subject to strict control.
But if thesetrue stories of everyday history were received so avidly,
if they formed part of the basic reading of the lower classes,it was
becausepeople found in them not only memories, but also prece'curiosity'
is also a political interest. Thus these
dents; the interest of
texts may be read as two-sided discourses,in the facts that they
relate, in the effects they give to these facts and in the glory they
'illustrious'
criminals, and no doubt in the very
confer on those
words they use (one should study the use of such categories as
'misfornrne' or 'abomination' or such epithets as 'famous' or
'lamentable' in accounts such as The History of the Life, Greet
Robberies and Tricks of Guilleri and his Companions and of their
Lamentable and Unhappjr End.8
'disturbances
Perhapswe should compare this literature with the
around the scafold' in which, through the tortured body of the
criminal, the power that condemnedconfronted the people that was
the witness, the participant, the possible and indirect victim of this
execution. In the wake of a ceremony that inadequately channelled
the power relations it sought to ritualize, a whole massof discourses
appeared pursuing the same confrontation; the posthumous proclamation of the crimes iustified justice, but also glorified the cri;
minal. That was why the reformers of the penal system were soon
demanding suppression of these broadsheets.TThat was why the
people showed so lively an interest in what served more or less as
the minor, everyday epic of illegalities. That was why the broadsheets lost their importance as the political function of popular
illegality altered.
And they disappearedas a whole new literature of crime developed: a literature in which crime is glorified, becauseit is one of the
fine arts, becauseit can be the work only of exceptional natures,
becauseit reveals the monstrousnessof the strong and powerful,
becausevillainy is yet another mode of privilege: from the adventure
story to de Quincey, or from the Castle of Otanto to Baudelaire,
there is a whole aesthetic rewriting of crime, which is also the
appropriation of criminality in acceptableforms. In appearance,it is
the discovery ofthe beauty and greatnessofcrime; in fact, it is the
affirmation that greatnesstoo has a right to crime and that it even
68

The spectacleof the scaffold
becomesthe exclusive privilege of those who are really great. The
great mgrders are not for the pedlars of petty crime. While, from
Gaboriau onwards, the literature of crime follows this first shifr by
his cunning, his tricks, his sharp-wittedness,the criminal represenred
in this literature has made himself impervious to suspicionl and the
struggle between two pure minds - the murderer and the detectivewill constitute the essentialform of the confrontation. We are far
removed indeed from those accountsof the life and misdeedsof the
criminal in which he admitted his crimes, and which recounted in
detail the tortures of his execution: we have moved from the
exposition of'the facts or the confession to the slow process of
discovery; from the execution to the investigation; from the physical confrontation to the intellectual struggle between criminhl and
investigator. It was not only the broadsheetsthat disappearedwith
the birth of a literature of crime; the glory of the rustic malefactor
and his sombre transformation into a hero by the processof torture
and execution went with them. The man of the people was now
too simple to be the protagonist of subtle truths. In this new genre,
there were no more popular heroesor great executions;the criminal
was wicked, of course, but he was also intelligent; and although he
was punished, he did not have to suffer. The literature of crime
transposesto another social class the spectaclethat had surrounded
the criminal. Meanwhile the newspapers took over the task of
recounting the grey, unheroic details ofeveryday crim,eand punishment. The split was complete; the people was robbed of its old
pride in its crimesl the great murders had becomethe quiet game of
thb well behaved.

69

PART TWO

Punishment

r. Generalized
punishment

'Let

penalties be regulated and proportioned to the offences, let the
death sentencebe passedonly on those convicted of murder, and
let the tortures that revolt humanity be abolished.' Thus, in 1789,
the chancellery summed up the general position of the petitions
addressedto the authorities concerning tortures and executions (cf.
Seligman,and Desjardin, r3-zo). Protests against the public executions proliferated in the secondhalf of the eighteenthcentury: among
the philosophers and theoreticians of the law; among lawyers and
parlementaires;in popular petitions and among the legislators of the
assemblies.Another form of punishment was needed: the physical
confrontation between the sovereign and the condemnedman must
end; this hand-to-hand fight betweenthe vengeanceofthe prince and
the containedangerof the people,through the mediation of the victim
and the executioner,must be concluded. Very soon the public execution became intolerable. On the side of power, where it betrayed
tyranny, excess,the thirst for revenge, and 'the cruel pleasuretaken
in punishing' (Petion de Villeneuve, 64r), it was revolting. On the
side of the victim who, though reducedto despair,was still expected
to bless'heaven and its iudges who appeared to have abandoned
him' (Boucher d'Argis, r78r, rz1), it was shameful. It was, in any
case,dangerous, in that it provided a support for a confrontation
between the violence of the king and the violence of the people. It
was :rs if the sovereign power did not see, in this emulation of
atrocity, a challengethat it itself threw down and which might one
day be taken up: accustomedas it was to 'seeing blood flow', the
people soon learnt that 'it could be revenged only with blood'
(Lachdre). In these ceremonies,which were the object of so much
adverse investment, one seesthe intersection of the excessof armed
iustice and the anger of the threatened people. Joseph de Maistre

7t

Punishment
was to recognizein this relation one of the fundamentalmechanisms
ofabsolute power: the executioneracts as a cog between the prince
and the people; the death he deals is like that of the serfs who built
St Petersburg over swamp and pestilence:it is a principle of universality; of the individual will of the despot, it makes a law for all,
and ofeach ofthose destroyed bodies, a stone for the State;it hardly
matters that innocents,too, are struck down ! In this samedangerous
and rirual violence, the eighteenth-century reformers denounced,on
the contrary, that which exceeded,on both sides, the legitimate
exercise of power: in this violence, according to them, tyranny
confronts rebellion; eachcalls forth the other. It is a double danger.
Insteadof taking revenge,criminal justiceshould simply punish.
This need for punishment without torture was first formulated
as a cry from the heart or from an outraged nature. In the worst of
murderers, there is one thing, at least, to be respectedwhen one
'humanity'.
The day was to come, in the nineteenth
punishes: his
century, when this'man', discoveredin the criminal, would become
the target of penal intervention, the object that it claimed to correct
'criminological'
and transform, the domain of a whole series of
'penitentiary'
practices.But, at the time of the
sciencesand strange
Enlightenment, it was not as a theme of positive knowledge that
man was opposed to the barbarity of the public executions,but as a
legal limit: the legitimate frontier of the power to punish. Not that
which must be reachedin order to alter him, but that which must
be left intact in order to respecthim. Noli me tangere.It marks the
'man'
that the reformers set
end of the sovereign's vengeance.The
'manup against the despotismof the scaffold has also become a
measure':not of things, but of power.
There is, therefore, a problem here: how was this man-measure
opposed to the traditional practice of punishmenti How did he
become the great moral justification of the reform movementi Why
this universal horror of torture and such lyrical insistence that
'humane'i
punishment be
Or, which amounts to the same thing,
how are the two elements,which are everywhere presentin demands
'measure'
'humanity',
and
to be
for a more lenient penal system,
articulated upon one another, in a single strategyi These elements
are so necessaryand yet so uncertain that it is they, as disturbing as
in the samedubious relation. that one finds
ever and still associated
74

Generalizedpunishment
today whenever the problem of an economy of punishment is posed.
It is as if the eighteenth century had opened up the crisis of this
economy and, in order to resolve it, proposed the fundamental law
'humaniry'
'measure',without
that punishment must have
as its
any
definitive meaning being given to this principle, which nevertheless
is regarded as insuperable. We must, therefore, recount the birth
'leniency'.
and early days of this enigmatic
Homage is paid to the 'great reformers' - Beccaria, Servan,
Dupaty, Lacretelle, Duport, Pastoret, Target, Bergasse,the compilers of the Cahiers,or petitions, and the Constituent Assembly for having imposed this leniency on a legal machinery and on
'classical'
theoreticians who, at the end of the eighteenth century,
were still rejecting it with well-formulated arguments. (Cf., in particular, Muyart de Vouglans's polemic against Beccaria - Muyart,
1766.)
Yet this reform must be situated in a processthat historians have
recently uncovered through the srudy oflegal archives: the relaxation of penality in the eighteenth century or, to be more precise,
the double movement by which, during this period, crimes seemed
to lose their violence, while punishments,reciprocally, lost some of
their intensity, but at the cost ofgreater intervention. From the end
of the seventeenth century, in fact, one observes a considerable
diminution in murders and, generally speaking, in physical acts of
aggression;offencesagainstproperty seemto take over from crimes
of violencel theft and swindling, from murder and assaulq the
diffuse, occasional,but frequent delinquency of the poorest classes
was supersededby a limited, but 'skilled' delinquency; the criminals
of the seventeenthcentury were 'harassedmen, ill-fed, quick to act,
quick to anger, seasonalcriminals'; those of the eighteenth, 'crafty,
cunning, sly, calculating'criminals on the fringes of society (Chaunu,
1962, 236 and 1966, ro7-8). Lastly, the internal organizations of
delinquency altered; the great gangsof malefactors(looters working
in small, armed units, groups of smugglersfiring on the agentsof the
tax authorities, disbanded soldiers or deserters who roamed the
countryside together) tended to break up; tracked down more
efficiently and forced to work in smaller groups - often no more
than half-a-dozenmen - in order to passundetected,they contented

7t

Punishment
themselves with more furtive operations, with a more modest
deployment of forces and less risk of bloodshed: 'The physical
destruction or institutional dislocation of large gangs . . . left the
6eld free for an anti-property form of delinquency practised by
individuals or very small groups of robbers and pickpockets, seldom
more than four in number' (Le Roy-Ladurie). A general movement
shifted criminality from the attack of bodies to the more or less
'mass
'marginal
direct seizureof goods; and from a
criminality' to a
criminality', partly the preserve of professionals.It was as if there
'a
had been a gradual lowering of level defusion of the tensions
that dominate human relations, . .. a better control of violent
impulses'r - and as if the illegal practiceshad themselvesslackened
their hold on the body and turned to other targets. Crime became
less violent long before punishment became less severe. But this
transformation cannot be separatedfrom several underlying processes.The first of these, as P. Chaunu observes,was a change in
the operation ofeconomic pressures,a general rise in the standard
of living, a large demographic expansion,an increasein wealth and
property and 'a consequentneed for security' (Chaunu, ry7r, 16).
Furthermore, throughout the eighteenth century, one can observe a
certain increased severity in the law: in England, out of the zz3
capital crimes in force at the beginning of the nineteenth century,
156 had been introduced during the preceding hundred years
(Buxton, XXXIX); in France, the legislation on vagabondagehad
been revised in the direction ofgreater severity on severaloccasions
since the seventeenthcentury; a tighter, more meticulous implementation of the law tended to take account of a massof minor offences
'in
that it once allowed to escapemore easily: the eighteenth century,
the law became slower, heavier, harder on theft, whose relative
frequency had increased,and towards which it now assumedthe
bourgeois appearancesof a class justice';z the growth in France
above all, and especiallyin Paris, ofa police apparatusthat prevented
the development of organized, open criminality, shifted it towards
more discreet forms; to this set of precautions, one should add the
very widespread belief in a constant and dangerous rise in crime.
Whereasthe historiansof today observea diminution in the great
gangs of malefactors, Le Trosne saw them roaming the French
'It
countryside like swarmsof locusts: is thesevoracious insectswho
76

Generalizedpunishment
daily lay waste the subsistenceof the cultivators. They are, quite
literally, enemy troops spreading over the surface of the territory,
living as they wish, as in a congueredcountry, exacting levies under
the name of alms.' They cost the poorest peasantsmore than ftxes:
the richer peasantshad to pay anything up to a third of their
incomes(Le Trosne, ry64r 4). Most observersmaintained that crime
was increasing - they included, of course, those who advocated
sterner measures;they also included those who thought that a law
that was more restrained in its use of violence would be more
effective, less liable to retreat before its own consequences(cf., for
example, Dupaty, 247); and they included the magistrates who
'the
claimed to be swamped by the number of trials:
misery of the
people and the corruption of morals have increasedthe number of
crimes and convicted criminals' (one of the iudges of the Chambre
de la Tournelle in an addressto the king, z August 1768, quoted
in Farge, 66); in any case,that crime was on the increasewas shown
by the real practice of the courts. 'The revolutionary and imperial
era could already be sensedin the last years of the Ancien R6gime.
One is struck, in the trials of ry821, by the increasein tension.
There is a new severity towards the poor, a concerted rejection of
evidence,a rise in mutual mistrust, hatred and fear' (Chaunu, 1966,
ro8).
In fact, the shift from a criminality of blood to a criminality of
fraud forms part of a whole complex mechanism, embracing the
developmentof production, the increaseof wealth, a higher juridical
and moral value placed on property relations, stricter methods of
surveillance,a tighter partitioning of the population, more efficient
techniquesof locating and obtaining information: the shift in illegal
practicesis correlative with an extension and a refinement of punitive practices.
Was this a general change of attitude, a 'change that belongs to
the domain of the spirit and the subconscious' (the expression is
Mogensen's)l Perhaps, but more certainly and more immediately
it was an effort to adjust the rnechanismsof power that frame thr
everyday lives of individuals; an adaptation and a refinement of tht
machinery that assumesresponsibility for and placesunder surveillance their everyday behaviour, their identity, their activity, their
apparently unimportant gestures;another policy for that multiplicity
77

Punishment
of bodies and forcesthat constitutesa population. What was emerging no doubt was not so much a new respect for the humanity of
the condemned- torture was still frequent in the execution of even
minor criminals - as a tendency towards a more finely tuned iustice,
towards a closer penal mapping of the social body. Following a
circular process,the threshold of the passageto violent crimes rises,
intolerance to economic offencesincreases,controls become more
thorough, penal interventions at once more premature and more
numerous.
If one compares this process with the critical discourse of the
reformers, a remarkable strategic coincidenceemerges.What they
were attacking in traditional justice, before they set out the principles of a new penality, was certainly the excessivenature of the
punishments;but an excessthat was bound up with an irregularity
even more than with an abuseof the power to punish. On u4 March
r79o, Thouret opened the debate in the Constituent Assembly on
the new oqganizationof the judicial power. In his view, this power
'denatured'
had become
in France in three ways. By private appropriation: the offices of judge were sold; they were hereditary; they
had a commercial value and, for that reason, the iustice that was
handed out was onerous. By a confusion between two types of
power: that which dispensesjustice and formulates a sentenceby
applying the law and that which createsthe law itself. Lastly, by the
existenceof a whole seriesof privileges that maciethe implementation of the law inconsistent:there were courts, procedures,litigants,
'privileged'
and fell outside common law
even offences that were
(Archfuesparlernentaires,XII, 3a4). This was only one of the many
criticisms that had been levied at the legal system for the past fifty
years at least, all of which denounced in this denaturation the
principle of an irregular iustice. Penal justice was irregular first of
all by virtue of the multiplicity of courts responsiblefor assuring it,
without ever forming a single and continuous pyramid (cf. Linguet
or Boucher d'Argis, 1789). Quite apart from the ecclesiasticaljurisdictions, we must take into account the discontinuities, overlappings
and conflicts between the different legal systems: those of the
nobiliry, which still played an important role in iudging petty
offencesl those of the king, which were themselvesnumerous and
badly coordinated (the sovereign courts were often in conflict with
t8

Generalizedpunishment
the bailiffs'courts and above all with the presidial courts, which had
recently beencreatedas intermediary instances);thosewhich, dejare
or defacto, were administeredby governmental authorities (such as
the intendants,or provincial administrators) or police authorities
(such as the provosts and police magistrates);to these should also
be added the right possessedby the king or his representativesto
take decisions on internment or exile quite outside any regular
procedure. By their very plethora these innumerable authorities
cancelledeach other out and were incapable of covering the socia!
body in its entirety. Paradoxically, their overlapping left penal
iustice with innumerableloopholes.This incompletenesswas a result
of differences of custom and procedure, despite the Ordonnance
Gdndrale of ft7q' of internal conflicts of responsibility; of private
interests- political or economic - which eachauthority found itself
defending;and, lastly, of the interventions of the royal power, which
could prevent, by meansof pardons, commuted sentences,the evocation of a case before the royal council or direct pressure exerted
on magistrates,the regular, austerecourse of justice.
The criticism of the reformers was directed not so much at the
weaknessor cruelty of those in authority, as at a bad economy of
power. There was too much power in the lower jurisdictions, which
could - aided by the ignorance and poverty of those convicted ignore appeal procedure and carry out arbitr:ary sentenceswithout
adequatesupervisionl there was too much power on the side of the
prosecution, which possessedalmost unlimited means of pursuing
its investigations, while the accusedopposed it virtually unarmed this led judges to be sometimesover-severeand sometimes,by way
of reaction, too lenient; there was too much power in the hands of
the judges who were able to content themselveswith futile evidence,
'legal'
providing it was
evidence, and who were allowed roo great
a freedom in the choice of penalty; there was too much power in
the hands of the'geas du roi', or royal magistrates,in relation to the
accused,but also in relation to other magistrates;lastly, there was
too much power exercisedby the king, who could suspendcourts
of justice, alter their decisions, remove magistratesfrom office, or
exile them, and replace them by iudges acting under royal commission. The paralysisof justice was due not so much to a weakening
as to a badly regulated distribution of power, to its concentration

79

Punishment
at a certain number of points and to the conflicts and discontinuities
that resulted.
This. dysfunction of power was related to a central excess:what
'super-power', which identified the
might be called the monarchical
right to punish with the personal power of the sovereign. This
theoretical identification made the king the fons justitiae; but the
practical consequencesof this were to be found even in that which
appearedto opposehim and to limit his absolutism.It was because
the king, in order to raisemoney, had appropriated the right to sell
'belonged'
legal offices, which
to him, that he was confronted by
magistrateswho owned their officesand who were not only intractable, but ignorant, self-interestedand frequendy compromised. It
was becausehe was constantly creating new officesthat he multiplied
the conflicts of power and authority. It was becausehe exercisedtoo
close a power over his'gens' and conferred on them almost discretionary powers that he intensified the conflicts within the magistftlture. It was becausehe had brought the law into conflict with too
many summary acts of justice (the jurisdictions of the provosts or
police magistrates)or with administrative measures,that he paralysed normal justice,renderedit sometimeslenientand inconsistent,
but sometimesover-hasty and severe.s
It was not so much, or not only, the privileges of iustice, its
arbirariness, its archaicarrogance,its uncontrolled rights that were
criticized; but rather the mixture of its weaknessesand excesses,its
exaggerationsand its loopholes, and above all the very principle of
'super-power'
of the monarch. The true objective
this mixture, the
of the reform movement, even in its most generalformulations, was
not so much to establish a new right to punish based on more
'economy'
of the power to
equitableprinciples,as to set up a new
punish, to assureits better distribution, so that it should be neither
too concenrated at certain privileged points, nor too divided between opposing authorities; so that it should be distributed in
homogeneous circuits capable of operating everywhere, in a continuous way, down to the finest grain of the social body.a The
reform of criminal law must be read as a strategy for the rearrangement of the power to punish, according to modalities that,render
it more regular, more effective, more constant and more detailed in
its effects; in short, which increaseits effects while diminishing its
8o

Generalizedpunishment
economic cost (that is to say, by dissociating it from the system of
property, of buying and selling, of corruption in obtaining not only
officcs, but the decisions themselves)and its political cost (by dissociating it from the arbitrarinessof monarchical power). The new
'political
iuridical theory of penality corresponds in fact to a new 'reform'
economy' of the power to punish. This explains why the
did not have a single origin. It was not the more enlightened members of the public, nor the philosophes,who regarded themselves as
enemiesof despotism and friends of mankind; it was not even the
social groups opposed to the parlementaireswho instigated the
reform. Or rather it was not they alone; in this sameoverall proiect
of a new distribution of the power to punish, and of a new distribution of its effects,many different interestscametogether. The reform
was not prepared outside the legal machinery and against all its
representativeslit was prepared, for the most part, from within, by
a large number of magistratesand on the basis of shared objectives
and the power conflicts that divided them. Certainly the reformers
did not form a majority of the magistrates;but it was a body of
lawyers who outlined its general principles: a pov/er to judge that
would not be alfected by the immediate exercise of the prince's
sovereignty; that would be relieved of any claim to legislate; that
would be detachedfrom property relations; and which, having no
other functions but to judge, would exercisethat power to the full.
In short, the power to iudge should no longer depend on the
innumerable, discontinuous, sometimescontradictory privileges of
sovereignty, but on the continuously distributed effects of public
power. This general principle defined an overall strategy that
covered many di{ferent struggles. Those of philosophers like
Voltaire and of publicists like Brissot or Maratl but also those of
magistrates whose interests were nevertheless very diverse: Le
Trosne, a judge at the presidial court of Orl6ans, and Lacretelle, the
advocate-generalat the parlementl Target, who with the parlements
was opposed to Maupeou's reform; but also J. N. Moreau, who
supported the royal power against the parlemenrarreslServan and
Dupaty, both magistrates,but in conflict with their colleagues,etc.
Throughout the eighteenth century, inside and outside the legal
apparatus, in both everyday penal practice and the criticism of
institutions, one sees the emergence of a new strategy for the

8r

Punishment
'reform', in the strict sense,as
exerciseof the power to punish. And
it was formulated in the theories of law or as it was oudined in the
various proiects, was the political or philcisophical resumption of
this strategy, with its primary objectives:to make of the punishment
and repression of illegalities a regular function, coextensive with
society; not to punish less, but to punish better; to punish with an
attenuated severity perhaps, but in order to punish with more
universality and necessity;to insert the power to punish more deeply
into the social body.
The conjuncture that saw the binh of reform is not, therefore,
that of a new sensibility, but that of another policy with regard to
illegalities.
Roughly speaking,one might say that, under the Ancien R6gime
each of the different social strata had its margin of tolerated illegality: the non-application of the rule, the non-observance of the
innumerable edicts or ordinances were a condition.of the political
and economic functioning of society. This feature may not have
been peculiar to the Ancien R6gime. But illegality was so deeply
rooted and so necessaryto the life ofeach social stratum, that it had
in a senseits own coherenceand economy. Sometimesit took on an
absolutely statutory form - as with the privileges accorded certain
individuals and groups - which made it not so much an illegaliry
as a regular exemption. Sometimes it took the form of a massive
general non-observance,which meant that for decades,sometimes
for centuries,ordinancescould be published and constantly renewed
without ever being implemented. Sometimesit was a matter of laws
gradually falling into abeyance,then suddenly being reactivated;
sometimesof silent consenton the part of the authorities, neglect, or
quite simply the actual impossibility of imposing the law and apprehending offenders. The least-favoured strata of the population did
not have, in principle, any privileges: but they benefited,within the
margins of what was imposed on them by law and custom, from a
spaceoftolerance, gained by force or obstinacy; and this spacewas
for them so indispensablea condition of existencethat they were
often ready to rise up to defend it; the attempts that were made
periodically to reduce it, by reviving old laws or by improving the
methods of apprehending, provoked popular disturbances,just as
8z

Generalizedpunishment
attempts to reduce cenain privileges disturbed the nobility, the
clergy and the bourgeoisie.
This necessaryillegality, of which every social stratum bore
within itself specific forms, was caught up in a seriesof paradoxes.
In its lower regions, it was identiied with criminality, from which
it was difficult to distinguish it juridically, if not morally: from fiscal
illegality to customs illegality, to smuggling, to looting, to the
armed struggle against the government's taxation agents, then
against the soldiers themselvesand, finally, to rebellion, there was
a continuity, in which it was difficult to mark the frontiers; or, again,
vagabondage (severely punished according to the terms of ordinances that were never implemented) with the pillage, aggravated
theft, even murder that went with it, provided a welcome environment to the unemployed, to workers who had left their employers
in irregular circumstances, to domestic servants who had some
reason to flee their masters, to ill-treated apprentices,to deserting
soldiers, to all those who wished to escape the press-gang. So
criminality merged into a wider illegality, to which the lower strata
were attached as to conditions of existencel and, conversely, this
illegality was a perpetual factor in the increaseof crime. Hence an
ambiguity in popular attitudes: on the one hand, the criminal especiallywhen he happenedto be a smuggler or a peasantwho had
fled from the exactions of a master - benefited from a spontaneous
wave of sympathy: his acts of violence were seen as descending
directly from old struggles. On the other hand, a man who, under
cover of an illegality acceptedby the population, committed crimes
at the expenseof this population, the vagrant beggar, for example,
who robbed and murdered, easilybecamethe object of a specialhate:
he had redirected upon the least favoured illegality that was integral
to their conditions of existence.Thus there grew up around crimes
a network of glorification and blame; effective help and fear alternated with regard to this shifting populatign, which one knew was
very near, but from which one felt that crime could emerge.
Popular illegality enveloped a whole nucleus of criminality that was
both its extreme form and its internal danger.
Between this illegality of the depths and those of the other social
castes,therewasneither an exactconvergencenor a profound opposition. Generally speaking, the different illegalities proper to each

81

Punishment
group maintained relations with one another that involved not only
rivalry, compedtion and conflicts of interest, but also mutual help
and complicity: the peasants' refusal to pay certain state or ecclesiastical rents was not necessarily disapproved of by the landowners;
the non-application by artisans of manufacturing regulations wils
often encouragedby the new entrepreneurs;smuggling - the story
of Mandrin, welcomed by the entire population, received in castles
and protected by parlementaires proves this * was very widely
supported. At most, one had seen in the seventeenthcentury the
different fiscal refusals coalescein serious revolts among widely
separatedsocial strata. In short, the reciprocal interplay of illegalities formed part of the political and economic life of society. Or
rather, a number of transformations (the abeyance into which
Colbert's regulations had fallen, for example, the non-obseryance
of customs barriers within the kingdom, the breakdown of guild
practices)had operated in the breach that was being widened every
day by popular illegality; the bourgeoisie had needed these transformations; and economic growth was due, in part, to them.
Tolerance then becameencouragement.
In the secondhalf of the eighteenth cennrry, the processtended to
be reversed.First, with the general increasein wealth, but also with
the sudden demographic expansion,the principal target ofpopular
illegality tended to be not so much rights, as goods: pilfering
and theft tended to replace smuggling and the armed stnrggle
against the tax agents. And, in this respect, the peasants,farmers
and artisans were often its principal victims. Le Trosne was no
doubt exaggercdngareal tendency when he describedthe peasants'
suffering under the exactions of vagabonds, even more than they
had suffered under feudal demands:thieves now attacked them like
a cloud of maleficent insects, devouring crops and depleting the
granaries (Le Trosne, rz6+, 4).It might be said that gradually in
the eighteenth century a crisis of popular illegality had occurred;
and neither the movements at the beginning of the Revolution
(around the refusalof seigniorial rights), nor those later movements,
in which the struggle against propgrty rights, political and religious
protests and the refusal of conscription came together, recombined
illegality in its old, welcoming form. Furthermore, although a large
part of the bourgeoisie had accepted,without too much trouble,

8+

Generalizedpunishment
the illegality of rights, it found it difficult to support illegality wlaen
it was a question of its own property rights. Nothing could be more
typical ofthis than the problem ofpeasant delinquency at the end
of the eighteenth century and especially after the Revolution
(Betc6, 16r). The transition to an intensive agriculture exercised,
over the rights to use common lands, over various tolerated practices, over small acceptedillegalities, a more and more restrictive
pressure.Furthermore, as it was acquired in part by the bourgeoisie,
now free of the feudal burdens that once weighed upon it, landed
'rights'
property became absolute property: all the tolerated
that
the peasantry had acquired or preserved (the abandonment of old
obligations or the consolidation of irregular practices: the right of
free pasture, wood-collecting, etc.) were now rejected by the new
owners who regarded them quite simply as theft (thus leading,
among the people, to a seriesof chain reactions of an increasingly
illegal, or, if one prefers the term, criminal kind: breachesof close,
the theft or killing of cattle, 6res, assaults, murders (cf. Festy
and Agulhon). The illegality of rights, which often meant
the survival of the most deprived, tended, with the new status of
property, to become an illegality of property. It then had to be
punished.
And this illegality, while resentedby the bourgeoisie where the
ownership of land was concerned,was intolerable in commercial and
industrial ownership: the development of the ports, the appearance
of great warehousesin which merchandisewas stored, the organization of huge workshops (with considerable quantities of raw
materials, tools and manufactured articles, which belonged to the
entrepreneursand which were difficult to supervise)also necessitated
a severerepressionof illegality. The way in which wealth tended to
be invested,on a much larger scalethan ever before, in commodities
and machines presupposed a systematic, armed intolerance of
illegality. The phenomenon was obviously very evident where
economic developmentwas most intense. Colquhoun set out to
give proof, supported by figures, of the urgent need to check the
innumerable illegal practices that had grown up: according to the
estimatesof the entrepreneurs and insurance companies, the theft
of produce imported from America and warehousedalong the banks
of the Thames had risen, on average, to dz;orooo per annum; in

8y

Punishment
all, approximately d;oorooo worth of goods was stolen each year
in the Port of London itself (and this did not include the arsenals
and warehousesoutside the port proper); to this should be added
dTcr,cno for the town itself. In this situation of permanentpilfering,
three phenomena,says Colquhoun, should be taken into consideration: first, the complicity and often the active participation of the
'Whenever
clerks, overseers,foremen and workers:
a large number
ofworkers are gatheredtogether in one place,there are bound to be
a lot of bad charactersamong them'; second,the existenceof a whole
organization of illicit commerce, which began in the workshops or
docks, then passed on to the recpivers - wholesale receivers,
specializing in certain kinds of commodity, and retail receivers
'wretched
whose stalls offered a
display of old iron, rags and worn
clothes,whereasat the back of the shop were hidden naval munitions
ofgreat value, copper bolts and nails, piecesofcast iron and precious
metals, produce from the West Indies, furniture and all kinds of
goods bought from the labourers'- then on to dealersand pedlars
who distributed the stolen goods far into the countryside (Colquhoun, ry97; in chaptersVII, VIII and XV, he gives a very detailed
account of this process); third, counterfeiting (it seemsthat there
were between forty and fifty mints producing counterfeit money
throughout England, in permanent operation). But what facilitated
the work of this huge undertaking, involving both depredation and
competition, was a whole set of tolerances:some amounted almost
to acquired right (the right, for example, to collect bits of iron or
rope around ships or to resell the sugar sweepings);others were of
the riature of a moral acceptance;the pilferers themselvesregarded
'they
their work as a kind of smuggling, which
did not regard as a
serious offence'.
It proved necessary,therefore, to control these illicit practices
and introduce new legislation to cover them. The ofienceshad to be
properly defined and more surely punishedl out of this mass of
irregularities, sometimestolerated and sometimespunished with a
severity out of all proportion to the offence, one had to determine
what was an intolerable offence, and the offenders had to be apprehended and punished. With the new forms of capital accumularion,
new relations of production and the new legal status of property,
all the popular practicesthat belonged, either in a silent, everyday,
86

Generalizedpunishment
tolerated form, or in a viotent form, to the illegality of rights were
reduced by force to an illegality of property. In that movement
which transformed a society of iuridico-political levies into a society
of the appropriation of the means and products of labour, theft
tended to become the 6rst of the great loopholes in legality. Or, to
put it another way, the economy of illegalities was restructured
with the development of capitalist society. The illegality of property
was separatedfrom the illegality of rights. This distinction represents a class opposition because,on the one hand, the illegality
that was to be most accessibleto the lower classeswas that of
property - the violent transfer ofownership - and because,on the
other, the bourgeoisie v/as to reserveto itselfthe illegality ofrights:
the possibility of getting round its own regulations and its own laws,
of gnsuring for itself an immense sector of economic circulation by
a skilful manipulation of gaps in the law - gaps that were foreseen
by its silences,or opened up by defauo tolerance. And this great
redistribution of illegalities was even to be expressedthrough a
specializationof the legal circuits: for illeghlities of property - for
theft - there were the ordinary courts and punishments; for the
illegalities of rights - fraud, tax evasion, irregular commercial
operations - special legal institutions applied with transactions,
accommodations, reduced fines, etc. The bourgeoisie reserved to
itself the fruitful domain of the illegality of rights. And at the same
time as this split was taking place, there emerged the need for
a constant policing concerned essentially with this illegality of
property. It becamenecessaryto get rid of the old economy of the
power to punish, based on the principles of the confused and inadequatemultipliciry of authorities, the distribution and concentration of the power correlative with actual inertia and inevitable
tolerance,punishments that were spectacularin their manifestations
and haphazardin their application. It becamenecessaryto define a
strategy and techniques of punishment in which an economy of
continuity and permanencewould replace that of expenditure and
excess,In short, penal reform was born at the point of junction
between the struggle against the super-power of the sovereign and
that against the infra-power of acquired and tolerated illegalities.
And if penal reform was anything more than the temporary result
of a purely circumstantial encounter, it was because,between this

8Z

Punishment
super-power and this infra-power, a whole network of relations
was being formed. By placing on the side of the sovereign the
additional burden of a spectacular,unlimited, personal, irregular
and discontinuous power, the form of monarchical sovereignty left
the subjects free to practise a constant illegality; this illegality was
like the correlative of this type of power. So much so that in attacking the various prerogatives ofthe sovereign one was also attacking
the functioning of the illegalities.The two obiectiveswere in continuity. And, according to particular circumstancesor mctics, the
reformers laid more stress on one or the other. Le Trosne, the
physiocrat who was a fudge at the presidial court of Orl6ans, may
serveas an example.In ry64, he published a memorandum on vaga'who
bondage: that hot-bed of thieves and murderers
live in the
midst of societywithout being membersof it', who wage'a veritable
war on all citizens',and who are in the midst of us'in that statethat
one supposesexisted before the establishmentof civil society'.
Against them, he demanded the most severe penalties (characteristically, he expressedsurprise that one should be more indulgent
towards them than to smugglers); he wanted the police to be reinforced, the mounted constabularyto hunt them down with the help
ofthe populationthat sufferedfrom their depredations;he demanded
that theseuselessand dangerouspeople should be'acquired by the
state and that they should belong to it as slavesto their masters';
and if necessaryone should organize collective round-ups in the
woods to drive them out, and anyone making a captureshould be
paid: 'A reward of ten pounds is given for anyonewho kills a wolf.
A vagabond is infinitely more dangerousfor society' (Le Trosne,
t764r 8, 50>54t 6r-z). In ry77 in Vues sur la justice criminelle, the
same Le Trosne demanded that the prerogatives of the Crown be
reduced, that the accused be regarded as innocent until proved
guilty, that the judge be a just arbiter betweenthem and society,
that laws be 'fixed, constant, determined in the most precise way',
so that subjectsknow 'to what they are exposed'and that magistratesbe nothing more than the'organ of the law' (Le Trosne, 1777,
jr, )7, ro3-6). For Le Trosne, as for so many others at that time,
the strugglefor the delimitation of the power to punish was articuIated directly on the need to subject popular illegality to a stricter
and more constant control. It is undeistandablethat the criticism
88

Generalizedpunishment
of the public execution should have assumedsuch importance in
penal reform: for it was the form in which, in the most visible way,
the unlimited power of the sovereign and the ever-active illegality
of the people came together. Humanity in the sentenceswas the
rule given to a system of punishment that must fix their limits on
'man'
that must be respected in the sentencewas the
both. The
juridical and moral form given to this double delimitation.
But, although it is true that reform, as a penal theory and as a
strategy of the piower to punish, took shapeat the point of coincidence of these two objectives, its stability in the future was due to
the fact that, for a long time, priority was given to the second.It was
becausethe pressureon popular illegalities had become,at the period
of the Revolution, then under the Empire, and finally throughout
the nineteenthcentury, an essentialimperative, that reform was able
to pass from the project stage to that of an institution and set of
practices. That is to say, although the new criminal legislation
appearsto be characterizedby less severepenalties,a clearer codification, a marked diminution of the arbirary, a more generally
acceptedconsensusconcerning the power to punish (in the absence
of a more real division in its exercise),it is sustainedin reality by an
upheaval in the traditional economy of illegalities and a rigorous
application of force to maintain their new adjustment. A penal system must be conCeived as a mechanism intended to administer
illegalities differentially, not to eliminate them all.
Shift the object and changethe scale.Define new tactics in order
to reacha target that is now more subtle but also more widely spread
in the social body. Find new techniquesfor adjusting punishment to
it and for adapting its effects.Lay down new principles for regularizing, refining, universalizing the art of punishing. Homogenize its
application. Reduceits economic and political cost by increasingits
effectivenessand by multiplying its circuits. In short, constitute a
new economy and a new technology of the power to punish: these
are no doubt the essential raisons d'Atre of penal reform in the
eighteenth century.
At the level of principles, this new strategy falls easily into the
general theory of the contract. The citizen is presumed to have
acceptedonce and for all, with the laws of society, the very law by

89

Punishment
which he may be punished.Thus the criminal appearsasa iuridically
paradoxicalbeing. He hasbroken the pact, he is therefore the enemy
of society as a whole, but he participatesin the punishment that is
practised upon him. The least crime attacks the whole of society;
and the whole of society - including the criminal - is present in the
least punishment. Penal punishment is therefore a generalized
function, coextensivewith the function of the social body and with
each of its elements.This gives rise to the problem of the degree of
punishmenq the economy of the power to punish.
In effect the offence opposes an individual to the entire social
body; in order to punish him, society has the right to oppose him
in its entirety. It is an unequal struggle: on one side are all the forces,
all the powei, all the rights. And this is how it should be, since the
defenceof each individual is involved. Thus a formidable right to
punish is established, since the offender becomes the common
enemy. Indeed, he is worse than an enemy, for it is from within
society that he delivers his blows - he is nothing less than a traitor,
a'monster'. How could socierynot havean absoluteright over himl
How could it not demand, quite simply, his eliminationl And,
although it is true that the principle of punishment must be subscribed to in the pact, must not each citizen, logically, accept the
extreme penalty for those of them who attack them as a body.
'Every
malefactor, by attacking the social rights, becomes,by his
crimes, a rebel and a traitor to his country; by violating its laws he
ceasesto be a member of it; he even makes war upon it. In such a
casethe preservation of the state is inconsistent with his own, and
one or the other must perish; in putting the guilty to death we slay
not so much the citizen as the enemy.'5The right to punish has been
shifted from the vengeance of the sovereign to the defence of
society. But it now finds itself recombined with elementsso strong
that it becomesalmost more to be feared. The malefactor has been
saved from a threat that is by its very nature excessive,but he is
exposedto a penalty that seemsto be without bounds. It is a return
to a terrible 'super-power'. It brings with it the need to establish a
principle of moderation for the power of punishment.
'Who
doesnot shudderwith horror when readingin history of so
many terrible and uselesstorments, invented and coldly applied by
monsters who took upon themselvesthe name of sagel' (Beccaria,
9o

Generalized
punishment
8z). Or again:'The laws summonme to the greatestpunishment
of crimes. I go with all the fury that it has inspired in me. But
what is thisl They evengo beyondit. . . God, who hasimprinted
in our heartsan aversion.topain for ourselvesand for our fellow
men, are they then thosesamebeings,whom thou hast createdso
weak and so sensible,who have invented such barbarous,such
refinedtorruresl' (Lacretelle,rz9). The principleof moderationin
punishment,evenwhen it is a questionof punishingthe enemyof
the socialbody, is articulatedfirst as a discourseof the heart.Or
ralher,it leapsforth like a cry from the body, which is revoltedat
thesightor at theimaginationof too muchcruelty.The formulation
by
of the principlethat penalitymustremain'humane'is expressed
the reformersin the first person.It is as if the sensibilityof the
speakerwerebeingexpressed
directly;asif the body ofthe philosopher or theoreticianhad come,betweenexecudonerand victim, to
affirm his own law and to imposeit finally on the entire economy
of punishment.Does this lyricism expressan inability to find a
rationalfoundationfor a penalarithmetid Betweenthe contractual
principlethat expelsthe criminalfrom societyand the imageof the
monster'vomited'bynature,whereis oneto find a limit, if not in a
human nature that is manifested- not in the rigour of the law,
not in the ferocity of the delinquent- but in the sensibility
of the reasonableman who makesthe law and doesnot commit
crimel
But this recourseto 'sensibility' does not exactly expressa
theoreticalimpossibility.In fact, it bearswithin it a principle of
calculation.The body, the imagination,pain, the hean to be respectedarenot, in effect,thoseof thecriminalthatis to be punished,
but thoseof the men who, havingsubscribedto the pact,havethe
right of exercisingagainsthim thepowerof assembly.
The painthat
mustexcludeany reductionin punishmentis that felt by the iudges
or specmtors
with all the hardness
of heartthat it may bring with it,
all the ferocity induced by familiarity, or on the contrary, illfoundedfeelingsof pity and indulgence:'Thank God for those
gentle,sensitivesoulson whom thosehorrible execudonsexert a
kind of torture' (Lacretelle,r3r). What has to be arrangedand
calculatedare the return effectsof punishmenton the punishing
authority and the power that it claimsto exercise.

9r

Punishment
Here the principle takes root that one should never apply 'inhumane' punishmentsto a criminal, who, nevertheless,may well be
a traitor and a monster. If the law must now treat in a'humane' way
an individual who is 'outside nature' (whereasthe old justice treated
'outlaw'
the
inhumanely), it is not on account of some profound
humanity that the crliminal concealswithin him, but becauseof a
necessaryregulation of the effects of power. It is this 'economic'
rationality that must calculate the penalty and prescribe the appropriate techniques.'Humanity' is the respectablename given to this
economy and to its meticulous calculations. 'Where punishment is
concerned,the minimum is ordered by humanity and counselledby
policy.'o
So, in order to understand this techno-politics of punishment, let
us take the extremecase,the ultimate crime: a deed of such enormity
that it violates all the most respectedlaws. It is produced in circumstancesso extraordinary, in such profound secrecy,with such lack
of restraint, as if at the very limit of possibility, that it could not
be other than unique, in any casethe last of its kind: no one could
ever imitate it; no one could take it as an example, or even feel
scandalizedthat it should have been committed. It is doomed to
disappearwithout trace. This fable?of the 'ultimate crime' is, to the
new penality, what original sin was to the old: the pure form in
which the reason for punishment appears.
Ought such a crime to be punishedi According to what calculationl Of what use could its punishment be in the economy of the
power to punishi It would be useful to the extent that it could make
reparation for 'the harm done to society' (Pastoret, II, zr). Now,
if one setsasidethe strictly material damage- which even when it is
irreparable as in the caseof a murder is of little account in relation
to society as a whole - the injury that a crime inflicts upon the
socialbody is the disorder that it introducesinto it: the scandalthat
it gives rise to, the example that it gives, the incitement to repeat it
if it is not punished,the possibility of becomingwidespreadthat it
bearswithin it. In order to be useful, punishmentmust have as its
objective the consequencesof the crime, that is to say, the seriesof
disorders that it is capable of initiating: 'The proportion between
the penalty and the quality of the offence is determined by the
influence that the violation of the pact has on the social order'
9z

Generalizedpunishment
(Filangieri, zr4). But this influence of a crime is not necessarilyin
direct proportion to its horror; a crime that horifies the conscience
is often of lesseffect than an offencethat everyone toleratesand feels
guite ready to imitate. There is a scarcity of great crimesl on the
other hand, there is the danger that everyday offencesmay multiply.
So one must not seek a qualitative relation between the crime and
its punishment, an equivalenceof horror:'Can the cries of a wretch
in torment bring back from the depths ofa past that cannot return
an action that has already been committedl' (Beccaria, 87). One
must calculatea penalty in terms not of the crime, but of its possible
repetition. One must take into account not the past ofience, but the
future disorder. Things must be so arranged that the malefactor can
have neither any desire to repeat his offence, nor any possibility of
having imitators.s Punishment, then, will be an art of effects;rather
than opposing the enormity of the penalty to the enormity of the
crime, one must adiust to one another the two series that follow
from the crims its own effects and those of the penalty. A crime
without a dynasty does not call for punishment; any more than,
according to another version of the same fable, a society on the
verge of dissolution and disappearancewould have the right to erect
scaffolds.The last crime cannot but remain unpunished.
This was an old view. The function of prrnishment as example
was to be found long before the eighteenth-century reform. That
punishment looks towards the future, and that at least one of its
major functions is to prevent crime had, for centuries, been one of
the current justifications of the right to punish. But the dillerence
was that the prevention that was expectedas an effect ofthe punishment and its spectacle- and therefore ofits excess- tended now to
become the principle of its economy and the measure of its just
proportions. One must punish exactly enough to prevent repetition.
Thbre is, then, a shift in the mechanicsof example: in a penality
employing public tonure and execution, example was the answer
to the crimel it had, by a sort of twin manifestation, to show the
crime and at the same time to show the sovereign power that
mastered it; in a penality calculated according to its own effects,
example must refer back to the crime, but in the most discreet way
possible and with the greatestpossible economy indicate the intervention of pbwer; ideally, too, it should prevent any subsequent

9t

Punishment
reappearanceof either. The exampleis no longer a ritual that manifests;it is a sign that servesas an obstacle.Through this techniqueof
punitive signs, which tends to reverse the whole temporal field of
penal action, the reformers thought they were giving to the power
to punish an economic, effective insffument that could be made
general throughout the entire social body, capableofcoding all its
behaviour and consequendyof reducing the whole diffuse domain
of illegalities. The semio-techniquewith which one tried to arm the
power to punish rested on five or six major rules.
TIe rule of minirnum quantity. A crime is committed becauseit
procures certain advantages.If one linked, to the idea of crime, the
idea of a slighdy greater disadvantage,it would ceaseto be desirable. 'For punishment to produce the effect that must be expectedof
it, it is enough that the harm that it causesexceedthe good that the
criminal has derived from the crime' (Beccaria, 89). A proximiry
between penalty and crime can, indeed must, be accepted;but no
longer in its old form, where the public execution had to be equivalent in intensity to the crime, with an additional factor that
marked the 'surplus power' of the sovereign carrying out his legitimate vengeance;it is a quasi-equivalenceat the level of interests: a
little more interest in avoiding the penalty than in risking the crime.
The rule of suffcient ideality. If the motive of a crime is the
advantageexpectedof it, the effectivenessof the penalty is the dis'pain'
advantageexpectedof it. This means that the
at the heart of
punishment is not the actual sensationof pain, but the idea of pain,
'pain'
'pain'.
Punishdispleasure,inconvenience- the
of the idea of
ment has to make use not of the body, but of representation. Or
rather, if it does make use of the body, it is not so much as the subject of a pain as the object of a representation:the memory of pain
must prevent a repetition of the crime, just as the spectacle,however artificial it may be, of a physical punishment may prevent the
contagion of a crime. But it is not pain in itself that will be the
instnrment of the technique of punishment. Therefore, as long as
possible, and except in casesrequiring an effective representation,
one should avoid recourse to the great panoply of the scaffold.
There is an elision of the body as the subject of the punishment, but
not necessarilyas an element in a spectacle.The reiection of the
public execution which, at the threshold of the theory, had found

94

Generalizedpunishment
no more than a lyrical expression,was now offered the possibility
of a rational articulation: what must be maximized is the representation of the penalty, not its corporal reality.
The rule of lateral efects. The penalty must have i,tsmost intense
effects on those who have not committed the crimel to carry the
argument to its limit, if one could be sure that the criminal could not
repeatthe crime, it would be enough to make others believe that he
had been punished. There is a centrifugal intensification of effects,
which leads to the paradox that in the calculation of penalties the
least important element is still the criminal (unless he is likely to
repeat the offence). Beccariaillustrated this paradox in the punishment that he proposed to replace the death sentence- perpetual
slavery. Is this not a physically more cruel punishment than deathl
Not at all, he says: becausethe pain of slavery, for the condemned
man, is divided into as many portions as he has moments left to live;
it is an infinitely divisible penalty, an Eleatic penalty, much less
severe than capital punishment, which is only one step away from
the public execudon. On the other hand, for those who see these
slaves, or represent them to themselves,the pains they bear are
concentrated into a single idea; all the moments of slavery are
contracted into a representationthat then becomesmore terrifying
than the idea of death. It is the economically ideal punishment: it
is minimal for him who undergoesit (and who, reduced to slavery,
cirnnot repeat his crime) and it is maximal for him who representsit
'Among
the penalties,and in the way of applying them
to himself.
in proportion to the offences,one must choose the means that will
leave the most lasting impression on the minds of the people, and
the least cruel on the body of the criminal' (Beccaria,87).
The rule of pe{ect cerninty. With the idea of each crime and the
advantagesto be expected of it must be associatedthe idea of a
particular punishment with the precise inconveniencesthat result
from it; the link from one to the other must be regardedas necessary
and unbreakable.This general element of certainty that must give
the system of punishment its effectivenessinvolves a number of
precise measures.The laws that define the crime and lay down the
penalties must be perfectly clear, 'so that each member of society
may distinguish criminal actions from virtuous actions' (Brissot,
z4). These laws must be published, so that everyone has accessto

9t

Punishment
them; what is neededis not oral traditionsand customs,but a written
legislationwhich can be 'the stablemonument of the social pact',
printed texts availableto all: 'Only printing can make the public as
a whole and not just a few p!rsonsdepositoriesofthe sacredcodeof
the laws' (Beccaria,z6). The monarch must renouncehis right of
pardon so that the force that is present in the idea of punishment
is not attenuatedby the hope of intervention: 'If one allows men to
see that the crime may be pardonedand that punishmentis not a
necessaryconsequenceof it, one nourishesin them the hope of
going unpunished.. . The laws must be inexorable,those who
execute them inflexible.'e Above all, no crime committed must
escapethe gazeof those whose task it is to dispensejustice. Nothing
so weakens the machinery of the law than the hope of going unpunished;how could one establishin the minds of the public a strict
link between the offenceand a penalty if it were aflectedby a certain
coefficientof improbabilityi Would it not be necessaryto make the
penalty the more to be fearedin its violence as it is lessto be feared
in its uncertaintyi Rather than imitate the old system in this way
and be 'more severe,one must be more vigilanl'.ro Hence the idea
that the machinery of justice must be duplicated by an organ of
surveillancethat would work side by side with it, and which would
make it possibleeither to prevent crimes, or, if committed, to arrest
their authors; police and justice must work together as two complementary actions of the sameprocess- the police assuring 'the action
of society on each individual', justice 'the rights of individuals
against society' (Duport, Archives parlementaires,XXI, 4y). Thus
every crime will come to the light of day and be punished in all
certainty. But it is also necessarythat the legal procedures should
not remain secret,that the reasonswhy a defendantis condemnedor
acquitted should be known to all, and each individual must be able
to recognize the reasonsfor a penalty: 'Let the magistratespeakhis
opinion aloud, let him be obliged to read in his iudgement the text
ofthe law that condemnsthe defendanr. . . Let the proceduresthat
are buried mysteriously in the obscurity of the records office be
opened to all citizens who are concerned at the fate of the condemned' (Mably, 3a8).
The rule ofcommontruth.Beneath this ordinary-seeming principle
is hidden an important transformation. The old system of legal

96

Generalizedpunishment
proofs, the use of torture, the extraction of confessions,the use of
the public execution, the body and spectaclefor the reproduction
of tmth had long isolated penal practice from the common forms of
demonstration: semi-proofs produced semi-truths and semi-guilty
persons,words extractedby pain had greater authenticity, presumption involved a degree of punishment. The heterogeneiry of this
systemwith the ordinary systemof proof really constituted a scandal
only when the power to punish needed, for its own economy, a
climate of irrefutable certainty. How can one link absolutely in the
minds of men the idea of crime and the idea of punishment, if the
reality of the punishment does not follow, in all cases,the reality
ofthe oflencel To establishthe offence,in all evidence,and according td the means valid for all, becomesa task of 6rst importance.
The verification of the crime must obey the general criteria for all
truth. In the arguments it employs, in the proofs it provides, legal
judgrcmentmust be homogeneouswith judgement in general.There
is, therefore, an abandonment of legal proof, a rejection of torture,
the need for a complete demonsration of the truth, an effacement
of all correlation between degrees of suspicion and degrees of
punishment. Like a mathematical truth, the truth of the crime will
be acceptedonly when it is completely proven. It follows that, up
to the 6nal demonstration of his crime, the defendant must be
regardedas innocentl and that, in order to carry out this demonstration, the iudge must use not ritual forms, but common instnrments,
that reason possessedby everyone, which is also that of philosophers and scientists:'In theory, I regard the magistrateas a philosopher who sets out to discover an interesting truth. . . His sagacity
will enable him to grasp all the circumstancesand all the relations,
bring togethbr or separatewhatever needs to be brought together
or separatedin order to arrive at a sane judgement' (Seigneux de
Corevon, a9). The investigation, the exerciseof common reason,
lays aside the old inquisitorial model and adopts the much more
subtle model (doubly validated by scienceand common sense)of
'pilot
steering between
empirical research.The judge will be like a
'What
the rocks':
proofs or what clues will be considered to be
sufficient neither I nor anyone else has dared to determine in general;
since circumstancesare subject to infinite variations, since proofs
and elues must be deduced from these circumstances,the clearest

97

Punishment
clues and proofs must necessarilyvary in proportion' (Risi, y3).
Henceforth, penal practice was to be subiect to a common rule of
truth, or rather to a complex rule in which heterogeneouselements
of scientific demonstration, the evidenceof the sensesand common
'deep'seated
sensecome together to form the judge's
conviction'.
justice
Although penal
preservesthe forms that guaranteeits equity,
it may now be opened up to all manner of truths, providing they
are evident, well founded, acceptableto all. The legal ritual in itself
no longer generatesa divided truth. It is resituated in the field of
reference of common proofs. With the multiplicity of scientific
discourses,a difficult, infinite relation was then forged that penal
justice is still unable to control. The master of justice is no longer
the master of its truth.
The rule of optimal specifcation.For penal semiotics to cover the
whole field of illegalities that one wishes to eliminate, all offences
must be defined; they must be classifiedand collected into species
from which none ofthem can escape.A code is therefore necessary
and this code must be sufficiently precisefor each type of ofience to
be clearly presentin it. The silenceof the law must not harbour the
hope of impunity. An exhaustive,explicit code is required, defining
crimes and fixing penalties. (On this theme, cf., among others,
Linguet, 8.) But the same imperative need for a total coincidence
between all possible offences and the effects-signsof punishment
forces one to go further. The idea of the samepunishment does not
have the sameeffect on everyone: the rich do not fear fines nor the
notorious infamy. The injury causedby an offence and its value as
example differ according to the status of the offender; a crime
committed by a noble is more injurious to society than one committed by a man of the people (Lacretelle, r44). Lastly, sincepunishment must prevent a repetition of the offence, it must take into
account the profound nature of the criminal himself, the presumable
degree of his wickedness,the intrinsic quality of his will: 'Of two
men who have committed the sametheft, how much lessguilty is he
who scarcelyhad the necessitiesof life than he who overflowed with
excesslOf two perjurers, how much more criminal is he on whom
one has striven from his childhood to impress feelings of honour
than he who, abandoned to nature, never received the benefit of
education' (Marat, 34). One seesthe emergenceat the same time of
98

Generalizedpunishment
the need for a parallel classificationof crimes and punishments, the
need for an individualization of sentences,in accordance with the
particular characteristicsof eachcriminal. This individualization was
to weigh very heavily throughout the history of modern penal law;
it is rooted precisely here in terms of the theory of law and according to the requirements of everyday practice, it is no doubt in
radical opposition to the principle of codification; but from the
standpoint of the economy of the power to punish, and of the
techniquesby which one wishes to circulate throughout the social
body precisely calibrated signs of punishment, with neither excesses
nor loopholes,with neither a useless'expenditure' of power nor with
timidity, it becomesevident that the codification of the offencespunishments system and the modulation of the criminal-punishment dyad go side by side, each requiring the other. Individualization appearsas the ultimate aim of a precisely adapted code.
But this individualization is very different in its nature from the
modulations of punishment to be found in the old jurisprudence,
The old system - and on this point it followed Christian penitentiary practice- used two seriesof variablesto adjust the punishment,
'circumstances'
those of
and those of intention'; elements,that is to
say, that made it possible to qualify the act itself. The modulation
of the penalty belonged to 'casuistry' in the broad sense.(On the
non-individualizing character of casuistry, cf. Cariou.) But what
w:rs now beginning to emergewas a modulation that referred to the
defendanthimself, to his nature, to his way of life and his attitude of
mind, to his past,to the'quality'and not to the intention of his will.
One perceives,but as a place as yet un6lled, the locus in which, in
penal practice, psychological knowledge will take over the role of
casuistic jurisprudence. Of course, at the end of the eighteenth
century, that moment was still far off. The code-individualization
link was sought in the scientific models of the period. Natural
history no doubt offered the most adeguateschema:the taxonomy
of speciesaccording to an uninterrupted gradation. One sought to
constitute a Linnaeus of crimes and punishments, so that each
particular offenceand eachpunishableindividual might come, without the slightest risk of any arbitrary action, within the provisions
of a general law. 'A table must be drawn up of all the genera of
crimes to be observed in different countries. According to the

99

Punishment
enumeration of crimes, a division into speciesmust be carried out.
The best rule of this division is, it seems to me, to separatethe
crimes according to their objects. This division must be such that
each speciesis quite distinct from another, and that each particular
crime, considered in all its relations may be placed between that
which must precedeit and that which must follow it, in the strictest
gradation; lastly, this table must be such that it may be compared
with another table that will be drawn up for penalties,in such a way
that they may correspond exactly to one another' (Lacretelle, 3yr3yz). In theory, or rather in dream, the double taxonomy of
punishments and crimes will solve the problem: but how is one to
apply fixed laws to particular individualsl
Far removed from this speculativemodel, forms of anthropological individualization were being constituted at the same period in
what was still a very rough and ready way. Let us take first the
notion of the repetition of crime. Not that this was unknown to the
old criminal laws.ll But it was tending to become a description
of the defendant himself capable of altering the sentencepassed:
according to the legislation of rygr, recidivists were liable in almost
all casesto a doubling of the penalty; according to the law of Flordal
Year X, they had to be branded with the letter R; and the penal code
of t8ro inflicted on them either the maximum possibleof the normal
penalty, or the penalty immediately above it. Now, through the
repetition of the crime, what one was aiming at was not the author
of an act defined by law, but the delinquent subjecthimseld a certain
will that manifested his intrinsically criminal character. Gradually,
as criminality, rather than crime, becamethe object of penal intervention, the opposition between first offender and recidivist tended
to become more important. And on the basis of this opposition,
reinforcing it on several points, one seesat the same period the
formation of the notion of the 'oime passionel' - an involuntary,
unpremeditated crime, bound up with extraordinary circumstances,
which, while not offering the sameexcuseas madness,nevertheless
prevented it from being regarded as an ordinary crime. As early as
rygt, Le Peletier remarked that the subtle gradation of penalties
that he had presentedto the Constituent Assembly might dissuade
from crime'the evil-doer who plansa wicked action in cold blood',
and who may be iestrained by thoughts of the penalty; but, on the

IOO

Generalizedpunishment
other hand, it was powerlessagainstcrimes due to 'violent passions
that have no regard to consequences';this, however, was unimportant, sincesuch crimes revealedin their authors'no reasonedwickedness.'lI
Beneaththe humanization of the penalties,what one finds are all
those rules that authorize, or rather demand, 'leniency', as a calculated economy of the power to punish. But they also provoke a
shift in the point of application of this power: it is no longer the
body, with the ritual play of excessivepains, spectacularbrandings
in the ritual of the public executionl it is the mind or rather a play
of representationsand signs circulating discreetly but necessarily
and evidently in the minds of all. It is no longer the body, but the
soul, said Mably. And we see very clearly what he meant by this
term: the correlative of a technique of power. Old 'anatomies' of
punishment are abandoned. But have we really entered the age of
non-corporal punishmentl
At the point of departure, then, one may place the political
project of rooting out illegalities, generalizing the punitive function
and delimiting, in order to control it, the power to punish. From
this there emerge two lines of obiectification of crime and of the
criminal. On the one hand, the criminal designatedas the enemy of
all, whom it is in the interest of all to track down, falls outside the
pact, disqualifies himself as a citizen and emerges, bearing within
him as it were, a wild fragment of nature; he appearsas a villain,
a monster, a madman, perhaps,a sick and, before long, 'abnormal'
individual. It is as such that, one day, he will belong to a scientific
'treatment'
objectification and to the
that is correlative to it. On the
other hand, the need to measure, from within, the effects of the
punitive pov/er prescribestactics of intervention over all criminals,
actual or potential: the organization of a field of prevention, the
calculation of interests,the circulation of representationsand signs,
the constitution of a horizon of certainty and proof, the adjustment
of penaltiesto ever more subde variables; all this also leads to an
obiectification of criminals and crimes. In either case,one seesthat
the power relation that underlies the exerciseof punishment begins
to be duplicated by an object relation in which are caught up not
,only the crime as a fact to be established according to common

IOI

Punishment
norms, but the criminal as an individual to be known according
to specific criteria. One also sees that this obiect relation is not
superimposed,from the outside, on the punitive practice, as would
be a prohibition laid on the fury of the public execution by the
limits of the sensibility, or as would be a rational or 'scienti6c'
interrogationas to what this man that one is punishingreally is. The
processesofobiectification originate in the very tacticsofpower and
of the arrangement of its exercise.
However, the two types of objectification that emerge with the
project ofpenal reform are very different from one another: both in
their chronology and in their effects. The objectification of the
criminal asoutsidethe law, asnaturalman, is still only a potentiality,
a vanishing trace, in which are entangled the themes of political
criticism and the figures of the imagination. One will have to wait a
long time beforc homo uiminalis becomesa definite obiect in the
field of knowledge. The other, on the contrary, has had much more
rapid and decisive effects in so far as it was linked more directly
to the reorganizationof the power to punish: codificarion, definition
of offences, the fixing of a scale of penalties, rules of procedure,
definition of the role of magistrates.And also becauseit made use
of the discoursealreadyconstituted by theldiologues.This discourse
provided, in effect, by meansofthe theory ofinterests, representations and signs, by the seriesand genesesthat it reconstituted, a sort
'mind'
of general recipe for the exerciseof power over men: the
as
a surfaceof inscription for power, with semiology as its tool; the
submission of bodies through the control of ideas; the analysis of
representationsas a principle in a politics of bodies that was much
more effective than the ritual anatomy of torture and execution. The
thought of the ldtologuer was not only a theory of the individual
and society; it developed as a technology of subtle, effective,
economic powers, in opposition to the sumptuousexpenditureof
the power of the sovereign. Let us hear once more what Servan has
to say: the ideas of crime and punishment must be strongly linked
'follow
and
one another without interruption. . . When you have
thus formed the chainof ideasin the headsof your citizens,you will
then be able to pride yourselves on guiding them and being their
masters.A stupid despotmay constrainhis slaveswith iron chains;
but a true politician binds them even more strongly by the chain of
r02

Generalizedpunishment
their own ideas;it is at the stable point of reasonthat he securesthe
end of the chain; this link is all the stronger in that we do not know
of what it is made and we believe it to be our own work; despair
and time eat away the bonds of iron and steel, but they are powerlessagainst the habirual union of ideas,they can only tighten it still
more; and on the soft fibres of the brain is founded the unshakable
baseofthe soundestofEmpires'(Servanr sy).
'ideological
It is this semio-techniqueof punishments, this
power' which, partly at least, will remain in suspenseand will be
supersededby a new political anatomy, in which the body, once
again, but in a new form, will be the principal character.And this
new political anatomy will permit the intersection of the two
divergent lines of objectification that are to be seenemerging in the
'from
eighteenth century: that which reiects the criminal
the other
side'- from the side ofa nature againstnature; and that which seeks
to control delinquency by a calculatedeconomy of punishments.A
glance at the new art of punishing clearly reveals the supersession
of the punitive semio-techniqueby a new politics of the body.

ro3

2. The gentleway in punishment

The art of punishing, then, must rest on a s'hole technology of
representation.
The undertakingcan succeedonly if it tbrms part of
'Like
the gravitation of bodies, a secretforce
a natural mechanics.
compels us ever towards our well-being. This impulsion is affecrcd
only by the obstaclesthat laws opposeto it. All the diverseactions
of man are the effectsof this interior tendency.' To find the suitable
punishment for a crime is to find the disadvantagewhose idea is
such that it robs for ever the idea of a crime of any attraction. It
is an art of conflicting energies,an art of imageslinked by association, the forging of stableconnectionsrhat defy time: it is a matter
of establishingthe representationof pairs of opposine values,of
establishing quantitative differences between the opposing forces,
of setting up a complex of obstacle-signstltat may subiect the
'Let
the idea of torture
movement of the forces to a power relation.
and execution be ever present in the heart of the weak man and
dominatethe feelingthat driveshim to crime'(Beccaria,r r9). These
obstacle-signsmust constitute the new arsenalof penalties,iust asthe
old public executionswere organizedaround a systemof retaliatory
marks. But in order to function, they must obey severalconditions.
r. They must be as unarbitrary as possible.It is true that it is
society that defines, in terms of its own interests, whar must be
regardedas a crime: it is not thereforenatural. But, if punishment
is to presentitself to the mind as soon as one thinks of committing a
crime, as immediate a link as possible must be made between the
'The penalty must
analogy, proximity.
two: a link of resemblance,
be made to conform as closely as possible to the nature of the
offence, so that fear of punishment diverts the mind from the road
along which the prospect of an advanta!feouscrime was leading it'
(Beccaria,rr9). The ideal punishmentwould be transparentto the
rol

The gende way in punishment
crime that it punishes;thus, for him who contemplatesit, it will be
infallibly the sign of the crime that it punishesl and for him who
dreamsof the crime, the idea of the offencewill be enough to arous!
the sign of the punishment. This is an advantagefor the stability of
the link, an advantagefor the calculation of the proportions between
crime and punishment and the quantitative reading of interests; it
also has the advantage that, by assuming the form of a natural
sequence,punishment does not appear as the arbitrary effect of a
'To derive the offence
human power:
from the punishment is the
best means of proportioning punishment to crime. If this is the
triumph of iustice, it is also the triumph of liberty, for then penalties
no longer proceedfrom the will of the legislator, but from the nature
of things; one no longer seesman committing violence on man'
(Marat, 33). In analogicalpunishment,the power that punishesis
hidden.
The reformers proposed a whole panoply of penalties that were
natural by institution and which represented in their form the
content of the crime. Take Vermeil, for example: those who abuse
public liberty will be deprived of their own; those who abuse the
benefits of law and the privileges of public office will be deprived of
their civil rights; speculation and usury will be punished by fines;
theft will be punished by confiscation; 'vainglory' by humiliation;
murder by death; fre-raising by the stake. In the caseof the poi'the
soner,
executioner will present him with a goblet the contents
of which will be thrown into his face; thus he will be made to feel
the horror of his crime by being ofiered an image of it; he will then
be thrown into a cauldron of boiling water' (Vermeil, 68-r4y; cf.
also Dufriche de Valaz6, 349) Mere day-dreamingi Perhaps. But
the principle of a symbolic communication was clearly formulated
by Le Peletier, when in rygr he presentedthe new criminal legisla'Exact
tion:
relations are required between the nature of the offence
and the nature of the punishment'; he who has used violence in his
crime must be subjected to physical pain; he who has been lazy
must be sentencedto hard labour; he who has acted despicablywill
be subjectedto infamy (Le Peletier, gzvz).
Despite cruelties that are strongly reminiscent of the tortures of
the Ancien R6gime, a quite different mechanismis at work in these
analogical penalties.Horror is not opposed to horror in a joust of

rot

Punishment
power; it is no longer the symmetry of vengeance,bur the transparency of the sign to that which it signifies;what is required is to
establish,in the theatreof punishments,a rilation that is immediately intelligible to the sensesand on which a simple.calculationmay
be based:a sort of reasonableaestheticof punishment.'It is not only
in the fine arts that one must follon' nature faithfully; political
institutions,at leastthose that display wisdom and permanence,are
founded on nature' (Beccaria,rr4). The punishmentmust proceed
from the crime; the law must appearto be a riecessityof things, and
power must act while concealingitself beneaththe gentle force of
nature.
z. This complex of signs musr en!fagewith the mechanicsof
forces: reduce the desire that makes rhe crime attractive; increase
the interest that makes the penalty be feared;reversethe relation of
intensities,so thar the represenrationof the penalty and its disadvantagesis more lively than that of the crime and its pleasures.
There is a whole mechanics,therefore,of interest,of its movement,
of the way that one representsit to oneselfand of the livelinessof
'The
this representation.
legislatormust be a skilful architectwho
knows how to employ all the forces that may contribute to the
solidity of the building and reduce all those that might ruin it'
(Beccaria,r3y).
There are several ways of achieving this. 'Go straight to the
sourceof evil' (N{ably,246).Smashthe mainspringthat animatesthe
representationof the crime. Weaken the interestthat brought it to
birth. Behind the offences of the vagabond, there is laziness;that
'One
is what one must 6ght against.
will not succeedby locking
beggarsup in filthy prisons that are more like cesspools';they will
have to be forced to work. 'The best way of punishing them is to
employ them' (Brissot, 258). Against a bad passion,a good habit;
againsta force, anotherforce, but it must be the force of sensibility
and passion,not that of armed power. 'Must one not deduce all
penaltiesfrom this principle,which is so simple,so appropriateand
alreadywell known, namely, to choosethem in that which is most
subduing for the passionthat led to the crime committedi' (Lacretelle,36r).
Set the force that drove the criminal to the crime againstitself.
Divide interest,use it to make the penalty somethingto be feared.
ro6

The gentle way in punishment
Let the punishment irritate it and stimulate it more than the crime
was able to flatter it. If pride led to the committing of a crime, let
it be hurt, let the punishment disgust it. Shameful punishments are
effective becausethey are based on the vanity that was at the root
of the crime. Fanatics glory both in their opinions and in the tortures that they endure for them. Let us, therefore, set against
'Reduce
it with
fanaticism the proud obstinacy that sustains it
ridicule and shame; if one humiliates the proud vanity of fanatics
before a great crowd of spectators,one may exp!ct happy effects
from this punishment.' It would be quite useless,on the other hand,
to impose physical pain on them. (Beccaria, rr3).
Reanimatethe useful, virtuous interest that hasbeen so weakened
by the crime. The feeling of respect for property - for wealth, but
also for honour, liberty, life - this the criminal loseswhen he robs,
calumniates, abducts or kills. So he must be taught this feeling
once again. And one will begin by teaching it to him for his own
benefit; one will show him what it is to lose the freedom to dispose
as one wishes of one's own wealth, honour, time and body, so that
he may respectit in others (Pastoret, I, 49). The penalty that forms
stable and easily legible signs must also recomposethe economy of
interests and the dynamics of passions.
3. Consequently, one must use a temporal modulation. The
penalty transforms, modifies, establishessigns, arranges obstacles.
What use would it be if it had to be permanentl A penalty that had
no end would be contradictory: all the constraints that it imposeson
the convict and of which, having become virtuous once more, he
would never be able to take advantage,would be little better than
torture; and the effort made to reform him would be so much
trouble and expenselost by society. If incorrigibles there be, one
must be determined to eliminate them. But, for all the others,
punishment can function only if it comes to an end. This analysis
was acceptedby the Constiruent Assembly: the code of r79r lays
down the death penalty for traitors and murderers; alt other penalties
must have an end (the maximum is twenty years).
But above all the role of duration must be integrated into the
economy of the penalty. In its very violence, the public execution
tended to have the following resulu the more serious the crime, the
shorter the punishment. Duration certainly intervened in the old
r07

Punishment
system of penalties;days at the pillory, years of banishment, hours
spent dying on the wheel. But it was a time of ordeal, not of concerted transformation. Duration must now facilitate the proper
action of the punishmenc 'A prolonged successionof painful privations, sparing mankind the horror of torture, has much more effect
on the guilty party than a passingmoment of pain. . . It constantly
renews in the eyes of the people that witness it the memory of
vengeful laws and revives in all the moments of a salutary terror.'l
Time, operator of punishment.
But the delicate mechanism of the passions must not be constrained in the same 1il/ayor with the same insistence when they
begin to improve; thd punishment should diminish as it produces its
effects.It may well be fixed, in the sensethat it is determined for all,
in the sameway, by law, but its internal mechanismmust be variable.
In the bill put before the Constituent Assembly, Le Peletier proposed a system of diminishing penalties: a convict condemned to
the most seriouspenalty would be subiectedto the'cdchot'(manacles
on hands and feet, darkness,solitude, bread and water) only during
the first stage of his imprisonmentl he would be allowed to work
first two then three days a week. After two thirds of his sentence
had been served, he could passto the'gdne' (a cell with light, chain
around the waist, solitary work for five hours a day, but with other
prisoners on the other two days; this work would be paid and would
enable him to improve his daily fare). Lastly, when he approached
the end of his sentence,he could pass to the normal prison r6gime:
'He
will be allowed every day to meet other prisoners for work in
common. If he prefers, he will be able to work alone. He will pay
for his food from what he earnsfrom his work'(Le Peletier, tzg-to).
4. For the convict, the penalty is a mechanicsof signs, interests
and duration. But the guilty person is only one of the targets of
punishment. For punishment is directed above all at others, at all
the potentially guilty. So these obstacle-signs that are gradually
engraved in the representationof the condemned man must therefore circulate rapidly and widely; they must be acceptedand redistributed by all; they must shapethe discoursethat each individual
has with others and by which crime is forbidden to all by all - the
true coin that is substituted in people's minds for the falseprofits of
crime.
.
ro8

The gentle way in punishment
'For this, everyone must seepunishment not only as naturalr but
in his own interestl everyone must be able to read in it his own
advantage.There must be no more spectacular,but uselesspenalties.
There must be no secret penaltieseither; but punishment must be
regarded as a retribution that the guilty man makes to each of his
fellow citizens, for the crime that has wronged them all - penalties
'bring
out
that areconstantl)'placedbeforecitizens'eyes,and which
the public utility of common and particular movetnents'(Dufriche
deYalazlr Sa6).The idealwould be for the convict to appearas a
sort of rentable property: a slave at the service of all. Why would
society eliminate a life and a body that it could appropriatei Ir
'serve
would be more useful to make him
the state in a slavery
that would be more or lessextendedaccording to the nature of his
crime'; France has all too many impracticable roads that impede
trade; thieves who also cbstruct the free circulation of goods could
be put to rebuilding the highways. Far more telling than death
'the
would be
exampleof a man who is ever before one's eyes,whom
one has deprived of liberty and who is forced to spend the rest of
his days repairing the loss that he has caused society' (Boucher
d'Argis, r78r, ryg).
In the old system, the body of the condemned man becamethe
king's property, on which the sovereign left his mark and brought
down the effectsof his power. Now he will be rather the property
of society, the object of a collective and useful appropriation. This
explains why the reformers almost always proposed public works
as one of the best possiblepenalties;in this, they were supported by
the Cahiersde doldances:'Letthose condemned to penaltiesshort of
death be put to the public works of the country for a time proportionate to their crime.'2 Public works meant two things: the collective interest in the punishment of the condemend man and the
visible, verifiable character of the punishment. Thus the convict
pays twice; by the labour he provides and by the signs that he
produces.At the heart of society, on the public squaresor highways,
the convict is a focus of profit and signification. Visibly, he is
serving everyone; but, at the sametime, he lets slip into the minds
of all the crime-punishment sign: a secondary, purely moral, but
much more real utility.
;. Hence a whole learned economy of publicity. In phvsical
r09

Punishment
torture, the example was based on terror: physical fear, collective
horror, imagesthat must be engravedon the memoriesof the spectators, like the brand on the cheekor shoulder of the condemnedman.
The exampleis now basedon the lesson,the discourse,the decipherable sign, the representationof public morality. It is no longer the
terrifying restoration of sovereignty that will sustain the ceremony
of punishment, but the reactivation of the code, the collective reinforcements of the link between the idea of crime and the idea of
punishment. In the penalty, rather than seeing the presenceof the
sovereign, one will read the laws themselves.The laws associated
a particular crime with a particular punishment. As soon as the
crime is committed, the punishment will follow at once, enacting the
discourseof the law and showing that the code, which links ideas,
also links realities. The iunction, immediate in the text, must be
immediate in acts. 'Consider those 6rst movements in which the
news of some horrible act spreadsthrough our towns and countryside; the citizens are like men who seelightning falling about them;
everyone is moved by indignation and horror. . . That is the
moment to punish the crime: do not let it slip by; hasten to prove
it and judge it. Set up scaffolds,stakes,drag out the guilty man to
the public squares,summon the people with great cries; you will
then hear them applaud the proclamation of your judgements,as the
proclamation of peaceand liberty; you will see them run to these
terrible spectaclesas to the triumph of the laws' (Servan, 3y-6).
Public punishment is the ceremony of immediate recoding.
The law is re-formed: it takesup its place on the side of the crime
that violated it. The criminal, on the other hand, is detached from
society, he leaves it. But not in those ambiguous festivals of the
Ancien R6gime in which the people inevitably took part, either in
the crime or in the execution, but in a ceremony of mourning. The
society that has rediscovered its laws has lost the citizen who violated them. Public punishment must manifest this double afriction:
that a citizen should have been capableofignoring the law and that
one should have been obliged to separateoneself from a citizen.
'Associate
the scaffold with the most lugubrious and most moving
ceremoniesllet this terrible day be a day of mourning for the nation;
let the general sorrow be painted everywhere in bold letters. . . Let
the magistrate, wearing black, funereal cr6pe, announce the crime
rto

The gentle way in punishment
and the sad necessity of a legal vengeanceto the people. Let the
di{Ierent scenesof this tragedy strike all the senses,stir all gentle,
honest affections' (Dufau, 688).
The meaning of this mourning must be clear to all; each element
of its ritual must speak, repeat the crime, recall the law, show the
need for punishment and iustify its degree. Posters,placards,signs,
symbols must be distributed, so that everyone may learn their
significations. The publicity of punishment must not have the
physical effect of terror; it must open up a book to be read, Le
Peletier suggestedthat, once a month, the people should be allowed
'in
to visit convicts,
their mournful cells: they will read, written in
bold letters above the door, the name of the convict, his crime and
his sentencd (Le Peletier, tzg-to). And in the simple, military style
of the imperial ceremonies,Bexon was to imagine some years later a
whole tableauof penal heraldry: 'The prisoner condemned to death
will be taken to the scaffold in a cart "hung or painted in black and
red"; if he is a traitor, he will wear a red coat on which will be
inscribed, in front and behind, the word "traitor"; if he is a parricide, his head will be covered with a black veil and on his shirt will
be embroidered daggers or whatever instruments of death he used;
if he is a poisoner, his red shirt will be decorated with snakesand
other venomous animals' (Bexon, 24-t - this project was presented
to the King of Bavaria).
This legible lesson,this ritual recoding, must be repeatedas often
as possible;the punishments must be a school rather than a festival;
an ever-open book rather than a ceremony. The duration that makes
the punishment efrective for the guilry is also useful for the spectators. They must be able to consult at each moment the permanent
lexicon of crime and punishment. A secretpunishment is a punishment half wasted. Children should be allowed to come to the places
where the penalty is being carried outl there they will attend their
classesin civics. And grown men will periodically relearn the laws.
Let us conceive of placesof punishment as a Garden of the Laws
that families would visit on Sundays. 'I propose that, from time to
time, after preparing people's minds with a reasoneddiscourse on
the preservation of the social order, on the utility of punishment,
men as well as boys should be taken to the mines and to the work
camps and contemplate the frightful fate of these outlaws. Such

III

Punishment
pilgrimageswould be more usefulthan the pilgrimagesmadeby the
Turks to Mecca' (Brissot). And Le Peletier consideredthat this
visibility of punishmentwas one of the fundamentalprinciplesof the
new penal code: 'Often, at certain special times, the presenceof
the peoplemust bring down shameupon the headsof the guilty; and
the presenceof the guiltyperson in the pitiful statetowhich his crime
has reducedhim must bring useful instruction to the souls of the
people' (Le Peletier,3zz). Long beforehe was regardedas an object
of science,the criminal was imagined as a source of instruction.
Once one madecharitablevisits to prisonersto sharein their sufferings (the seventeenthcentury had inventedor revived this practice);
now it was being suggestedthat childrenshould comeand learnhow
the benefitsof the law are applied to crime - a living lessonin the
museumof order.
6. This will make possiblein society an inversion of the traditional discourseof crime. How can one extinguishthe dubiousglory
of the criminali This was a matter of grave concern to the lawmakers of the eighteenthcentury. How can one silencethe adventures of the great criminals celebratedin the almanacs,broadsheets
and popular talesi If the recoding of punishmentis well done, if the
ceremony of mourning takes place as it should, the crime can no
longer appearas anything but a misfortune and the criminal as an
enemy who must be re-educatedinto social life. lnstead of those
songs of praise that turn the criminal into a hero, only those
obstacle-signsthat arrest the desire to commit the crime by the
calculatedfear of punishmentwill circulatein men's discourse.The
positive mechanicswill operateto the full in the languageof every
day, which will constantlyreinforceit with new accounts.Discourse
will become the vehicle of the law: the constant principle of universal recoding.The poets of the peoplewill at last join those who
call themselvesthe 'missionariesof eternalreason';they will become
moralists.'Filled with theseterrible imagesand salutaryideas,each
citizen will spread them through his family and there, by long
accountsdeliveredwith as much fervour as they are avidly listened
to, his children gathered around him, will open up their young
memories to receive, in imperishable lineaments,the notion of
crime and punishment,the love of law and country, the respectand
trust of the magistrature.Country people,too, will be witnessesof
tt2

The gentle way in punishment
these examples and will sow them around their huts, the taste of
virtue will take root in these coarse souls, while the evil-doer, dismayed at the public ioy, fearful at the sight of so many enemies,
may abandon plans whose outcome will be as prompt as it is
gloomy' (Servan, 3z).
This, then, is how one must imagine the punitive city. At the
crossroads,in the gardens, at the side of roads being repaired or
bridges built, in workshops open to all, in the depths of mines that
may be visited, will be hundreds of tiny theatres of punishment.
Each crime will have its law; each criminal his punishment. It will
be a visible punishment, a punishment that tells all, that explains,
justifies itself, convicts: placards, different-coloured caps bearing
inscriptions, posters,symbols, texts read or printed, tirelessly repeat
the code. Scenery, perspectives,optical effects, trompe-l'eil sometimes magnify the scene,making it more fearful than it is, but also
clearer.From where the public is sitting, it is possible to believe in
the existenceof certain cruelties which, in fact, do not take place.
But the essentialpoint, in all these real or magnified severities, is
that they should all, according to a strict ecohomy, teach a lesson:
that each punishment should be a fable. And that, in countelpoint
with all the direct examples of virtue, one may at each moment
encounter, as a living specmcle,the misfortunes of vice. Around
'representations',
each of these moral
schoolchildren will gather
with their mastersand adults will learn what lessonsto teach their
offspring. The great terrifying ritual of the public execution gives
way, day after day, street after street, to this serioustheatre, with its
multifarious and persuasive scenes. And popular memory will
reproduce in rumour the austerediscourse of the law. But perhaps
it will be necessary,above these innumerable spectaclesand narratives, to place the major sign of punishment for the most terrible
of crimes: the keystone of the penal edifice. In any case,Vermeil had
imagined the sceneof absolute punishment that should dominate all
the theatres of everyday punishmenu the only case in which one
had to seekto reach an infinity of punishment, something equivalent
in the new penal system to what regicide had been in the old. The
man found guilty of this crime would have his eyes put out; he
would be put into an iron cage,suspendedin the air, above a public
square;he would be completely naked; he would be attachedto the
tt,

Punishment
bars of the cage by an iron belt around his waist; to the end of his
'Thus
he would be
days, he would be fed on bread and water.
exposedto all the rigours of the seasons,sometimeshis head would
be covered with snow, sometimes burnt by a scorching sun. It is
in this energetic torture, presenting rather the extension ofa painful
death than that of a painful life, that one would truly recognize a
villain deserving of the horror of nature in its entirety, condemned
to see no longer the heaven that he has outraged and to live no
longer on the earth that he has sullied' (Vermeil, 148-9). Above the
punitive city hangs this iron spider; and the criminal who is to be
thus crucified by the new law is the parricide.
'Avoid
There is a whole new arsenalof picturesquepunishments.
inflicting the samepunishments,'saidMably. The idea of a uniform
penalty, modulated only according to the gravity of the crime is
banished.To be more precise:the use of imprisonment as a general
form of punishment is never presentedin theseprojects for specific,
'telling'
visible and
penalties.Imprisonment is envisaged,but as one
among other penalties; it is the specific punishment for certain
offences, those that infringe the liberty of individuals (such as
abduction) or those that result from an abuse of liberty (disorder,
violence). It is also envisaged as a condition to enable certain
punishments to be carried out (forced labour, for example). But it
does not cover the whole field of penality with its duration as the
sole principle of variation. Or rather, the idea of penal imprisonment is explicitly criticized by many reformers. Because it is
incapable of corresponding to the specificity of crimes. Becauseit
has no effect on the public. Becauseit is useless,even harmful, to
society: it is costly, it maintains convicts in idleness, it multiplies
their vices (cf. Archives parlementaires,XXVI, 7rz). Becausethe
execution ofsuch a penalty is difficult to superviseand becausethere
is a risk of exposing prisoners to the arbitrary will of their guards.
Becausethe job of depriving a man of his liberty and of supervising
him is an exerciseof tyranny. 'You are demanding that there should
be monstersamong you; and if theseodious men existed, the legislator ought perhapsto treat them as murderers' (Mably, 338). Prison
as the universal penalty is incompatible with this whole technique
of penalty-effect, penalty-representation,penalty-general function,
rr4

The gentle way in punishment
penalty-sign and discourse.It is obscurity, violence and suspicion.
'It
is a place of darknessin which the citizen's eye cannot count the
victims, in which consequently their number is lost as an example.
. . . Whereas if, without multiplying crimes, one could multiply the
example of punishments, one would succeed at laSt in rendering
them less necessary;indeed, the obscurity of the prisons becomes
a subiect ofdefiance for the citizens; they easily suppose that great
injustices are committed there. . . There is certainly something
wrong when the law, which is made for the good of the multitude,
instead of arousing its gratitude, continually iuouses its discontent'
(Dufriche de Valaz6, t44-).
The idea that imprisonment might as it does today cover the
whole middle ground of punishment, between death and light
penalties,was one that the reformers could not arrive at immediately.
The problem is the following: within a short space of time,
detention became the essential form of punishment. In the penal
code of r8ro, between death and fines, it occupies, in a number of
forms, almost the whole field of possible punishments. 'What is the
system of penality acceptedby the new lawl It is incarceration in all
its forms. Indeed, compare the four principal penalties that remain
in the penal code. Forced labour is a form of incarceration. The
convict-ship is an open-air prison. Detention, reclusion, imprisonment for a rninor offence are in a sensemerely different names for
one and the same punishment' (R6musat, l8y). And the Empire
decided at once to translate this imprisonment, envisaged by the
law, into reality, according to a whole penal, administrative, geographical hierarchy; at the lowest degree, associated with each
justice of the peace,municipal maisonsdepolice;in each arrondissement, maisons d'arr!4 in each d!partement, a mahon de correctionl
at the summit, several rnaisonscentralesfor convicted criminals or
correctionekserving sentencesofover one year; lastly, in a few ports,
convict-ships. A great prison stmcrure was planned, whose different
levels would correspond exactly to the levels of the centralized
administration. The scaffold, where the body of the tortured
criminal had been exposed to the ritually manifested force of the
sovereign, the punitive theatre in which the representation of
punishment was permanently available to the social body, was
replaced by a great enclosed, complex and hierarchized structure

II'

Punishment
that was integrated into the very body of the state apparatus. A
quite difierent materiality, a quite different physics of power, a quite
different way of investing men's bodies had emerged. During the
Restoration and the July monarchy, there were, apart from a few
exceptional moments, between 4orooo and 43rooo prisoners in
French gaols (approximately one prisoner per 6oo inhabitants).
The high wall, no longer the wall that surrounds and protects, no
longer the wall that stands for power and wealth, but the meticulously sealedwall, uncrossablein either direction, closed in upon the
now mysterious work of punishment, will become, near at hand,
sometimes even at the very centre of the cities of the nineteenth
century, the monotonous figure, at oncq material and symbolic, of
the power to punish. Already under the Consulate, the Minister of
the Interior had been appointed to investigate the different 'places
of safety' that were already functioning and which could be used in
different towns. A few years later, sums had been allocated for the
construction, in keeping with the power that they were to represent
and serve, of these new castlesof the new civil order. The empire
used them in fact, for another war (cf. Decazes).A lessextravagant,
but more obstinate economy continued to build them throughout
the nineteenth century.
In under twenty years, in any case, the principle so clearly
formulated in the Constituent Assembly, of specific, appropriate,
effective penalties,constituting, in eachcase,a lessonfor all, became
the law of detention for every offence of any importance, except
those requiring the death penalty. The theatre of punishment of
which the eighteenth century dreamedand which would have acted
essentially on the minds of the general public was replaced by the
great uniform machinery of the prisons, whose network of immense
buildings was to extend acrossFrance and Europe. But twenty years
is perhaps too long a chronology for this conjuring trick. It may
be argued that it occurred almost instantaneously.One has only to
look at the bill for the criminal code presentedin the Constituent
Assembly by Le Peletier. The principle stated at the outset is the
'exact
need for
relations between the nature of the offence and the
naturreof the punishment': physical pain should be inflicted on those
who commit crimes of violence, hard labour on the idle, shameon
those with degraded souls. But the severe penalties actually
r16

The gentle way in punishment
proposed are three'forms of detention: the'cachot'rin which the
penaltyof imprisonment is augmentedby various measures(solitude,
a deprivation of light, restrictions on food); the'g6ne',in which these
ancillary measures are attenuatd, and lastly imprisonment proper,
which is reduced to simple confinement. The diversity, so solemnly
promised, is reduced in the end to this grey, uniform penalty.
Indeed, at the dme, there were deputieswho expressedsurprise that,
instead of establishing a natural relation between offences and
penalties,a quite different plan had been adopted: 'So that ifl have
betrayed my country, I go to.prison; if I have killed my fatherr l go
to prison; every imaginable offenceis punished in the sameuniform
way. One might as well seea physician who has the same remedy
for all ills' (Chabroud, 618).
This prompt substitution was not confined to France.It was to be
found, to a greater or lesser degree, in other countries. When
Catherine II, in the years immediately following the treatise .Des
ddlits et despeines,gave instructions to the commission enuusted
'new
with the task of drawing up a
code of laws', Beccaria'slesson
on the specificity and variety of penaltieswas not forgotten; it was
repeatedalmost word for word: 'It is a triumph of civil liberty when
the criminal laws derive each penalty from the parricular nature of
eachcrime. In this way all arbitrarinessceases;the penalty does not
depend on the caprice of the legislator, but on the nature of the
thing; it is not man who does violence to man, but the man's.own
action' (article eil. A few years later, Beccaria'sgeneral principle
served as a foundation for the new Tuscan Code and for the nev
code given by JosephII to Austria; and yet both legislations made
imprisonment - modulated according to its duration and augmented in certain casesby branding or the use of irons - an almost
uniform penalty: at least thirty years' detention for an attempt on
the sovereign'slife, for counterfeiting and for murder with robbery;
fifteen to thirty years for voluntary homicide or armed robbery; one
month to five years for simple theft, etc.3
But if this colonization of the penalty by the prison is surprising,
it is becauseimprisonment was not, as one might imagine, a punishment that was already securely establishedin the penal system, just
below the death penalty, and which naturally occupied the place left
vacant by the disappearanceof public torture. In fact, imprisonment
r17

Punishment
- and on this point many countries were in the same situation as
France - had only a limited and marginal position in the system of
penalties. This is shown by the texts themselves. The ordinance of
167o does not include detention among the peinzs affictives, or
serious penalties. Perpetual or temporary imprisonment was no
doubt included among certain local customs and practices (cf., for
example,Coquille). But contemporary writers maintained that it was
'There
were
falling into disusetogether with other forms of torture:
formerly penalties that are no longer practised in France, such as
writing a condemned man's penalty on his face or forehead and
perpetual imprisonment, iust as one no longer condemns a criminal
to be exposedto wild beastsor sent down the mines' (Rousseaudde
la Combe, 3). In fact, it is certain that imprisonment had survived
tenaciously as a punishment for less serious offences,according to
local customs and practices. In this sense,Soulatges spoke of the
'light penalties'
that the ordinance of ft7o had not mentioned:
reprimand, admonition, banishmentfrom a certain place,satisfaction
to the injured party and a terrn of imprisonment. In certain regions,
especiallythose that had most preservedtheir legal peculiarities, the
penalty of imprisonment was still widespread, but this had its
difficulties, as in the recently annexedprovince of Roussillon.
Yet, despitethesedivergencies,jurists held firmly to the principle
'imprisonment is not to be regarded as a penalty in our civil
that
law' (Serpillon, rogt - however, one does 6nd in Serpillon the idea
that the rigour of imprisonment is the beginning of a penalty). Its
role is rather that of holding the person and his body as security:
ad continendoshomines, non ad puniendos, as the tag has iq in this
sense,the imprisonment of a suspecthas a role similar to that of a
debtor. Through imprisonment, one has security for someone, one
does not punish him.{ This was the generalprinciple. And although
imprisonment sometimes served as a penalty, even in important
cases,it did so essentiallyas a substitute: it replacedthe galleys for
'The
those- women, children, invalids - who could not s!rve there:
sentenceof imprisonment for a terrn or for life is equivalent to being
sent to the galleys.'6In this equivalence,one can seeclearly enough
the emergenceof a possible connection. But, for this to take place,
the prison had to change its iuridical status.
It was also necessaryto overcome a second obstacle, which, for
rr8

The gentle way in punishment
France at least,was a considerableone. Imprisonment was especially
disqualified for this role by the fact that it was, in practice, directly
bound up with arbitrary royal decision and the excessesof the
sovereign power. The'maisons deforce', the general hospitals, the
'king's
orders' or the orders of the police magistrates,letters under
the king's private seal obtained by notables or by families, con'regular justice'
stituted a whole repressivepractice, iuxtaposedwith
and more usually opposed to it. And this extra-iudicial imprisonment came to be rejected by both classicaljurists and reformers.
Prisons are made by princes, said a traditionalist like Serpillon, who
'Although, for
sheltered behind the authority of Judge Bouhier:
reasonsof sate, princesare sometimesinclined to inflict this penalty,
ordinary justice makes no use of this kind of sentence'(Serpillon,
ro95). Detention was described by the reformers in innumerable
'What
statementsasa figure and privileged instnrment of despotism:
is one to say of those secretprisons coniured up by the fatal spirit of
monarchism, reservedin the main either for philosophers, in whose
hands nature has placed her torch and who dared to enlighten their
century, or for those proud independentsouls who lack the cowardice to keep silent on the ills of their country; prisons whose gloomy
doors are opened by mysterious letters and swallow up forever its
unfortunate victimsl What is to be said even of those letters, those
masterpiecesof ingenious tyranny, which overthrow the privilege
of every citizen to be heard before he is judged, and which are a
thousand times more dangerous for men than the invention of
Phalaris. . .'o (Brissot, r73).
No doubt these protests, coming from such diverse sources,are
'illegal'
directed not at imprisonment as a legal penalty, but at the
use of arbitrary, indeterminate detention. Nevertheless,imprisonment was seen, generally speaking, as branded by the abusesof
power. And many cahiersde doldancesrejected it as incompatible
'name
with good justice. Sometimes in the
of classical iuridical
principles: 'Prisons were intended by the law not to punish but to
securethe personsof the offenders. . .' (Desjardin, 477). Sometimes
in the name of the effects of imprisonment, which punishes those
who have not yet beenconvicted, which communicatesand generalizes the evil that it ought to prevent, and which runs counter to the
principle of the individuality of penalties by punishing a whole
II9

Punishment
family; it was said that 'imprisonment is not a penalty. Humanity
rises up against the frightful thought that it is not a punishment to
deprive a citizen of his most precious possession,to plunge him
ignominiously into the den of crime, to snatchhim from everything
that is dear to him, to bring him perhapsto ruin and to deprive not
only him but his unfortunate family of all means of subsistence'
(Desjardin, 483). And, on several occasions,the cahiersdemanded
'We
the abolition of those 'houses of internment':
believe that the
maisonsdeforce must be razed to the ground. . .'? And the decree
'all
of r3 March l79o ordered the freeing of
persons detained in
castles,religious houses,naisons deforce, maisonsde police or any
other prisons, by orders under the king's private seal or by orders
of the agents of the executive power'.
How then could detention, so evidently bound up with an
illegality that was denounced even in the power of the prince,
become in so short a time one of the most general forms of legal
punishmenti
The explanation most usually given is the formation, during the
classicalage,of a number of great models of punitive imprisonment.
Their prestige, which was all the greater in that the mosr recent
examplescame from England and above all from America, app!ars
to have madeit possibleto overcome the double obstacleconstituted
by the age-old rules of law and the despotic functioning of imprisonment. Very soon, it seems,these obstacleswere swept away
by the punitive marvels thought up by the reformers, and detention
becamea seriousreality. There can be no doubt about the importance
of these models. But it is precisely these models that, before providing a solution, themselvespose problems: the problem of their
existenceand the problem of their diffusion. How were they able
to come into being and, above all, how did they becomeso generally
acceptediFor it is easyto show that, although they correspond on a
number of points with the general principles of penal reform, they
fail to do so on an even greater numberl sometimes they are even
quite incompatible.
The oldest of thesemodels, the one that is generally regarded as
having more or tess inspired all the others, was the Rasphuis of
Amsterdam, opened in 1596.8 Originally, it was intended for
r20

The gentle way in punishment
beggars or young malefactors. Its functioning obeyed three great
principles: the duration of the penalties could, at least within
cerftdn limits, be determined by the administration itself, according
to the prisoner's conduct (indeed this latitude could be given in the
s!ntenceitself: in r;97 a prisoner was condemned to twelve years'
imprisonment, which could be reduced to eight, if his behaviour
proved satisfactory). Work was obligatory; it was performed in
common (indeed the individual cell was used only as an additional
punishment; prisonersslept rwo or three to a bed, in cells containing
between four and fwelve persons); and, for the work done, the
prisoners received wages. A strict time-table, a system of prohibitions and obligations, continual supervision, exhortations, religious
'to
draw towards good' and
readings, a whote complex of methods
'to
turn away from evil' held the prisoners in its grip from day to
day. One may take the Rasphuis of Amsterdam as a basic figure.
Historically, it forms the link between the theory, so characteristic
of the sixteenth century, of a pedagogicaland spiritual transformation of individuals brought about by continuous exercise,and the
penitentiary techniquesconceivedinthe secondhalfofthe eighteenth
century. And it provided the three institutions that were then set up
with the fundamental principles that eachwas to develop in its own
particular direction.
The maison de force at Ghent organized penal labour above all
around economic imperatives. The reason given was that idleness
was the general causeof most crimes. An investigation - no doubt
one of the first * carried out among those sentencedunder the
furisdiction of Alost, in ry4g, showed that malefactors were not
'artisans
or labourers' (workers think only of the work that feeds
'idlers given
up to begging'.o Hence the idea of a house
them), but
that would in a senseprovide a universal pedagogy of work for
thosewho had proved to be resistantto it. This had four advantages:
it reduced the number of criminal prosecutions, which were costly
to the state (it was estimated that this would save over Ioorooo
pounds in Flanders); this would make it unnecessary to return
money paid in taxesto the owners of woods ruined by vagabonds;
'by
comit would createa massof new workers, which would help
petition to bring down the cost of labour'; lastly, it would enablethe
true poor to benefit, to the full, from necessarychariry (Vilan, 68).
t2r

Punishment
This useful pedagogy would revive for the lazy individual a liking
for work, force him back into a system of interests in which labour
would be more advantageous than laziness, form around him a
small, miniature, simplified, coercive society in which the maxim,
'he
who wants to live must work', would be clearly revealed.Work
would be compulsory, but so too would be remuneration, which
!nablesthe prisoner to improve his lot during and after detention.
'The
man who does not find his subsistencemust be made to desire
to procure it for himself by work; he is offered it by supervision and
discipline; in a sense,he is forced to acguire iq he is then tempted
by the bait of gainl corrected in his morals, accustomedto work,
his anxiety aroused by the little money he has kept for his release,'
he has learned a trade 'that will guafimtee a subsistencewithout
danger' (Vilan, ro7). This reconstruction of homo oeconomicusexcluded the use of penaltiesthat were too short - this would prevent
the acquisition of habits and skills of work - or too long - which
would make any apprenticeship useless.'The term of six months
is too short to correct criminals, and to bring them to the spirit of
work'; on the other hand, 'a life sentencethrows them into despair;
they become indifferent to the correction of their morals and to the
spirit of work; they become concerned only with plans to escape
and to rebel; and since the iudgements that were passedon them
did not deprive them of life, why should one seek to render it
unbearable for themi' (Vilan, roz-3). The duration of the penalry
has meaning only in relation to possible correction, and to an
economic use of the corrected criminal.
To the principle of work, the English models added, as an
essential addition to correction, isolation. The outlines had been
provided in ry71, by Hanway, who justified it 6rst with negative
reasons:promiscuity in the prison provided bad examplesand possibilities of escapein the short term and of blackmail or complicity in
the long term. The prison would be too much like a factory if one
left the prisoners to work together. The positive reasonsfollowed:
isolation provides a 'terrible shock' which, while protecting the
prisoner from bad influences, enableshim to go into himself and
rediscoverin the depthsofhis consciencethe voice ofgood; solitary
work would then becomenot onlyanapprenticeship,
butalsoanexercisein spiritual conversion; it would rearrangenot only the complex
t22

The gentle way in punishment
of interests proper to homo oecotomicus,but also the imperatives of
the moral subject. The cell, that technique of Christian monachism,
which had survived only in Catholic countries, becomes in this
protestant society the instrument by which one may reconstitute
both homo oeconomhusand the religious conscience. Between the
crime and the return to right and virtue, the prison would constitute
the'space between two worlds'the place for the individual transformation that would restore to the statethe subject it had lost. Hanway
'reformatory' (cf.
called this apparatusfor modifying individuals a
Hanway). These were the general principles that Howard and
Blackstoneput into operation in ry7g when the independenceof the
United Statesput an end to deportation and when a law was being
drawn up to modify the system of penalties.Imprisonment, with the
purpose of transforming the soul and conduct, made its entry into
the system of civil laws. The preamble of the bill, written by Blackstone and Howard, describesindividual imprisonment in terms of
its triple function as example to be feared, instrument of conversion
and condition for an apprenticeship:subjected'to isolated detention,
regular work and the influence of religious instrucdon', certain
criminals might not only inspire terror in those who would be
'but
tempted to imitate them,
atso to correct .themselvesand to
acguire the habit of work' (Preamble of the bill of ry7g). Hence the
decision to build two penitentiaries, one for men, one for women,
'to
in which the isolated prisoners would be put
the most servile
labours, most compatible with the ignorance, negligence and
obstinacy of the criminals': walking in a wheel to move a machine,
fixing a winch, polishing marble, beating hemp, rasping logwood,
cutting up rags, rope-making and sewing sacks. In fact, only one
penitentiary was built, at Gloucester, and it corresponded only
partially to the initial plan: total con6nementfor the most dangerous
criminals; for the others, day work in common and separation at
night.
Then came the Philadelphia model. This was no doubt the most
famous becauseit was associatedin people's minds with the political
innovations of the American system and also becauseit was not,
like the others, doomed to immediate failure and abandonment; it
was continuously re-examined and transformed right up to the
great debatesof the r83os on penitentiary reform. In many resPects
t2,

Punishment
the Walnut Street Prison, opened in r79o, under the direct infuence
of the Quakers, w.ls modelled on those of Ghent and Gloucester.ro
There was compulsory work in workshops; the prisoners were kept
constantly occupied; the prison was fnanced by this work, but the
prisoners were also rewarded individually as a way of reinserting
them morally and materially into the strict world of the economy;
'constantly
employed on productive
by keeping the prisoners
works, they were able to defray the expenses of the prison, they
were not left idle and they were able to save a litde money for the
time when their captivity would cease'(La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, 9). Life was partitioned, therefore, according to an absolutely
strict time-table, under constant supervision; each moment of the
day was devoted to a particular type of activity, and brought with it
its own obligations and prohibitions: 'All prisoners rise at daybreak,
so that, after making their beds, cleaning and washing themselves
and attending to other needs, they generally begin their work at
sunrise.From that moment, no one may go into the rooms or other
placesexcept to the workshops and placesassignedfor their work.
. . . At nightfall, a bell rings to mark the end of their work. . . Th"y
are given half an hour to arrange their beds, after which they are not
allowed to conversealoud or to make the leastnoise' (furnbull, ry16). As at Gloucester,solitary confinement was not total; it was used
for certain prisoners who would in former times have incurred the
death penalty, and for those inside the prison who deservedspecial
punishment: 'There, without occupation, without anything to distract him, waiting in uncertainty for the moment when he would be
delivered', the prisoner spent'long anxious hours, with nothing but
the reflections that are present to the minds of all guilty persons'
(Teeters, rytr, 49). Lastly, as at Ghent, the length of the imprisonment could vary with the behaviour of the prisoner: after consulting
the files, the prison inspectorsobtained from the authorities - without much difficulty up to the r8zos - pardons for prisoners who had
shown good behaviour.
Furthermore, Walnut Street had a number of characteristicsthat
were specific to it, or which at least developedwhat was potentially
present in the other models. First, the principle of not publicizing
the penalty. Though the sentenceand the re:rsonsfor it should be
known to all, the penalty should be carried out in secret;the public
r24

The gentle way in punishment
w:rs to intervene neither as a witness, nor as a guarantor of punishmentl the certainty that, behind the walls, the prisoner was serving
his sentence must suffice as an example: there were to be no more
of those saeet spectacleswhich the law of ry86 has given rise to by
imposing on certain prisoners public works to be carried out in
towns and on the highways.lr The punishment and correction that
it must operate are process!sthat unfold between the prisoner and
those who supervise him. They are processesthat effect a transformation of the individual as a whole - of his body and of his habis by
the daily work that he is forced to perform, of his mind and his will
'Bibles
by the spiritual attentions that are paid to him:
and other
books ofreligious practice are provided; the clergy ofthe different
obediencesto be found in the town and suburbs perform the services
once a week and any other edifying person may have accessto the
prisonersat any time' (Teeters, gJJr jj-4). But this transformation
is entrusted to the administration itself. Solitude and self-examination are not enoughl nor are purely religious exhortations. Work on
the prisoner's soul must be carried out as often as possible. The
prison, though an administrative apparatus,will at the sametime be
a machine for altering minds. On first entering the prison, the
prisoner will be read the regulationsl 'at the sametime, the inspectors
seek to strengthen in him the moral obligations that he now hasl
they representto him the offencethat he has committed with regard
to them, the evil that has consequently resulted for the society that
protected him and the need to make compensation by his example
and his amendment. They then make him promise to do his duty
gladly, to behavedecently, promising him or allowing him to hope
that, before the expiration of the term of the sentence, he will be
able to obtain his discharge if he behaves well. . . From time to
time the inspectorsmake it their duty to conversewith the criminals
one after the other, concerning their duties as men and as members
of society' (Tumbull, z7).
But no doubt the most important thing was that this control and
transformation of behaviour were accompanied- both asa condition
and as a consequence- by the development of a knowledge of the
individuals. When the new piisoner arrived, the Walnut Street
administration received a report concerning his crime, the circumstancesin which it was committed, a summary of the examinations

r2t

Punishment
of the defendant, notes on his behaviour before and after sentence:
'decide
indispensableelementsif one wished to
what stepswill have
to be taken to destroy his old habits'.ls And throughout his detention he would be observed; his conduct would be noted daily and
the inspectors- twelve local worthies appointed in ryg1- who, two
by two, visited the prison each week, would be kept informed of
events, follow the cbnduct of each prisoner and decide which of
them deserveda shortening of his term. This ever-growing knowledge of the individuals made it possible to divide them up in the
prison not so much according to their crimes as according to the
dispositionsthat they revealed.The prison becameasort ofpermanent
observatory that made it possible to distribute the varieties of vice
or weakness.From ry97rthe prisonerswere divided into four classes:
the first for those who were explicitly condemned to solitary confinement or who had committed serious offencesin the prison; the
'well known
as old offenders .'. . whose
secondfor those who were
irregular dispositions, or
morality,
dangerous
character,
depraved
disorderly conduct' becameapparent during the time they were in
prison; the third for those 'whose character and circumstances,
before and after conviction, led one to believe that they were not
habitual offenders'; the fourth and last was a special section, a
probationary class for those vrhose character was still not known,
or who, if they were better known, did not deserveto be put in the
preceding category (Teeters, gJJ, j9). A whole corpus of individualizing knowledge was being organized that took as its field of
referencenot so much the crime committed (at least in isolation),
but the potentiality of danger that lies hidden in an individual and
which is manifestedin his observed everyday conduct. The prison
functions in this as an apparatus of knowledge.
Between this apparatusof punishment proposed by the Flemish,
'reformatories'
English and American models, between these
and
all the punishments imagined by the reformers, one may establish
the points ofconvergence and the disparities.
Points of convergence.In the 6rst instance, there is a difference
in the temporal direction of punishment. The 'reformatories' were
mechanismsdirected towards the future; they too were intended not
'As
to efface a crime, but to prevent its repetition.
to the end, or
tz6

The gentle way in punishment
6nal causeof human punishments.This is not by way of atonement
or expiation for the crime committed; for that must be left to the just
determinationof the supremebeing...'(Blackstone, rr). And in
Pennsylvania, Buxton declared, the principles of Montesguieu and
'the prevention
'force of
Beccariashould now have the
axigms', that
of crimes is the sole end of punishment' (Bradford, 3). So one
punishesnot to effacethe crime, but to transform a criminal (actual
or potential); punishment must bring with it a cernin coffective
technique. Here, too, Rush is close to the reforming jurists - were
it not, perhaps, for the metaphor he uses when he says: we have
invented machinesthat facilitate labour; how much more one should
'the
praise the inventor of
most speedy and effectual methods of
restoring the vicious part ofmankind to virtue and happiness,and of
extirpating a portion of vice from the world'.r8 Lastly, the English
and the American models, like the projects of the legislators and
theoreticians, require methods to individualize the penalry: in its
duration, its nature, its intensity, the way in which it is carried out,
the punishment must be adjusted to the individual characterand to
the danger that he bears within him for others. The system of
penaltiesmust be open to individual variables. In their general outline, the models more or lessinspired by the Rasphuisof Amsterdam
were not in contradiction with the proposals of the reformers. It
might even be thought at first glance that they were merely a development of them - or a sketch - at the level of concrete institutions.
Yet the disparity emergesclearly enough when one defines the
techniques of this individualizing correction. The difference is
to be found in the procedure of accessto the individual, the way in
which the punishing power gets control over him, the instruments
that it uses in order to achieve this transformation; it is in the
technology of the penalty, not in its theoretical foundation; in the
relation that it establisheswith the body and with the soul, and not
in the way that it is inserted within the legal system.
That was the method of the reformers. Where exactly did the
penalty apply its pressure,gain control of the individuali Representations: the representationsofhis interests, the representationofhis
advantagesand disadvantages,pleasureand displeasure;and, if the
punishment happensto seizethe body, to apply techniquesto it that
are little short of torture, it is becauseit is - for the condemnedman
r27

Punishment
and for the spectators- an object ofrepresentation. By what instrument did one act on the representationslOther representations,or
rather couplings of ideas (crime-punishment, the imagined advantage of crime-disadvantage perceived in the punishments); these
pairings could function only in the element of publicity: punitive
scenesthat establishedthem or reinforced them in the eyes ofall, a
discourse that circulated, brought back into currency at each
moment the complex of signs. The role of the criminal in punishment was to reintroduce, in the face of crime and the criminal code,
the real presenceof the signified : that is to say, of the penalty
which, according to the terms of the code, must be infallibly associated with the offence. By producing this signified abundantly and
visibly, and therefore reactivating the signifying system ofthe code,
the idea of crime functioning as a sign of punishment, it is with this
coin that the offender pays his debt to sociery. Individual correction
must, therefore, assurethe process of redefining the individual as
subject of law, through the reinforcement of the systems of signs
and representationsthat they circulate.
The apparatusof corrective penality acts in a quite different way.
The point of application of the penalty is not the representation,but
the body, time, everyday gesturesand activities; the soul, too, but
in so far as it is the seat of habits. The body and the soul, as principles of behaviour, form the element that is now proposed for
punitive intervention. Rather than on an art of representations,this
punitive intervention must rest on a studied manipulation of the
individual: 'I have no more doubt of every crime having its cure in
moral and physical influence . . .'; so, in order to decide on punishments, one 'will require some knowledge of the principles of sensation, and of the sympathies which occur in the nervous system'
(Rush, r3). As for the instruments used, these are no longer complexes of representation, reinforced and circulated, but forms of
coercion, schemataof constraint, applied and repeated. Exercises,
not signs: time-tables, compulsory movements, regular activities,
solitary meditation, work in common, silence, application, respect,
good habits. And, ultimately, what one is trying to restore in this
technique of correction is not so much the juridical subject, who is
caught up in the fundamental interests of the social pact, but the
obedient subject, the individual subjected to habits, rules, orders,
rz8

The gentle way in punishment
an authority that is exercised continually around him and upon
him, and which he mlst allow to function automatically in him.
There are two quite distinct ways, therefore, of reacting to the
offence; one may restore the iuridical subject of the social pact, or
shape an obedient subject, according to the general and detailed
form of some power.
All this would no doubt amount to little more than a speculative
difference - for in each case it is a question of forming obedient
'coercion' did not bring with it
individuals - if the penality of
certain crucial conseguences.The training of behaviour by a full
time-table, the acquisition of habits, the constraints of the body
imply a very specialrelation betweenthe individual who is punished
and the individual who punishes him. It is a relation that not only
renders the dimension of the spectacleuseless:it excludesit.ra The
agent of punishment must exercisea total power, which no third
party can disturb; the individual to be corrected must be entirely
enveloped iri the power that is being exercisedover him. Secrecyis
irnperative, and so too is autonomy, at least in relation to this
technique of punishment: it must have its own functioning, its own
rules, its own techniques, its own knowledge; it must fix its own
norms, decide its own results. There is a discontinuity, or in any
case a specificiry, in relation to the legal power that declares guilt
and fixes the general limits of punishment. These two consequences
- secrecyand autonomy in the exerciseof the power to punish - are
unacceptablefor a theory and a policy of penality that has two aims
in view: to get all citizens to participate in the punishment of the
social enemy and to render the exercise of the power to punish
entirely adeguateand transparentto the laws that publicly define it.
Secretpunishmentsand punishmentsnot specifiedin the legal code,
a power to punish exercised in the shadows according to criteria and
with instruments that elude control - this was enough to compromise the whole strategy of the reform. After the sentence, a power
was constituted that was reminiscent of the power exercised in the
old system. The power that applied the penalties now threatened
to be as arbitrary, as despotic, as the power that once decided them.
In short, the divergenceis the following: punitive city or coercive
institutionl On the one hand, a functioning of penal power, distributed throughout the social space; present everywhere as scene,

r29

Punishment
spectacle,sign, discourse;legible like an open book; operating by a
perrnanent recodification of the mind of the citizens; eliminating
crime by those obstacles placed before the idea of crime; acting
invisibly and uselesslyon the 'soft fibres ofthe brain', as Servan put
it. A power to punish that ran the whole length of the social network
would act at each of its points, and in the end would no longer be
perceived as a pov/er of certain individuals over others, but as an
immediate reaction of all in relation to the individual. On the other
hand, a compact functioning of the power to punish: a meticulous
assumption of responsibility for the body and the time of the convict, a regulation of his movements and behaviour by a system of
authority and knowledge; a concerted orthopaedy applied to convicts in order to reclaim them individually; an autonomous administration of this power that is isolated both from the social body and
from the judicial power in the strict sense.The emergenceof the
prison marks the institutionalization of the power to punish, or, to be
more precise:will the power to punish (with the strategic aim adopted in the late eighteenthcentury, the reduction of popular illegality)
be better served by concealing itself beneath a general social func'punitive
tion, in the
city', or by investing itself in a coercive
institution, in the enclosedspaceof the 'reformatory'i
In any case,it can be said that, in the late eighteenth century, one
is confronted by three ways of organizing the power to punish. The
first is the one that was still functioning and which was basedon the
old monarchical law. The other two both refer to a preventive,
utilitarian, corrective conception of a right to punish that belongs
to society as a whole; but they are very different from one another
at the level of the mechanismsthey envisage.Broadly.speaking, one
might say that, in monarchical law, punishmenr is a ceremonial of
sovereignty; it usesthe rirual marks of the vengeancethat it applies
to the body of the condemned man; and it deploys before the eyes
ofthe spectatorsan efiect ofterror as intense as it is discontinuous,
irregular and always above its own laws, the physical presenceof the
sovereign and of his power. The reforming jurists, on the other
hand, saw punishment as a procedure for requalifying individuals
as subjects,as iuridical subjects;it usesnot marks, but signs, coded
sets of representations, which would be given the most rapid
circulation and the most general acceptancepossible by citizens
r30

The gentleway in punishment
wimessingthe sceneof punishment.Lastly, in the proiect for a
prison institution that was then developing,punishmentwas seen
as a techniquefor the coercionof individuals;it operatedmethods
of raining the body - not signs- by the tracesit leaves,in the form
of habits, in behaviour;and it presupposedthe setting up of a
specificpov/erfor the administrationof the penalty.We have,then,
the sovereignand his force,the socialbody and the administrative
apparatus;mark, sign, trace; ceremony,representation,exercisel
the vanquishedenemy,the iuridical subiectin the processof requalification,the individual subjectedto immediatecoercion;the
tortured body, the soul with its manipulatedrepresentations,
the
body subiectedto training.We haveherethethreeseriesof elements
that characterizethe three mechanismsthat faceone anotherin the
secondhalf of the eighteenthcentury. They cannot be reducedto
theoriesof law (though they overlapwith suchtheories),nor can
they be identifiedwith apparatuses
or institutions(though they are
basedon them),nor canthey be derivedfrom moral choices(though
they find their justificationin morality).They aremodalitiesaccording to which the powerto punishis exercised:
of
threetechnologies
power.
The problem,then, is the following: how is it that, in the end,
it wasthe third that wasadoptedlHow did the coercive,corporal,
solitary,secretmodelof the powerto punishreplacethe represenative, scenic,signifying, public, collective modell Why did the
physicalexerciseof punishment(which is not torture) replace,with
theprisonthat is its institutionalsupport,thesocialplay of thesigns
of punishmentand the prolix festivalthat circulatedtheml

r3r

PART THREE

Discipline

r. Docilebodies

Let us take the ideal figure of the soldier as it was still seen in the
eady seventeenth century. To begin with, the soldier w:ui someone
who could be recognized from afar; he bore certain signs: the natural
signs of his strength and his courage, the marks, too, of his pride;
his body was the blazon of his strength and valour; and although it
is true that he had to learn the profession of arms little by litde generally in actual fighting - movements like marching and attitudes
like the bearing of the head belonged for the most part to a bodily
rhetoric of honour; 'The signs for recognizing those most suited to
this profession are a lively, alert manner, an erect head, a taut
stomach, broad shoulders, long arms, strong fingers, a small belly,
thick thighs, slender legs and dry feet, because a man of such a
figure could not fail to be agile and strong'; when he becomesa pikebearer, the soldier'will have to march in step in order to have as
much grace and gravity as possible, for the pike is an honourable
weapon, worthy to be borne with gravity and boldness' (Montgommery, 6 and 7). By the late eighteenth century, the soldier has
becomesomething that can be made; out of a formless clay, an inapt
body, the machine required can be constructedl posture is gradually
correctedl a calculatedconstraint runs slowly through each part of
the body, mastering it, making it pliable, ready at all times, turning
silently into the automatism of habit; in short, one has 'got rid of
th! peasant' and given him 'the ak of a soldier' (ordinance of zo
March 1764). Recruits become accustomedto 'holding their heads
high and erect; to standing upright, without bending the back, to
sticking_outthe belly, throwing out the chestand throwing back the
shoulders; and, to help them acquire the habit, they are given this
position while standing against a wall in such a way that the heels,
the thighs, the naist and the shoulders touch it, as also do the backs

r3,

Discipline
of the hands,as one turns the arms outwards, without moving them
away from the body. . . Likewise, they will be taught never to fix
their eyeson the ground, but to look straight at those they pass. . .
to remain motionless until the order is given, without moving the
head, the hands or the feet . . . lasdy to march with a bold step, with
knee and ham taut, on the points of the feet, which should face
outwards' (ordinance of zo March r764).
The classical age discovered the body as object and target of
power. It is easy enough to find signs of the attention then paid to
the body - to the body that is manipulated, shaped,trained, which
obeys, responds,becomesskilful and increasesits forces. The great
book of Man-the-Machine was written simultaneously on two
registers: the anatomico-metaphysicalregister, of which Descartes
wrote the first pages and which the physicians and philosophers
confinued, and the technico-political register, which was constituted
by a whole set of regulations and by empirical and calculated
methods relating to the army, the school and the hospital, for controlling or correcdng the operations of the body. These two registers are quite distinct, since it was a question, on the one hand, of
submission and use and, on the other, of functioning and explanation: there was a useful body and an intelligible body. And yet there
are points of overlap from one to the other. La Mettrie's L'Hommemachine is both a materialist reduction of the soul and a general
theory of dressage,at the centre of which reigns the notion of
'docility', which joins
the analysablebody to the manipulable body.
A body is docile that may be subjected, used, transformed and
improved. The celebratedautomata, on the other hand, were not
only a way of illustrating an organism, they were also political
puppets, small-scalemodels of power: Frederick II, the meticulous
king of small machines,well-trained regiments and long exercises,
was obsessedwith them.
What was so new in these projects of docility that interested the
eighteenth century so muchi It was certainly not the first time that
the body had become the object of such imperious and pressing
investmentsl in every society, the body was in the grip of very
strict powers, which imposed on it constraints, prohibitions or
obligations. However, there were severalnew things in thesetechniques. To begin with, there was the scaleof the control: it was a

ry6

Docile bodies
'wholesale', as if it were
question not of treating the body, en il asse)
'retail',
individually; of
an indissociable unity, but of working it
exercisingupon it a subtle coercion, of obtaining holds upon it at the
level of the mechanism itself - movements, gestures, attirudes,
rapidity: an infinitesimal power over the active body. Then there
was the object of the control: it was not orwas no longer the signifying elements of behaviour or the language of the body, but the
economy, the efficiency of movements, their internal organization;
constraint bearsupon the forces rather than upon the signs; the only
truly important ceremony is that of exercise. Lastly, there is the
modality: it implies an uninterrupted, constant coercion, supervising the processesof the activity rather than its result and it is
exercised according to a codification that partitions as closely as
possible time, space, movbment. These methods, which made
possible the meticulous control of the operations of the body,
which assured the constant subjection of its forces and imposed
'disciplines'.
upon them a relation of docility-utility, might be called
Many disciplinary methods had long been in existence- in monasteries, armies, workshops. But in the course of the seventeenthand
eighteenth centuries the disciplines became general formulas of
domination. They were different from slavery becausethey were
not based on a relation of appropriation of bodies; indeed, the
eleganceof the discipline lay in the fact that it could dispensewith
this costly and violent relation by obtaining effectsof utility at least
'service', which was a
as great. They were different, too, from
constant, total, massive, non-analytical, unlimited relation of
domination, established in the form of the individual will of the
master,his'caprice'. They were different from vassalage,which was
a highly coded, but distant relation of submission, which bore less
on the operations of the body than on the products of labour and
the ritual marks of allegiance. Again, they were different from
asceticismand from'disciplines'of a monastictype, whose function
was to obtain renunciations rather than increasesof utility and
which, although they involved obedience to others, had as their
principal aim an increaseof the mastery of each individual over his
own body. The historical moment of the disciplineswas the moment
when an art of the human body was born, which was directed not
only at the growth of its skills, nor at the intensification of its

r)7

Discipline
subjection,but at the formation of a relation that in the mechanism
itself makes it more obedient as it becomesmore useful, and conversely. What was then being formed was a policy of coercions
that act upon the body, a talculated manipulation of its elements,
its gestures,its behaviour. The human body was entering a machinery of power that explores it, breaks it down and rearrangesit. A
'political
'mechanicsof power',
anatomy', which was also a
was
being born; it defined how one may have a hold over others' bodies,
not only so that they may do what one wishes,but so that they may
operate as one wishes, with the techniques,the speed and the efficiency that one determines.Thus discipline produces subiectedand
practised bodies, 'docile' bodies. Discipline increasesthe forces of
the body (in economic terms of utility) and diminishes these same
forces(in political terms of obedience).In short, it dissociatespov/er
'aptitude',
from the body; on the one hand, it turns it into an
a
'capacity',
which it seeksto increaselon the other hand, it reverses
the course of the energy, the power that might result from it, and
turns it into a relation of strict subjection. If economic exploitation separatesthe force and the product of labour, let us say
that disciplinary coercion establishesin the body the constricting link between an increased aptitude and an increased
domination.
'invention'
The
of this new political anatomy must not be seen
as a sudden discovery. It is rather a multiplicity of often minor
processes,of different origin and scatteredlocation, which overlap,
repeat, or imitate one another, support one another, distinguish
themselvesfrom one another according to their domain of application, converge and gradually produce the blueprint of a general
method. They were at work in secondaryeducation at a very early
date, later in primary schools; they slowly invested the spaceof the
hospital; and, in a few decades, they restructured the military
organization. They sometimes circulated very rapidly from one
point to another (between the army and the technical schools or
secondaryschools),sometimesslowly and discreetly(the insidious
militarization of the large workshops). On almost every occasion,
they were adopted in response to particular needs: an industrial
innovation, a renewed outbreak of certain epidemic diseases,the
invention of the rifle or the victories of Prussia.This did not prevent
rl8

Docile bodies
them being totally inscribed in general and essential transformations, which we must now try to delineate.
There can be no question here of writing the history of the
different disciplinary institutions, with all their individual differences.I simply intend to map on a seriesof examplessome of the
essentialtechniques that most easily spread from one to another.
These were always meticulous, often minute, techniques, but they
had their importance: because they defined a certain mode of
'new
micro-physics' of
detailed political investment of the body, a
power; and because,since the seventeenthcentury, they had constantly reached out to ever broader domains, as if they tended to
cover the entire social body. Small acts of cunning endowed with a
great power of diffusion, subtle arrangements,apparently innocent,
but profoundly suspicious,mechanismsthat obeyed economiestoo
shamefulto be acknowledged,or pursued petty forms of coercion it was neverthelessthey that brought about the mutation of the
punitive system, at the threshold of the contempoftry period. Describing them will require great attention to detail: beneathevery set
of figures, we must seek not a meaning, but a precautionl we must
situate them not only in the inextricability of a functioning, but in
the coherenceof a tactic. They are the acts of cunning, not so much
of the greater reasonthat works even in its sleepand gi$es meaning
'malevolence'
that turns
to the insignificant, as of the attentive
everything to account. Discipline is a political anatomy of detail.
Before we lose patiencewe would do well to recall the words of
'Although
those who concern themselves with
Marshal de Saxe:
details are regarded as folk of limited intelligence, it seemsto me
that this part is essential, becauseit is the foundation, and it is
impossible to erect any building or establish any method without
understanding its principles. It is not enough to have a liking for
architecture. One must also know stone-cutting' (Saxe, y). There is
'stone-cutting' - history
a
a whole history to be written about such
rationalization
moral
of the utilitarian
of detail in
accountability and
initiate
it; rather it
political control. The classical age did not
and
instmments,
acceleratedit, changed its scale, gave it precise
infinitely
perhaps found some echoesfor it in the calculation of the
small or in the description of the most detailed characteristicsof
'detail'
natural beings. In any case,
had long been a category of

rt9

Discipline
theology and asceticism:every detail is important since, in the sight
of God, no immensity is greater than a detail, nor is anything so
small that it was not willed by one of his individual wishes.In this
great tradition of the eminenceof detail, all the minutiae of Christian education, of scholastic or military pedagogy, all forms of
'training'
found their place easily enough. For the disciplined man,
as for the true believer, no detail is unimportant, but not so much
for the meaning that it concealswithin it as for the hold it provides
for the power that wishes to seizeit. Characteristicis the great hymn
'little
to the
things' and to their eternal importance, sung by JeanBaptiste de La Salle, in his Traiti sur les obligations desfrires dzs
Ecoleschritienne.r.The mystique of the everyday is joined here with
'How
the discipline of the minute.
dangerous it is to neglect little
things. It is a very consoling refection for a soul like mine, little
disposed to great actions, to think that fidelity to little things may,
by an imperceptible progress, raise us to the most eminent sanctity:
becauselittle things lead to greater . . . Little things; it will be said,
alas,my God, what can we do that is great for you, weak and mortal
creaturesthat we are. Little things; if great things presentedthemselveswould we perform themi Would we not think them beyond
our strengthi Little things; and if God acceptsthem and wishes to
receive them as great thingsi Little things; has one ever felt thisl
Does one iudge according to experiencei Little things; one is certainly guilty, therefore, if seeing them as such, one refuses theml
Little things; yet it is they that in the end have made great saints!
Yes, little things; but great motives, great feelings, great fervour,
great ardour, and consequently great merits, great treasures,great
rewards' (La Salle, Traitd ..., zt8-9). The meticulousness of
the regulations, the fussinessof the inspections, the supervision of
the smallestfragment of life and of the body will soon provide, in the
context of the school, the barracks, the hospital or the workshop,
a laicized content, an economic or technical rationality for this
mystical calculus of the infinitesimal and the infinite. And a History
of Detail in the eighteenth century, presided over by Jean-Baptiste
de La Salle, touching on Leibniz and Buffon, via Frederick II,
covering pedagogy, medicine, military tactics and economics,
should bring us, at the end of the century, to the man who dreamt
of being another Newton, not the Newton of the immensities of
r40

Docile bodies
the heavensand the planetarymasses,but a Newton of 'small
bodies', small movements,small actionsl to the man who replied
to Monge'sremark,'therewasonly.oneworld to discover':'What
do I hearl But the world of details,who hasneverdreamtof that
other world, what of that worldl I havebelievedin it ever sinceI
was fifteen. I was concernedwith it then, and this memory lives
within me, as an obsessionneverto be abandoned.. . That other
world is the most importantof all that I flatter myselfI havediscovered:when I think of it, my heart aches'(thesewords are
attributed to Bonapartein the Introduction to Saint-Hilaire's
NotionssynthCtigues
et higtoriqaes
dcphilosophienanrelh). Napoleon
did not discoverthisworld; but we know that hesetout to organize
it; andhe wishedto arrangearoundhim a mechanism
of powerthat
would enablehim to seethe smallesteventthat occurredin the state
hegoverned;heintended,by meansof therigorousdisciplinethathe
imposed,'to embracethe whole of this vast machinewithout the
slightestdetailescapinghis attention'(Treilhard, r4).
A meticulousobservationof detail, and at the sametime a
politicalawareness
of thesesmallthings,for the control and useof
men, emergethrough the classicalagebearingwith them a whole
set of techniques,a whole corpus of methodsand knowledge,
descriptions,plansand data.And from suchtrifles, no doubt, the
manof modernhumanismwasborn.r
The art of distihutions
In the 6rst instance,disciplineproceedsfrom the distributionofindividualsin space.
To achievethisend,it employsseveraltechniques.
r. Disciplinesometimesrequiresenclosure,
the specificationof a
placeheterogeneous
to all othersand closedin upon itself.It is the
protectedplace of disciplinarymonotony. There was the great
'confnement' of vagabondsand paupers;
there were other more
discreet,but insidiousand efiectiveones.There were the colliges,
or secondaryschools:the monasticmodel was graduallyimposed;
boardingappearedas the most perfect, if not the most frequent,
educationalrdgime;it becameobligatoryat Louis-le-Grandwhen,
after the departureof the Jesuits,it wasturnedinto a modelschool
(cf. Ari0s, 3o8-r3 and Snyders,Jj-4r). There were the military
I4I

Discipline
barracks: the army, that vagabond mass, has to be held in place;
looting and violence must be preventedl the fears of local inhabitants, who do not care for troops passing through their towns,
must be calmed; conficts with the civil authorities must be avoided;
desertion must be stopped, expenditurr controlled. The ordinance
of ryry envisaged the construction of several hundred barracks,
on the model of those already set up in the south of the country;
'The
there would be strict confinements:
whole will b! enclosed by
an outer wall ten feet high, which will surround the said houscs, at
a distance of thiny feet from all the sides'; this will have the efrect
of maintaining the aoops in 'order and discipline, so that an officer
will be in a position to ansv/er for thern' (L'Ordomarce militaire,
IXL, zy September l7r9). In 1741, there were barracks in about
32o towns; and it was estimated that the total capacity of the barracks in ry7t was approximately 2oo,ooo men (Daisy, 2orj; an
anonymous memoir of ry71, in D6p6t de la guerre, 1689, f. 116;
Navereau, ry2-J). Side by side with the spread of workshops; there
also developed great manufacturing spaces,both homogeneous and
well defined: first, the combined manufactories,then, in the second
half of the eighteenth century, the works or factories proper (the
Chaussadeironworks occupied almost the whole of the M!dine
peninsula, between NiCvre and Loire; in order to set up the Indret
factory in q77, Wilkinson, by means of embankments and dikes,
constructed an island on the Loire; Toufait built Le Creusot in the
valley of the Charbonnidre, which he transformed, and he had
workers' accommodation built in the factory itself); it was a change
of scale, but it was also a new typ! of control. The factory was
explicitly compared with the monastery, the fortress, a walled town;
'will
the guardian
open the gatesonly on the return of the workers,
and after the bell that announcesthe resumption of work has been
rung'; a quarter of an hour later no one will be admitted; at the end
of the day, the workshops'heads will hand back the keys to the Swiss
guard of the factory, who will then open the gates (Antroisc, f.
rzrr3or). The aim is to derive the maximum advantages and to
neutralize the inconveniences (thefts, interruptions of work, dis'cabals'),
turbances and
as th! forces of production become more
concentrated;to protect materialsand tools and to master the labour
'The
force:
order and inspection that must be maintained require
r42

Docile bodies
that all workers be assembled
under the sameroof, so that the partner who is entmstedwith the managementof the manufactorymay
prevent and remedyabusesthat may ariseamong the workers and
arresttheir progressat the outset'(Dauphin, r99).
z. But the principleof 'enclosure'is neitherconstant,nor indispensable,nor sufficientin disciplinary machinery.This machinery
works spacein a mudt more flexible and deailed way. It doesthis
first of all on the principle of elementarylocation or paritioning.
Each individual has his own place;and each place its individual.
Avoid disaibutions in groups; break up collectivedispositions;
analysegonfused,massiveor transientpluralities.Disciplinary space
tends to be divided into as many sectionsas there are bodies or
elemensto be distributed.One must eliminatethe effectsof impreof individuals,
cise distributions,the uncontrolleddisappearance
their diftrse circulation, their unusableand dangerouscoagulationl
anti-concentrait was a tactic of anti-desertion,anti-vagabondage,
to know where
tion. Its aim wasto establishpresences
and absences,
and how to locateindividuals, to set up usefulcommunications,to
intemrpt others,to be ableat eachmomentto supervisethe conduct
of eachindividual,to :rssess
it, to judgeit, to calculateits qualities
or merits.It wasa procedure,therefore,aimedat knowing, mastering and using. Discipline organizesan analyticalspace.
And there, too, it encounteredan old architecturaland religious
method: the monasticcell. Even if the compartmentsit assigns
becomepurely ideal, the disciplinary spaceis always, basicalln
cellular.Solitudewasnecessary
to both body and soul, accordingto
a certainasceticism:they must, at certainmomentsat least,confront
temptation and perhapsthe severity of God alone. 'Sleep is the
imageof death,the dormitory is the imageof the sepulchre...
although the dormitories are shared, the beds are nevertheless
arrangedin sucha way and closedso exactly by meansof curtains
(Riglementpour
that the girls may riseandretire without hing sr.:en'
la communautldcsflles du Bon Pasteur,in Delamare,ye7). But this
is still a very crudeform.
3. The ruleof fuactiotnlsrieswould gradually,in the disciplinary
institutions, codea spacethat architecturegenerallyleft at the disposal of several different uses. Particular placeswere defined to
correspondnot only to the need to supervise,to break dangerous
r4,

Discipline
communications, but also to cneatea useful space. The process
appearedclearly in the hospitals,especiallyin the military and naval
hospitals. In France, it seemsthat Rochefort served both as experiment and model. A port, and a military port is - with its circulation
of goods, men signed up willingly or by force, sailors embarking
and disembarking, diseasesand epidemics - a place of desertion,
smuggling, contagion: it is a crossroadsfor dangerous mixtures, a
meeting-place for forbidden circulations. The naval hospital must
therefore treat, but in order to do this it must be a filter, a mechanism
that pins down and panitionsl it must provide a hold over this whole
mobile, swarming mass, by dissipating the confusion of illegality
and evil. The medical supenrision of diseasesand contagions is
inseparablefrom a whole seriesof other controls: the military control
over deserters,fiscal control over commodities, administrative control over remedies, rations, disappearances,cures, deaths, simulations. Hence the need to distribute and partition off space in a
rigorous manner. The first steps taken at Rochefort concemed
things rather than men, precious commodities, rather than patients.
The arrangementsof 6scal and economic supervision preceded the
techniquesof medical observation: placing of medicinesunder lock
and key, recording their use; a little later, a system was worked out
to verify the real number of patients, their identity, the units to
which they belonged; then one began to regr.rlatetheir comings and
goings; they were forced to remain in their wards; to each bed was
attached the name of its occupantl each individual treated was
entered in a register that the doctor had to consult during the visit;
later came the isolation of contagious patients and separatebeds.
Gradually, an administrative and political spacewas articulated upon
a therapeutic space; it tended to individualize bodies, diseases,
symptoms, lives and deaths;it constituted a real table of juxtaposed
and carefully distinct singularities. Out of discipline, a medically
useful spacewas born.
In the factoriesthat appearedat the end ofthe eighteenth century,
the principle of individualizing partitioning became more complicated. It was a guestion of distributing individuals in a space in
which one might isolate them and map them; but also of articulating
this distribution on a production machinery that had its own requirements. The distribution of bodies, the spatial arrangement of
r44

Docile bodies
production machinery and the different forms of activiry in the
distribution of 'posts' had to be linked together. The Oberkampf
manufactory at Jouy obeyed this principle. It was made up of a
seriesofworkshops specifiedaccording to eachbroad type ofoperation: for the printers, the handlers, the colourists, the women who
touched up the design, the engravers, the dyers. The largest of the
buildings, built in rygrrby Toussaint Barr6, was rro metres long
and had three storeys. The ground floor was devoted mainly to
block printing; it contained ry,2 tables arranged in two rows, the
Iength of the workshop, which had eighty-eight windows; each
printer worked at a table with his 'puller', who prepared and spread
the colours. There were 264 personsin all. At the end of each table
was a sort of rack on which the material that had just been printed
was left to dry (Saint-Maur). By walking up and down the central
aisleof the workshop, it was possible to carry out a supervision that
was both general and individual: to observe the worker's presence
and application, and the quality of his work; to compare workers
with one another, to classify them according to skill and speed;
to follow the successivestagesofthe production process.All these
serializationsformed a permanent grid: confusion was eliminated2:
that is to say, production was divided up and the labour process
was articulated, on the one hand, according to its stagesor elementary operations,and, on the other hand, according to the individuals,
the panicular bodies, that carried it out: eachvariable ofthis force strength, promptness, skill, constancy - would be observed, and
therefore characterized, assessed,computed and related to the
individual who was its particular agent. Thus, spread out in a perfectly legible way over the whole series of individual bodies, the
work force may be analysedin individual units. At the emergence
of large-scaleindustry, one finds, beneath the division of the production process,the individualizing fragmentation of labour power;
the distributions of the disciplinary spaceoften assuredboth.
4. In discipline. the elements are interchangeable,since each is
defined by the place it occupies in a series, and by the gap that
separatesit from the others. The unit is, therefore, neither the
tenitory (unit of domination), nor the place (unit of resiilence),but
the rank: the placeone occupiesin a classification,the point at which
a line and a column intersect, the interval in a seriesof intervals that

r4,

Discipline
one may traverse one after the other. Discipline is an art of rank,
a technique for the transformation of arrangements.It individualizes
bodies by a location that does not give them a 6xed position, but
disributes them and circulates them in a network of relations.
Take the exampleof the 'class'.In the Jesuit colleges,one still
found an organization that was at once binary and unified; the
classes,which might compriseup to two or three hundred pupils,
were subdividedinto groups of ten; eachof thesegroups, with its
'decurion', was placed
in a camp, Roman or Carthaginian;each
'decury'
had its counterpart in the opposing camp. The general
form was that of war and rivalry; work, apprenticeshipand classification were carried out in the form of the joust, through the confrontation of two armiesl the contribution of each pupil was inscribed in this general duel; it contributed to the victory or the
defeat of a whole camp; and the pupils were assigneda place that
correspondedto the function ofeach individual and to his value as
'decury'
(Rochemonteix,
a combatant in the unitary group of his
It
should
be
moreover
that
Roman
comedy
observed
this
;rff).
made it possibleto link, to the binary exercisesof rivalry, a spatial
dispositioninspired by the legion, with rank, hierarchy,pyramidal
supervision. One should not forget that, generally speaking, the
Roman model, at the Enlightenment, played a dual role: in its
republican aspect, it was the very embodiment of liberty; in its
military aspect,it was the ideal 6chemaof discipline. The Rome of
the eighteenth century and of the Revolution was the Rome of the
Senate,but it was also that of the legion; it was the Rome of the
Forum, but it was also that of the camps. Up to the empire, the
Roman referencetransmitted, somewhat ambiguously, the juridical
ideal of citizenshipand the techniqueof disciplinary methods. In
any case,the strictly disciplinary elementin the ancient fable used by
the Jesuitcollegescameto dominatethe elementof joust and mock
warfare. Gradually - but especially after ry62 - the educational
spaceunfolds; the classbecomeshomogeneous,it is no longer made
up of individual elementsarranged side by side under the master's
'rank'
eye. In the eighteenthcentury,
begins to define the great form
of distribution of individualsin the educationalorder: rows or ranks
ofpupils in the class,corridors, courtyards; rank attributed to each
pupil at the end of each task and each examination; the rank he
r46

Docile bodies
obtains from week to week, month to month, year to yeari aA
alignment ofage groups, one after another; a successionofsubiects
taught and questions treated, according to an order of increasing
difficulty. And, in this ensemble of compulsory alignments, each
pupil, according to his age, his performance,his behaviour, occupies
sometimesone rank, sometimesanother; he moves constantly over
'ideal'
a seriesof compartments - sorne of these are
compartments,
marking a hierarchy of knowledge or ability, others ixpress the
distribution of values or merits in material terms in the spaceof the
collegeor classroom.It is a perpetualmovement in which individuals
replaceone another in a spacemarked off by aligned intervals.
The organization of a serial spacewas one of the great technical
mutations of elementary education. It made it possible to supersede
the traditional system (a pupil working for a few minutes with the
master,while the rest of the heterogeneousgroup remained idle and
unattended). By assigning individual places it made possible the
supervision of each individual and the simultaneouswork of all. It
organizeda new economy of the time of apprenticeship.It made the
educational space function like a learning machine, but also as a
machine for supervising, hierarchizing, rewarding. Jean-Baptistede
La Salle dreamt of a classroom in which the spatial distribution
might provide a whole series of distinctions at once: according to
the pupils' progress, worth, character, application, cleanlinessand
parents' fortune. Thus, the classroom would form a single great
table, with many different entries, under the scrupulously 'classificatory' eye of the master: 'In every class there will be places
assignedfor all the pupils ofall the lessons,so that all those attending
the samelessonwill always occupy the sameplace. Pupils attending
the highest lessonswill be placed in the benchesclosest to the wall,
followed by the others according to the order of the lessonsmoving
towards the middle of the classroom. . . Each of the pupils will
have his place assignedto him and none of them will leave it or
change it except on the order or with the consent of the school
inspector.' Things must be so arranged that 'those whose parents
are neglectful and verminous must be separatedfrom those who are
careful and clean; that an unruly and frivolous pupil should be
placed between.two who are well behaved and serious, a libertine
either alone or between two pious pupils'.8

r47

Discipline
'ranks',
In organizing'cells', 'places' and
the disciplines create
complex spacesthat are at once architectural, functional and hierarchical. It is spacesthat provide fixed positions and permit circulation; they carve out individual segmentsand establish operational
links; they mark places and indicate valuesl they guarantee the
obedience of individuals, but also a better economy of time and
gesture. They are mixed spaces:real becausethey govern the disposition of buildings, rooms, furniture, but also ideal, becausethey
are projected over this arrangementof characterizations,assessments,
hierarchies.The first of the great operations of discipline is, therefore,.the constitution of 'tableaux vi'vants', which transform the
confused, uselessor dangerous multitudes into ordered multiplici'tables'
ties. The drawing up of
was one of the great problems of the
scientific, political and economic technology of the eighteenth
century: how one was to arrange botanical and zoological gardens,
and construct at the sametime rational classificationsof living beings;
how one was to observe, supervise, regularize the circulation of
commodities and money and thus build up an economic table that
might serve as the principle of the increaseof wealth; how one was
to inspect men, observe their presenceand absenceand constitute
a general and permanent register of the armed forcesl how one was
to distribute patients, separatethem from one another, divide up
the hospital spaceand make a systematic classification of diseases:
thesewere all twin operations in which the two elements- distribution and analysis, supervision and intelligibility - are inextricably
bound up. In the eighteenth century, the table was both a technique
of power and a procedure of knowledge. It was a question of
organizing the multiple, of providing oneself with an instrument to
cover it and to master it; it was a question of imposing upon it an
'order'.
Like the army general of whom Guibert spoke, the natural'blinded
ist, the physician, the economist was
by the immensity,
dazedby the multitude . . . the innumerable combinations that result
from the multiplicity of obiects, so many concerns together form a
burden above his strength. In perfecting itself, in approaching true
principles, the scienceof modern warfare might becomesimpler and
'with
less difficult'; armies
simple, similar tactics, capable of being
adapted to every movement . . . would be easierto move and lead'
(Guibert, xxxvi). Tactics, the spatial ordering of menl taxonomy,
r48

Docile bodies
the disciplinary space of natural beings; the economic table, the
regulated movement of wealth.
But the table does not have the same function in these different
registers. In the order of the economy, it makes possible the
measurementof quantities and the analysis of movements. In the
form of taxonomy, it has the function of characterizing (and consequently reducing individual singularities) and constituting classes
(and therefore of excluding considerations of number). But in the
form of the disciplinary distribution, on the other hand, the table
has the function of treating multiplicity itself, distributing it and
deriving from it as many effects as possible. Whereas natural
taxonomy is situated on the axis that links characterand category,
disciplinary tactics is situated on the axis that links the singular and
the multiple. It allows both the characterization of the individual
as individual and the ordering of a given multiplicity. It is the first
condition for the control and use of an ensembleof distinct elements:
'cellular'
the base for a micro-physics of what might be called a
Power.
Tlze control of activity
r. The time-table is an old inheritance. The strict model was no
doubt suggestedby the monastic communities" It soon spread. Its
three great methods - establishrhythms, impose particular occupations, regulate the cycles of repetition - were soon to be found in
schools, workshops and hospitals. The new disciplines had no difficulty in taking up their place in the old formsl the schoolsand poorhouses extended the life and the regularity of the monastic communities to which they were often attached. The rigours of the
industrial period long retained a religious air; in the seventeenth
century, the regulations of the great manufactories laid down the
exercisesthat would divide up the working day: 'On arrival in the
morning, before beginning their work, all persons shall wash their
hands, offer up their work to God and make the sign of the cross'
(Saint-Maur, article r); but even in the nineteenth century, when the
rural populations were needed in industry, they were sometimes
'congregations',
formed into
in an attempt to inure them to work
in the workshops; the framevork of the 'factory*monastery' was

r49

Discipline
imposed upon the workers. In the Protestant armies of Maurice of
Orapge and Gustavus Adolphus, military discipline was achieved
through a rhythmics of time punctuated by pious exerciseslarmy
life, Boussanellewas later to say, should have some of the 'perfections ofthe cloister itself'(Boussanelle, z1on the religious character
of discipline in the Swedish army, cf. The Snedish Discipline,
London, 163z). For centuries,the religious orders had been masters
of discipline: they were the specialistsof time, the great technicians
of rhythm and regular activities. But the disciplines altered these
methods of temporal regulation from which they derived. They
altered them first by refining them. One began to count in quarter
hours, in minutes, in seconds.This happenedin the army, of course:
Guibert systematicallyimplemented the chronometric measurement
of shooting that had been suggestedearlier by Vauban. In the elementary schools, the division of time becameincreasingly minute;
activities were governed in detail by orders that had to be obeyed
'At
immediately:
the last stroke of the hour, a pupil will ring the
bell, and at the first sound of the bell all the pupils will kneel, with
their arms crossedand their eyeslowered. When the prayer hasbeen
said, the teacherwill strike the signal once to indicate that the pupils
should get up, a secondtime as a sign that they should salute Christ,
and a third that they should sit down' (La Salle,Conduite. . .r z7-8).
In the early nineteenth century, the following time-table was sug'mutual
gested for the Ecoles mutuelles,or
improvement schools':
8.45 entranceof the monitor, 8.yz the monitor's summons, 8.y6
entrance of the children and prayer, 9.oo the children go to their
benches,9.o4 first slate, 9.o8 end ofdictation, 9.rz secondslate, etc.
(Tronchot, zzr). The gradual extension of the wage-earning class
brought with it a more detailed partitioning of time 'If workers
arrive later than a quarter ofan hour after the ringing ofthe bell . . .'
(Amboise, article z); 'if any one of the companions is asked for
during work and losesmore than 6ve minutes . . .', 'anyone who is
not at his work at the correct time . . .' (Oppenheim, article 7-8).
But an attempt is also made to assurethe quality of the time used:
constant supervision, the pressureof supervisors,the elimination of
anything that might disturb or distract; it is a question of constitut'It
is expressly forbidden during work to
ing a totally useful time:
companions
amuse one's
by gesruresor in any other way, to play
rto

Docile bodies
at any girme whatsoever, to eat, to sleep, to tell stories and comedies'
(Oppenheim, article 16); and even during the rneal-break,'therewill
be no telling ofstories, adventures or other such talk that distracts
the workers from their work'f it is expressly forbidden for any
worker, under any pretext, to bring wine into the manufactory and
to drink in the workshops' (Amboise,article 4). Time measuredand
paid must also be a time without impurities or defects; a time of
good quality, throughout which the body is constantly applied to
its exercise.Precision and application are, with regularity, the fundamental virtues of disciplinary time. But this is not the newest thing
about it. Other methods are more characteristicof the disciplines.
z. The temporal elaborationof the act.There are, for example, two
ways of controlling marching troops. In the early seventeenth
'Accustomed
century, we have:
soldiers marching in file or in
battalion to march to the rhythm of the drum. And to do this, one
must begin with the right foot so that the whole troop raises the
same foot at the same time' (Montgommery, 86). In the mid'The
eighteenth centurry,there are four sorts of steps:
length of the
the short step will be a foot, that of the ordinary step, the double
step and the marching step will be two feet, the whole measuredfrom
one heel to the nexq as for the duration, that of the small step and
the ordinary step will last one second, during which two double
stepswould be performed; the duration of the marching step will be
a little longer than one second. The oblique step will take one
secondl it will be at most eighteeninches from one heel to the next.
. .. The ordinary step will be executedforwards, holding the head
up high and the body erect, holding oneselfin balancesuccessively
on a single leg, and bringing the other forwards, the ham taut, the
point of the foot a little turned outwards and low, so that one may
without affectation brush the ground on which one must walk and
place one's foot, in such a way that eachpart may come to rest there
at the sametime without striking the ground' ('Ordonnance du rcr
ianvier 1766, pour r6gler I'exercisede I'infanterie'). Between these
two instructions, a new set of restraintshad been brought into play,
another degreeof precision in the breakdown of gesturesand movements, another way of adiusting the body to temporal imperatives.
What the ordinance of ry66 defines is not a time-table - the
general framework for an activity; it is rather a collective and
Itr

Discipline
'programme';
obligatory rhythm, imposed fro4 the outside; it is a
it assuresthe elaborationof the act itself; it controls its development
and its stages from the inside. We have passed from a form of
injunction that measuredor punctuated gesturesto a web that constrains them or sustainsthem throughout their entire succession.A
sort of anatomo-chronological schemaof behaviour is defined. The
act is broken down into its elements;the position of the body, limbs,
articulations is defined; to each movement are assigneda direction,
an aptitude, a duration; their order of successionis prescribed.Time
penetratesthe body and with it all the meticulous controls of power.
3. Hence the correlationof the body and the gesture.Disciplinary
control does not consist simply in teaching or imposing a seriesof
particular gestures;it imposes the best relation between a gesture
and the overall position of the body, which is its condition of efficiency and speed. In the correct use of the body, which makes
possible a correct use of time, nothing must remain idle or useless:
everything must be called upon to form the support of the act
required. A well-disciplined body forms the operational context of
the slightest gesture. Good handwriting, for example, presupposes
a gymnastics- a whole routine v/hoserigorous code invests the body
in its entirety, from the points of the feet ro the tip of the index
'hold
6nger. The pupils must always
their bodies erect, somewhat
turned and free on the left side, slightly inclined, so that, with the
elbow placed on the table, the chin can be rested upon the hand,
unlessthis wer!to interfere with the view; the left leg must be somewhat more forward under the table than the dght. A distanceof two
fingers must be left between the body and the table; for not only
does one write with more alertness,but nothing is more harmful
to the health than to acquire the habit of pressing one's stomach
againstthe table; the part ofthe left arm from the elbow to the hand
must be placed on the table. The right arm must be at a distance
from the body ofabout three fingers and be about five fingers from
the table, on which it must rest lightly. The teacher will place the
pupils in the posture that they should maintain when writing, and
will correct it either by sign or otherwise, when they change this
position' (La Salle, Conduite. . ., 6l-C). A disciplined body is the
prerequisite of an efficient gesture.
4. The body-objectarticulation. Discipline defines each of the
rtz

Docile bodies
relations that the body must have with the obiect that it manipulates.
'Bring
the weapon
Between them, it outlines a meticulous meshing.
forward. In three stages.Raisethe rife with the right hand, bringing
it close to the body so as to hold it perpendicular with the right
knee, the end of the barrel at eye level, grasping it by striking it with
the right hand, the arm held close to the body at waist height. At the
secondstage, bring the rifle in front of you with the left hand, the
barrel in the middle between the two eyes, vertical, the right hand
grasping it at the small of the butt, the arrn outstretched,the triggerguard resting on the first finger, the left hand at the height of the
notch, the thumb lying along the barrel against the moulding. At
the third stage,let go of the rifle with the left hand, which falls along
the thigh, raising the rife with the right hand, the lock outwards
and opposite the chest, the right arm half flexed, the elbow close to
the body, the thumb lying against the lock, resting against the first
screw, the hammer resting on the first finger, the barrel perpendicular' ('Ordonnance du rcr ianvier ry66,.., titreXI, article z'). This
is an exampleof what might be called the instrumental coding of the
body. It consistsof a breakdown of the total gestureinto two parallel
series:that ofthe parts ofthe body to be used (right hand, left hand,
difierent fingers ofthe hand, knee, eye, elbow, etc.) and that ofthe
parts of the object manipulated (barrel, notch, hammer, screw, etc.);
then the two sets of pars are correlated together according to a
number of simple gestures(rest, bend); lastly, it fixes the canonical
successionin which each of these correlations occupiesa particular
place. This obligatory syntar( is what the military theorericians of
'manoeuvre'.
The traditional recipe
the eighteenth cennrry called
gives place to explicit and obligatory prescriptions. Over the whole
surfaceofcontact betweenthe body and the object it handles,power
is introduced, fastening them to one another. It constitutes a bodyweapon, body-tool, body-machine complex. One is as far as possible
from those forms of subjection that demanded of the body only
signs or products, forms of expression.or the result of labour.
The regulation imposed by power is at the same time the law of
constmction of the operation. Thus disciplinary power appearsto
have the function not so much of deduction as of synthesis, not so
much of exploitation of the product as of coercive link with the
apparatusof production.

rtt

Discipline
5. Exhaustire zse. The principle that underlay the time-table in
its traditional form was essentially negative; it was the principle of
non-idleness:it was forbidden to waStetime, which was counted by
God and paid for by men; the time-table was to eliminate the danger
of wasting it - a moral offenceand economic dishonesty. Discipline,
- on the other hand, arrangesa positive economy; it poses the principle of a theoretically ever-growing use of time: cxhaustion rather
than usel it is a question of extracting, from time, ever more available
moments and, from each moment, ever more useful forces. This
means that one must seek to intensify the use of the slightest
moment, as if time, in its very fragmentation, were inexhaustibleor
as if, at least by an ever more detailed internal arrangement, one
could tend towards an ideal point at which one maintainedmaximum
speedand maximum efficiency. It was precisely this that was implemented in the celebratedregulations of the Prussian infantry that
the whole of Europe imitated after the victories of Frederick II:{ the
more time is broken down, the more its subdivisions multiply,
the better one disarticulates it by deploying its internal elements
under a gaze that supervisesthem, the more one can acceleratean
operation, or at least regulate it according to an optimum speed;
hencethis regulation of the time of an action that was so important
in the army and which was to be so throughout the entire technology
of human activity: the Prussian regulations of ry43 laid down six
stagesto bring the weapon to one's foot, four to extend it, thirteen
to raiseit to the shoulder, etc. By other means,the 'mutual improvement school' was also arranged as a machine to intensify the use of
time; its organization made it possible to obviate the linear, successive characterof the master'steaching: it regulated the counterpoint
of operadons performed, at the same moment, by different groups
of pupils under the direction of monitors and assistants,
so that each
passing moment was filled with many different, but ordered activities; and, on the other hand, the rhythm imposed by signals,whistles,
orders imposed on everyone temporal norms that were intended both
to acceleratethe processof learning and to teach speedas a virtue;6
'the
sole aim of thesecommands . . . is to accustom the children to
executing well and quickly the sameoperations, to diminish as far as
possibleby speedthe loss of time causedby moving from one operation to another' (Bernard).
rt4

Docile bodies
Through this techniqueof subiectiona new object vas being
formed;slowly,it superseded
the mechanical
body - the body composedof solidsand assignedmovements,the imageof which had
for so long hauntedthosewho dreamtof disciplinaryperfection.
This newobiectis thenaturalbody, the bearerofforcesandthe seat
' of duration;it is the body susceptible
to specifiedoperations,which
havetheir order, their stages,their internal conditions,their constituent elements.In becoming the target for new mechanisms
of power,the body is offeredup to new forms of knowledge.It is
the body of exercise,rather than of speculativephysics;a body
manipulatedby authority, rather than imbuedwith animalspirits;
a body of usefultrainingand not of rationalmechanics,
but one in
which,by virtue of thatvery fact,a numberof nahrraliequirements
andfunctionalconstraintsarebeginningto emelge.This is the body
that Guibertdiscoveredin his critiqueof excessively
artificialmovements.In the exercisethat is imposedupon it and which it resists,
the body brings out its essentialcorrelationsand spontaneously
reiectsthe incompatible:'On enteringmostof our trainingschools,
one seesall thoseunfortunatesoldiersin constrictingand forced
attitudes,oneseesall theirmusclescontracted,thecirculationof their
blood interrupted.. . If we studiedthe intentionof natureand the
constructionof the humanbody, we would 6nd the position and
the bearingthat natureclearlyprescribesfor the soldier.The head
mustbe erect,standingout from the shoulders,sitting perpendicularly betweenthem. It must be turned neitherto left nor to right,
in view ofthe correspondence
because,
betweenthe vertebraeofthe
neckandtheshoulder-blade
to whichtheyareattached,noneofthem
may move in a circular mannerwithout slighdy bringing with it
from the samesidethat it movesone of the shouldersand because,
the body no longerbeingplacedsquarely,the soldiercanno longer
walk straightin front of him or serveas a point of alignment.. .
Sincethe hip-bone, which the ordinanceindicatesas the point
againstwhich the butt end shouldrest,is not situatedthe samein all
men,the rifle mustbe placedmore to the right for some,and more
to the left for others.For the samereasonof inequality of structure,
the trigger-guardis moreor lesspressedagainstthe body, depending
on whether the outer parts of a man's shoulderis more or less
fleshy' (Guibert, zr-z).

rtt

Discipline
We have seenhow the proceduresof disciplinary distribution had
their place among the contemporary techniquesof classificationand
tabulation; but also how they introduced into them the specific
problem of individuals and multiplicity. Similarly, the disciplinary
controls ofactivity belonged to a whole seriesofresearches,theoretical or practical, into the natural machinery of bodies; but they
began to discover in them specific processes;behaviour and its
organized requirements gradually replaced the simple physics of
movement. The body, required to be docile in its minutest operations, opposesand shows the conditions of functioning proper to an
organism. Disciplinary power has as its correlative an individuality
that is not only analytical and 'cellular', but also natural and
'organic'.

The organiTation of geneses
In 1667, the edict that set up the manufactory of the Gobelins
envisaged the organization of a school. Sixty scholarship children
were to be chosenby the superintendent ofroyal buildings, entrusted for a time to a master whose task it would be to provide them
'upbringing
with
and instruction', then apprenticed to the various
master Epestry makers of the manufactory (who by virrue of this
fact receivedcompensationdeducted from the pupils'scholarships);
after six years' apprenticeship,four years of serviceand a qualifying
'set
examination, they were given the right to
up and run a shop'
in any town of the kingdom. We find here the characteristicsof
guild apprenticeship:the relation of dependenceon rhe master that
is both individual and total; the statutory duration of the training,
which is concluded by a qualifying examination, but which is not
broken down according to a preciseprogmmme; an overall exchange
between the master who must give his knowledge and the apprentice who must offer his services,his assistanceand often some payment The form of domestic service is mixed with a transferenceof
knowledge.o In ry37, an edict organized a school of drawing for
the apprenticesof the Gobelins; it was not intended to replace the
training given by the master workers, but to complement it. It
involved a quite different arrangement of time. Two hours a day,
except on Sundays and feast days, the pupils met in the school. A
rt6

Docile bodies
werenoted
roll-callwastaken,from a list on the wall; the absentees
down in a register.The school was divided into three classes.The
first for thosewho had no notion of drawing; they were madeto
copy models,which were more or lessdifficult accordingto the
abilitiesof eachpupil. The second'forthosewho alreadyhavesome
principles',or who had passedthrough the first class;they had to
'at
reproducepictures sight,without tracing',but consideringonly
the drawing. In the third class,they learnt colouring and pastel
drawing,andwereintroducedto the theoryandpracticeof dyeing.
The pupils performedindividual tasksat regularintervals;eachof
theseexercises,signedwith the name of its author and date of
execution,was handedin to the teache4the best were rewardedl
assembled
togetherat the end of the yearandcompared,they made
it possibleto establishthe progress,the presentability and the
relativeplaceof eachpupil; it wasthendecidedwhich of themcould
passinto the next class.A generalbook, kept by the teachersand
recordedfrom day to day the behaviourof the
their assistants,
pupilsandeverythingthathappened
in theschool;it wasperiodically
shownto an inspector(Gerspach,r89z).
The Gobelinsschoolis only oneexampleof an importantphenoin the classicalperiod,of a new technique
menon:the development,
for regulating
for takingchargeof the time of individualexistences;
the relationsof time, bodiesand forces;for assuringan accumulaprofit or usethe
tion ofdurationl and for turning to ever-increased
movementof passingtime. How can one capitalizethe time of
individuals,accumulateit in eachof them, in their bodies,in their
forcesor in their abilities,in a way that is susceptibleof useand
controll How canoneorganizeprofitabledurationslThe disciplines,
which analysespace,breakup and rearrangeactivities,mustalsobe
understoodasmachineryfor addingup and capitalizingtime. This
was done in four ways, which emergemost clearly in military
organization.
r. Divide durationinto successive
or parallelsegments,
eachof
which must end at a specifictime. For example,isolatethe period
of trainingand the periodof practice;do not mix the instmctionof
miliary schools
recruitsand the exerciseof veterans;openseparate
(in
for the armedservice ry64rthecreationof the 6cole Militaire in
Paris, in ry76 the creationof twelve schoolsin the provinces);
rt7

Discipline
recruit professional soldiers at the youngest possible age, take
'have
children,
them adopted by the nation, and brought up in
special schools' (Servan, 1., CS6);teach in tum posture, marching,
the handling of weapons, shooting, and do not pass to another
activity until the first has been completely mastered: 'One of the
principal mistakes is to show a soldier every exercise at once'
('Rdglementde ry43. . .'); in short, break down time into separate
and adjusted threads. z. Organize these threads according to an
analytical plan - successionsof elements as simple as possible,
combining according to increasing complexity. This presupposes
that instruction should abandon the principle of analogical repetition. In the sixteenth cennrry, military exerciseconsisted above all
in copying all or part ofthe action, and ofgenerally increasing the
soldier's skill or strength;7in the eighteenth century, the instruction
'manual'
'elementary'
of the
followed the principle of the
and not of
'exemplary':
the
simple gesnrres the position of the 6ngers, the
bend of the leg, the movement of the arms - basicelementsfor useful
actions that also provide a general training in strength, skill,
docility. 3. Finalize these temporal segments,decide on how long
each will last and conclude it with an examinarion, which will have
the triple function of showing whether the subject has reached the
level required, ofguaranteeing that eachsubiect undergoesthe same
apprenticeshipand of differentiating the abilities of each individual.
When the sergeants, corporals, etc. 'entrusted with the task of
instructing the others, are of the opinion that a particular soldier is
ready to pass into the first class,they will present him first to the
officers of their company, who will carefully examine him; if they
do not find him sufficiently practised,they will refuse to admit him;
if, on the other hand, the man presentedseemsto them to be read6
the said officers will themselvespropose him to the commanding
officer of the regiment, who will see him if he thinks it necessary,
and will have him examined by the senior officers. The slightest
mistakes will be enough to have him rejected, and no one will be
able to passfrom the secondclassto the first until he has undergone
this first examination' (Instruction par I'exercise de I'infanterie, 14
mai ry14).4. Draw up seriesof series;lay down for eachindividual,
according to his level, his seniority, his rank, the exercisesthat are
suited to him; common exerciseshave a differing role and each
rt8

Docile bodies
difference involves specific exercises. At the end of each series,
others begin, branch offand suMivide in turn. Thus eachindividual
is caught up in a temporal series which specifically defines his level
'Soldiers of
or his rank. It is a disciplinary polyphony ofexercises:
the second class will be exercised every morning by sergeants,
corporals, anspessades,lance-corpordls. . . The lance-corporals will
be exercisedevery Sunday by the head ofthe section ...; the corporals and anspessadeswill be exercised every Tuesday afternoon
by the sergeantsand their company and these in turn on the afternoons of every second, twelfth and twenty-second day of each
month by senior officers' (Instuction ...).
It is this disciplinary time that was gradually imposed on pedagogical practice - specializingthe time of training and detaching it
from the adult time, from the time of mastery; arranging different
stages,separatedfrom one another by graded examinations;drawing
up programmes,each of which must take place during a particular
sage and which involves exercisesof increasingdifficulty; qualifying
individuals according to the way in which they progress through
theseseries.For the'initiatory' time of traditional training (an overall time, supervised by the master alone, authorized by a single
examination), disciplinary time had substituted its multiple and
progressiveseries.A whole analytical pedagogy was being formed,
meticulous in its detail (it broke down the subject being taught into
its simplest elements,it hierarchizedeachstageof development into
small steps)and also very precociousin its history (it largely anticipated the genetic analyses of the iddologues,whose technical model
it appearsto have been).At the beginning ofthe eighteenth century,
Demia suggesteda division of the processof learning to read into
sevenlevels:the first for those who are beginning to learn the letters,
the second for those who are learning to spell, the third for those
who are learning to join syllables together to make words, the
fourth for those who are reading Latin in sentencesor from punctuation to punctuation, the fifth for those who are beginning to read
French, the sixth for the best readers,the seventh for those who can
read manuscripts.But, where there are a great many pupils, further
subdivisions would have to be introduced; the first class would
'simple
comprise four streams:one for those who are learning the
'mixed'
letters'; a second for those who are learning the
lettersl a

rtg

Discipline
third for those who are learning the abbreviated letters (,ir 6 , ..);
a fourth for those who are learning the double letters (1fr, ss,tt, st).
The secondclasswould be divided into three streams:for those who
'count
each letter aloud before spelling the syllable, D.O., DO'; for
'who
spell the most difficult syllables, such as bant, brand,
those
spinx', etc. (Demia, r9-zo). Each stage in the combinatory of elementsmust be inscribedwithin a greattdmporal seriesrwhichis both
a natural progressofthe mind and a code for educative procedures.
'seriation'
The
of successiveactivities makes possible a whole
investment of duration by power: the possibility of a detailed control and a regular intervention (of differentiation, correction,
punishment, elimination) in eachmoment of time; the possibility of
characterizing,and therefore of using individuals according to the
level in the seriesthat they are moving through; the possibility of
accumulating time and activity, of rediscovering them, totalized and
usablein a final result, which is the ultimate capacityof an individual.
Temporal dispersal is brought together to produce a pro6t, thus
mastering a duration that would otherwise elude one's grasp. Power
is articulated directly onto time; it assuresits control and guarantees
its use.
The disciplinary methods reveal a linear time whose moments are
integrated, one upon another, and which is orientated towards a
'evolutive'
terminal, stablepoint; in short, an
time. But it must be
recalled that, at the samemoment, the administrative and economic
techniques of control reveal a social time of a serial, orientated,
cumulative type: the discovery of an evolution in terms of 'progress'.
The disciplinary techniquesrevealindividual series:the discovery of
'genesis'.
'discoveries'
an evolution in terms of
These two great
ofthe eighteenth century - the progressofsocieties and the geneses
of individuals - were perhapscorrelative with the new techniquesof
power, and more specifically, with a new way of administering
time and making it useful, by segmentation,seriation, synthesisand
totalization. A macro- and a micro-physics of power made possible,
not the invention ofhistory (it had long had no need ofthat), but
the integration of a temporal, unitary, continuous, cumulative
dimension in the exerciseof controls and the practiceof dominations.
'Evolutive'
historicity, asit was then constituted - and so profoundly
that it is still self-evidentfor many today - is bound up with a mode
r6o

Docile bodies
of functioning of power. No doubt it is as if the'history-remembering' of the chronicles, genealogies,exploits, reigns and deeds had
long been linked to a modality of power. With the new tichniques
of subjection, the 'dynamics' of continuous evolutions tends to re'dynastics'
place the
of solemn events.
In any case, the small temporal continuum of individualitygenesis certainly seems to be, like the individuality-cell or the
individuality-organism, an effect and an object.of discipline. And, at
the centre of this seriation of time, one finds a procedure that is, for
'tables'
it, what the drawing up of
was for the distribution of
individuals and cellular segmentation, or, again, what'manoeuvre'
was for the economy of activities and organic control. This procedure is'exercise'. Exercise is that technique by which one imposes
on the body tasks that are both repetitive and different, but always
graduated. By bending behaviour towards a terminal state, exercise
makes possible a perpetual characterization of the individual either
in relation to this term, in relation to other individuals, or in relation
to a type of itinerary. It thus assures,in the form of continuity and
constraint, a growth, an observation, a qualification. Before adopting this strictly disciplinary form, exercisehad a long history: it is
to be found in military, religious and university practices either as
initiation ritual, preparatory ceremony, theatrical rehearsal or
examination. Its linear, continuously progressive organization, its
genetic development in time werer'at least in the army and the
school, introduced at a later date - and were no doubt of religious
'programme'
origin. In any case, the idea of an educational
that
would follow the child to the end of his schooling and which would
involve from year to yeiu, month to month, exercisesof increasing
connplexity, first appeared, it seems, in a religious group, the
Brothers of the Common Life (cf. Meir, 16o ff). Strongly inspired
by Ruysbroek and Rhenish mysticism, they transposedcertain of
the spiritual techniquesto education - and to the education not only
of clerks, but also of magistratesand merchants:the theme of a perfection towards which the exemplary masterguides the pupil became
with them that of an authoritarian perfection of the pupils by the
teacher; the ever-increasing rigorous exercisesthat the ascetic life
proposed became tasks of increasing complexity that marked the
gradual acquisition of knowledge and good behaviour; the striving

r6r

Discipline
of the whole community towards salvation became the collective,
perrnanentcompetition of individuals being classifiedin relation to
one another. Perhapsit was theseproceduresof community life and
salvation that were the first nucleus of methods intended to produce
individually characterized,but collectively useful aptitudes.t In its
mystical or asceticform, exercisewas a way of ordering earthly time
for the conquest of salvation. It was gradually, in the history of the
West, to changedirection while preserving certain of its characteristics; it served to economize the time of life, to accumulateit in a
useful form and to exercisepower over men through the mediation
of time arranged in this way. Exercise, having become an element
in the political technology of the body and of duration, does not
culminatein a beyond, but tendstowardsa subjectionthat hasnever
reachedits limit.
The compositionof forces
'Let
us begin by destroying the old prejudice, according to which
one believed one was increasingthe strength ofa troop by increasing
its depth. All the physical laws of movement becomechimeraswhen
one wishes to adapt them to tactics.'e From the end of the seventeenth century, the technical problem of infantry had been freed
from the physical model of mass.In an army of pikes and muskets slow, imprecise,practically incapableof selectinga target and taking
'the
aim - troops were used as a projectile, a wall or a fortress:
formidableinfantry of the army of Spain';the distribution ofsoldiers
in this mass was carried out above all according to their seniority
and their bravery; at the centre, with the task of providing weight
and volume, of giving density to the body, were the least experienced; in front, at the angles and on the flanks, were the bravest or
reputedly most skilful soldiers. In the course of the classicalperiod,
one passedover to a whole set of delicate articulations. The unit 'division'lo regiment, battalion, section and, later,
becamea sort
of machine with many parts, moving in relation to one another, in
order to arrive at a configuration and to obtain a specific result.
What were the reasonsfor this mutationi Some were economic to
make each individual useful and the training, maintenance, and
arming of troops profitable; to give to each soldier, a precious unit,
r6z

Docile bodies
maximum efficiency. But these economic reasons could become
determinant only with a technical transformation: the invention of
the rifle:rr more accurate, more rapid than the musket, it gave
greater value to the soldier's skill; more capableof reaching a particular target; it made it possible to exploit fire-power at an individual level; and, conversely, it turned every soldier into a possible
target, requiring by the same token greater mobility; it involved
therefore the disappearanceof a technigue of massesin favour of an
art th.rt distributed units and men along extended,relatively flexible,
mobile iines. Hence the need to find a whole calculatedpractice of
individual and collective dispositions, movements of groups or
isolated elements,changesof position, of movement from one disposition to anotherl in short, the need to invent a machinery whose
principle would no longer be the mobile or immobile mass, but a
geometry of divisible segmentswhose basic unity was the mobile
soldier with his rife;l2 and, no doubt, below the soldier himself, the
minimal gestures,the elementary stagesof actions, the fragments of
spacesoccupied or traversed.
The sameproblems arose when it was a question of constituting
a productive force whose effect had to be superior to the sum of
'The
elementary forces that composed ie
combined working-day
produces, relatively to an equal sum of working-days, a greater
quantity of use-values,and, consequently, diminishes the labourtime necessaryfor the production of a given useful effect. Whether
the combined working-day, in a given case,acquires this increased
productive power, because it heightens the mechanical force of
labour, or extends its sphere ofaction over a greater sPace,or contracts the field of production relatively to the scale of production,
or at the critical moment setslarge massesof labour to work . . . the
special productive power of the combined working-day is, under
all circumstances,the social productive power of labour, or the
productive power of social labour. This power is due to cooperation
itself'(Marx, Capital, vol. r, 3Ir*rz). On severaloccasions,Marx
stressesthe analogy between the problems of the division of labour
'Just
as the offensive
and those of military tactics. For example:
power of a squadron of cavalry, or the defensive power of a regiment of infantry, is essentiallydifferent from the sum of the offensive or defensive powers of the individual cavalry or infantry

r63

Discipline
soldiers taken separately,so the sum total of the mechanicalforces
exerted by isolated workmen differs from the social force that is
developed, when many hands take part simultaneously in one and
the sameundivided operation' (Marx, Capital, vol. r, 3o8).
Thus a new demand appearsto which discipline must respond: to
construct a machinewhose effect will be maximized by the concerted
articulation of the elementary parts of which it is composed. Discipline is no longer simply an art of distributing bodies, of extracting
time from them and accumulating it, but of composing forces in
order to obtain an efficient machine. This demand is expressedin
severalways.
r. The individual body becomesan element that may be placed,
moved, articulated on others. Its bravery or its strength are no
longer the principal variables that de6ne it; but the place it occupies,
the interval it covers, the regularity, the good order according to
which it operatesits movements. The soldier is above all a fragment
of mobile space,before he is courage or honour. Guibert describes
'When
he is under arms, he occuthe soldier in the following way:
pies two feet along his greatest diameter, that is to say, taking him
from one end to the other, and about one foot in his greatestthicknesstaken from the chestto the shoulders,to which one must add an
interval of a foot between him and the next man; this gives two feet
in all directions per soldier and indicates that a troop ofinfantry in
battle occupies,either in its front or in its depth, as many stepsas it
has ranks' (Guibert, z7). This is a functional reduction of the body.
But it is also an insertion of this body-segment in a whole ensemble
over which it is articulated. The soldier whose body has been trained
to function part by part for particular operations must in turn form
an element in a mechanism at another level. The soldiers will be
'one
instructed first
by one, then two by rwo, then in greater
numbers. . . For the handling of weapons, one will ascertainthat,
when the soldiers have been separatelyinstructed, they will carry it
out two by two, and then change placesalternately, so that the one
on the left may learn to adapt himself to the one on the right'
('Ordonnance . . .'). The body is constitutedas a part of a multisegmentary machine.
z. The various chronological seriesthat discipline must combine
to form a composite time are also piecesof machinery. The time of
r64

Docile bodies
each must be adiusted to the time of the others in such a way that the
maximum quantity of forces may be extracted from each and combined with the optimum result. Thus Servan dreamt of a military
machine that would cover the whole territory of the nation and in
which each individual would be occupied without intemrption but
in a different way according to the evolutive segment, the genetic
sequencein which he finds himself. Military life would begin in
childhood, when young children would be taught the profession of
'military
arms in
manors'; it would end in thesesamemanors when
the veterans, right up to their last day, would teach the children,
exercisethe recruits, preside over the soldiers' exercises,supervise
them when they were carrying out works in the public interest, and
finally make order reign in the country, when the troops were fighting at the frontiers. There is not a single moment of life from which
one cannot extract forces, providing one knows how to differentiate
it and combine it with others. Similarly, one uses the labour of
children and of old people in the great workshops; this is because
they have certain elementary capacitiesfor which it is not necessary
to use workers who have many other aptitudesl furthermore, they
constitute a cheap labour force; lastly, if they work, they are no
longer at anyone's charge: 'Labouring mankind', said a tax collector
of an enterprise at Angers, 'may find in this manufactory, from the
age often to old age, resourcesAgainstidlenessand the penury that
follows from it' (Marchegay, 36o). But it was probably in primary
education that this adjustment of different chronologies was to be
carried out with most subtlety. From the seventeenthcentury to the
introduction, at the beginning of the nineteenth, of the Lancaster
method, the complex clockwork of the mutual improvement school
was built up cog by cog: first the oldest pupils were entrusted with
asks involving simple supervision, then of checking work, then of
teaching;in the end, all the time of all the pupils was occupied either
with teaching or with being taught. The school becamea machine
for learning, in which each pupil, each level and each moment, if
correctly combined, were permanently utilized in the general processof teaching. One of the great advocatesof the mutual improvement schoolsgives us some idea of this progress: 'In a school of 36o
children, the master who would like to instruct each pupil in turn
for a sessionof three hours would not be able to give half a minute

r6t

Discipline
to each.By the new method, eachof the 36o pupils writes, reads or
counts for rwo and a halfhours' (cf. Bernard).
3. This carefully measured combination of forces requires. a
precise system of command. All the activity of the disciplined
individual must be punctuated and sustainedby injunctions whose
elf,cacity rests on brevity and clarity; the order does not need to be
explained or formulated; it must trigger off the required behaviour
and that is enough. From the master of discipline to him who is
subjectedto it the relation is one of signalization: it is a question not
of understanding the iniunction but of perceiving the signal and
reacting to it immediately, according to a more or less artiFcial,
prearrangedcode. Placethe bodies in a little world of signals to each
of which is attacheda single, obligatory response:it is a technique
'despotically
of training, of dressage,that
excludes in everything
the least representation, and the smallest murmur'; the dis'begins
ciplined soldier
to obey whatever he is ordered to do; his
obedienceis prompt and blind; an appearanceof indocility, the least
delay would be a crime' (Boussanelle,z). The training of schoolchildren was to be carried out in the same way: few words, no
explanation, a total silenceinterrupted only by signals - bells, clapping ofhands, gestures,a mere glance from the teacher,or that little
wooden apparatusused by the Brothers of the Christian Schools; it
was calledpar excellence
the'Signal'and it containedin its mechanical
brevity both the technique of command and the morality of obedi'The first
ence.
and principal use of the signal is to attract at once
the attention of all the pupils to the teacher and to make them
attentive to what he wishes to impart to them. Thus, whenever he
wishes to attract the attention of the children, and to bring the
exerciseto an end, he will strike the signal once. Whenever a good
pupil hears the noise of the signal, he will imagine that he is hearing
the voice of the teacher or rather the voice of God himself calling
him by his name. He will then partake of the feelings of the young
Samuel, saying with him in the depths of his soul: "Lord, I am
'
here." The pupil will have to have learnt the code of the signals
'When
and respond automatically to them.
prayer has been said,
the teacher will strike the signal at once and, tuming to the child
whom he wishes to read, he will make the sign to begin. To make a
sign to stop to a pupil who is reading, he will strike the signal
r66

Docile bodies
once. . . To make a sign to a pupil to repeat when he has read
badly or mispronounced a letter, a syllable or a word, he will strike
the signal twice in rapid succession.If, after the sign had been made
two or three times, the pupil who is reading does not find and repeat
the word that he has badly read or mispronounced - becausehe has
read several words beyond it before being called to order - the
teacherwill strike three times in rapid succession,as a sign to him to
begin to read farther back; and he will continue to make the sign
till the pupil finds the word which he has said incorrectly' (La Salle,
Conduite... ryz-8; cf. also Demia, zl). The mutual improvement
school was to exploil still further this control of behaviour by the
system of signals to which one had to react immediately. Even
verbal orders were to function as elements of signalization: 'Enter
your benches. At the wotd enter, the children bring their right
hands down on the table with a resounding thud and at the same
time put one leg into the bench; at the words your henchesthey put
the other leg in and sit down opposite their slates . . . Take your
slates.At the word take, the children, with their right hands, take
hold of the string by which the slate is suspendedfrom the nail
before them, and, with their left hands, they grasp the slate in the
middle; at the word s/cres,they unhook it and placeit on the table'.rg
To sum up, it might be said that discipline creates out of the
bodies it controls four types of individuality, or rather an individuality that is endowed with four characteristics:it is cellular (by the
play of spatialdistribution), it is organic (by the coding of activities),
it is genetic (by the accumulation of time), it is combinatory (by the
composition of forces). And, in doing so, it operates'four great
techniques:it draws up tables; it prescribesmovements; it imposes
exercisesllastly, in order to obtain the combination of forces, it
'tactics'.
arrianges
Tactics, the art of constructing, with located
bodies, coded activities and trained aptitudes, mechanismsin which
the product of the various forces is increased by their calculated
combination are no doubt the highest form of disciplinary pracrice.
In this knowledge, the eighteenth-century theoreticians saw the
general foundation of all military practice, from the control and
exerciseof individual bodies ro the use of forces specificto the most
complex multiplicities. The architecture, anatomy, mechanics,
economy of the disciplinary body: 'In the eyes of mosr soldiers,

r6T

Discipline
tactics are only a branch of the vast scienceof war; for me, they are
the base of this sciencel they are this science itself, becausethey
teachhow to constitute troops, order them, move them, get them to
6ght; becausetactics alone may make up for numbers, and handle
the multitude; lastly, it will include knowledge of men, weapons,
tensions, circumstancis, becauseit is all these kinds of knowledge
brought together that must determine those movements' (Guibert,
'The
term tactics . . . gives some idea of the respective
4). Or again:
position of the men who make up a particular troop in relation to that of the different troops that make up an army, their
movementsand their actions, their relations with one another'(Joly
de Maizeroy, z).
It may be that war as strategy is a continuation of politics. But it
'politics'
has been conceived as a conmust not be forgotten that
tinuation, if not exactly and directly of war, at least of the military
model as a fundamentalmeansof preventing civil disorder. Politics,
as a technique of internal peaceand order, sought to implement the
mechanismof the perfect army, of the disciplined mass,of the docile,
useful troop, of the regiment in camp and in the 6eld, on manoeuvres and on exercises.In the great eighteenth-century states, the
army guaranteedcivil peaceno doubt becauseit was a real force,
an ever-threateningsword, but also becauseit was a technique and a
body of knowledge that could project their schemaover the social
body. If there is a politics-war seriesthat passesthrough strategy,
there is an army-politics series that passesthrough tactics. It is
strategy that makes it possible to understand warfare as a way of
conducting politics between states;it is tactics that makesit possible
to understand the army as a principle for maintaining the absenceof
warfare in civil society. The classicalage saw the birth of the great
political and military strategy by which nations confronted each
other's economic and demographic forces; but it also saw the birth
of meticulous military and political tactics by which the control of
bodies and individual forces was exercised within states. The
'militaire'the military institution, military science, the militaire
himself, so different from what was formerly characterizedby the
term'homme de guerre' - was specified, during this period, at the
point of junction between war and the noise of battle on the one
hand, and order and silence, subservient to peace, on the other.
r68

Docile bodies
Historiansof ideasusuallyattributethe dreamof a perfectsocietyto
the philosophers
andjuristsof the eighteenthcentury;but therewas
wasnot to
reference
alsoa military dreamof society;its fundamental
the stateof nature,but to the meticulouslysubordinatedcogsof a
machine,not to the primal socialcontract, but to peflnanentcoercions, not to fundamentalrights, but to indefinitely progressive
formsof training,not to the generalwill but to automaticdocility.
'Disciplinemust be madenationalr'saidGuibert. 'The statethat
I depictwill havea simple,reliable,easilycontrolledadministration.
It will resemble
thosehugemachines,
which by quiteuncomplicated
meansproducegreat efiects;the strengthof this statewill spring
from its own strength,its prosperityfrom its own prosperity.Time,
which destroysall, will increaseits power. It will disprovethat
vulgar prejudiceby which we aremadeto imaginethat empiresare
subiectedto an imperiouslaw of declineand ruin' (Guibert,xxiii:oriv; cf. what Marx saysabout the army and forms of bourgeois
societyin his letterto Engels,z; Septemberfi17). The Napoleonic
r6gimewas not far off and with it the form of statethat was to
surviveit and,we must not forget, the foundationsof which were
laid not only by jurists,but alsoby soldiers,not only councillorsof
state,but alsojunior officers,not only t]remenof thecourts,but also
the menof the camps.The Romanreferencethat accompanied
this
formation certainly bearswith it this double index: citizensand
legionaries,law and manoeuvres.While jurists or philosophers
were seekingin the pact a primal model for the constructionor
reconstructionof the socialbody, the soldiersand with them the
for the indivitechnicians
of disciplinewereelaboratingprocedures
dual and collectivecoercionofbodies.

r6g

Medalcommemoratrng
LoursXIV'sfrrstmrlrtary
revuern1668( B.N.Cabrnet
desm6darlles).
Cf.p.188.
hrstonques
Handwrrtrng
model(Collectrons
de
l ' l . N . R . D . PC. )f .p .1 5 2 .

J. Bentham. Pfan otth! Panopticon ( fra Works of Jercmy Bentham, ed. Bowring,
vol. lV. 1843. 172-3). Cf. o. 201 .

:

lii:

N H a r o u - R o m a r nP. l a nf o r a p e n t t e n t t a r y1,8 4 0 A p n s o n e r r, n h r s c e l l ,k n e e h n ga t
prayerbeforelhe centralI nspectrontower. Cf. p 250.

5 TheMarsoncentraleat Rennesn 1877.Cf.p. 250.
UnitedStales,twentiethcentuty.Cf. p. 250.
at Statevrlle,
6 lnteriorofthe penitentrary

Bedtrmeat the reformatoryof Mettray. Ct. p.294.

L e c t u r eo n t h e e v r l so f a l c o h o h s mI n t h e a u d t t o n u mo f F r e s n e sp r r s o n

9

Steammachrneforthe'celenferous'correcilonofyoungboysandgrrls'Fathers
and Mothers.Unclesand Aunts, GuardtanMastersand Mrstressesof boardrng
, r s o b e d r e n rt ,e b e l h o u sr n s o l e n t .
s c h o o l s a n da l l t h o s e w h o h a v el a z y ,g r e e d y d
q u a r r e l s o m et a, l e - b e a r r n gc,h a t t e r r n gr,r r e h g r o ucsh r l d r e no, r c h r l d r e nh a v r n ga n y
other defect,are herebyrnformedthat Mr Bogeymanand Mrs Bncabrachave,ust set
up n evetymane of the clty of Parrsa machrnesrmrlarto the one representedIn thts
e n g r a v r n ga n d a r er e a d yt o a c c e p ta l l n a u g h t yc h r l d r e nr n n e e do f c o r r e c l r o nr n
t h e r fe s t a b h s h r n e n t s e a cdha y ,f r o m m r d d a y t ot w o o ' c l o c k M r W e r e w o l f ,C o a l m a n
- u n g e ra n d M r s W r l d c a t .S p r t e t u S
S c a r e c r o wE
, a t - w r t h o u tH
l l a ga n d D n n k - w t t h o u t T h r r s tf,r r e n d sa n d r e l a t r o n o
s f M r E o g e y m a na n d M r s B r r c a b r a cw, r l l ,f o r a s m a l ls u m ,
s e t u p s l m r l a rm a c h r n e st o b e s e n tI n t o p r o v r n c r at lo w n s a n d w t l l t h e m s e l v e s u p e r v t s e
t h e r ro p e r a t l o nT h e c h e a p n e s so f c o r r e c t r o ng r v e nb y t h e s t e a mm a c h r n ea n d t h e
surpnsrngeffectsthat rt produceswrll persuadeparenlsto avarlthemselvesof rt as
o f t e n a st h e b a d b e h a v r o uor f t h e r rc h r l d r e nw r l l r e q u r r er t W e a l s ot a k er n c o r r r g r b l e
'
chrldrenas boarders, they arefed on breadand water Engravtngof the late
N. D P . ) .
e r g h t e e n t hc e n l u r y( C o l l e c t r o n s h r s t o n q u e s d e l ' l .R

10

N Andry,L' otthopddrcou I'art de prdvenr et de conger dans
lesenfants Iesdrfformft6s du corps (Onhopaedtcs or the art
of preventrngand correctrngdeformrtresof the body rn
chrldren).1749.

z. The meansof correct training

At the beginning of the seventeenthcentury, Walhausen spoke of
'strict
discipline' as an art of correct training. The chief function of
the disciplinary power is ro 'ffain', rather than to selectand to levy;
or, no doubt, to train in order to levy and selectall the more. It does
not link forcestogether in order to reducethem; it seeksto bind them
together in such a way as to multiply and use them. Instead of bending all its subjects into a single uniform mass,it separates,analyses,
differentiates,carriesits proceduresof decomposition to the point of
necessary
and sufficientsingleunits. It'trains'the moving, confused,
uselessmultitudesof bodiesand forcesinto a multipliciry of individual elements -- small, separatecells, organic autonomies, genetic
identities and continuities, combinatory segments. Discipline
'makes'
individuals; it is the specific technique of a power that
regardsindividuals both as objectsand as instruments of its exercise.
It is not a triumphant power, which becauseof its own excesscan
pride itself on its omnipotence; it is a modest, suspicious power,
which functions as a calculated, but permanent economy. These
are humble modalities, minor procedures, as compared with the
majestic rituals of sovereignty or the great apparatusesof the state.
And it is precisely they that were gradually to invade the maior
forms, altering their mechanismsand imposing their procedures.The
legal apparatuswas not to escapethis scarcely secretinvasion. The
successof disciplinarypower derivesno doubt from the use of simple
instrumentsl hierarchical observation, normalizing judgement and
theircombinationin a procedurethat is specificto itrtheexamination.
Hierarchical obseryation
The exerciseof discipline presupposesa mechanismthat coercesby
means of observation; an apparatus in which the techniques that
t70

The means of correct training
make it possible to see induce effects of power, and in which,
conversely, the means of coercion make those on whom they are
applied clearly visible. Slowly, in the course of the classicalage, we
'observatories' of human multiplicity
see the construction of those
for which the history of the scienceshas so litde good to say. Side
by side with the maior technology of the telescope,the lens and the
light beam, which were an integral part of the new physics and cosmology, there were the minor techniquesof multiple and intersecting observations, of eyes that must see without being seen; using
techniques of subjection and methods of exploitation, an obscure
art of light and the visible was secretly preparing a new knowledge
of man.
'observatories' had
an almost ideal model: the military
These
the
short-lived,
artificial
city, built and reshapedalmost at
camp
the
power
that
must
will;
seat of a
be all the stronger, but also all
more
more
the
discreet, all the
effective and on the alert in that it is
In
the perfect camp, all power would be
exercisedover armed men.
exercisedsolely through exact observationl each gazewould form a
part of the overall functioning of power. The old, traditional square
plan was considerably refined in innumerable new projects. The
geometry of the paths, the number and distribution of the tents,
the orientation of their entrances,the disposition of 6les and ranks
were exactly defined; the network of gazes that supervised one
'In
the parade ground, five lines are drawn
another was laid down:
up, the first is sixteen feet from the second;the others are eight feet
from one anotherl and the last is eight feet from the arms d6pdts.
The arms ddp6ts are ten feet from the tents of the junior officers,
immediately opposite the first tentpole. A company streetis fifty-one
feet wide. . . All tents are two feet from one another. The tents of
the subalterns are opposite the alleys of their companies.The rear
tentpole is eight feet from the last soldiers' tent and the gate is
opposite the captains' tent. .
The captains' tents are erected
opposite the streetsof their companies.The entranceis opposite the
companiesthemselves.'r The camp is the diagram of a power that
acts by meansof general visibility. For a long time this model of the
camp or at leastits underlying principle was found in urban development, in the construction of working-class housing estates,hospitals,
'nesting' of hierarchized
asylums, prisons, schools: the spatial
17r

Discipline
surveillance.The principle was one of 'embedding' ('encastetnent').
The camp was to the rather shameful art of surveillance what the
dark room was to the great science of optics.
A whole problematic then develops: that of an architecture that
is no longer built simply to be seen (as with the ostentation of
palaces), or to observe the external space (cf, the geometry of fortresses),but to permit an internal, articulated and detailed control to render visible those who are inside it; in more general terms, an
architecture that would operate to transform individuals: to act on
those it shelters, to provide a hold on their conduct, to carry the
effectsof power right to them, to make it possible to know them, to
alter them. Stones can make people docile and knowable. The old
simple schemaof confinement and enclosure - thick walls, a heavy
gate that prevents entering or leaving - began to be replacedby the
calculation of openings, of filled and empry spaces,passagesand
transparencies.In this way the hospital building was gradually
organized as an instrument of medical action: it was to allow a better
observation of patients, and therefore a better calibration of their
treatment; the form of the buildings, by the careful separationof the
patients, was to prevent contagionsl lastly, the ventilation and the
air that circulated around each bed was to prevent the deleterious
vapours from stagnating around the patient, breaking down his
humours and spreading the diseaseby their immediate effects.The
hospital - which wns to be built in the second half of the century
and for which so many plans were drawn up after the H6tel-Dieu
was burnt down for the second time - was no longer simply the
roof under which penury and imminent death took shelter; it was,
in its very materiality, a therapeutic operator.
Similarly, the school building was to be a mechanismfor training.
I-t was as a pedagogicalmachine that PAris-Duverney conceived the
Ecole Militaire, right down to the minute detailsthat he had imposed
on the architect, Gabriel. Train vigorous bodies, the imperative of
health; obtain competent officers, the imperative of qualification;
create obedient soldiers, the imperative of politics; prevent debauchery and homosexuality, the imperative of morality. A fourfold
reason for establishing sealed compartments between individuals,
but also apertures for continuous surveillance. The very building
of the Ecole was to be an apparatusfor observation; the rooms were
172

The means of correct training
distributed along a corridor like a series of small cells; at regular
intervals, an officer's quarterswere situated, so that'every ten pupils
had an officer on each side'; the pupils were confined to their cells
throughout the night; and PAris had insisted that 'a window be
placed on the corridor wall of each room from chest-level to within
one or two feet of the ceiling. Not only is it pleasantto have such
windows, but one would venture to say that it is useful, in several
respects,not to mention the disciplinary reasons that may determine this arrangement' (quoted in Laulan, rr7-r8). In the dining'a
rooms was slighdy raised platform for the tablesof the inspectors
of studies, so that they may see all the tables of the pupils of their
divisions during meals'; latrines had been installed with half-doors,
so that the supervisor on duty could see the head and legs of the
pupils, and also with side walls sufficiently high 'that those inside
cannot see one another'.2 This infinitely scrupulous concern with
surveillance is expressedin the architecture by innumerable petty
mechanisms.These mechanismscan only be seen as unimportant
if one forgets the role of this instrumentation, minor but flawless,
in the progressiveobiectification and the ever more subtle partitioning of individual behaviour. The disciplinary institutions secreted
a machinery of control that functioned like a microscopeof conductl
the fine, analytical divisions that they created formed around men
an appantus of observation, recording and training. How was one
to subdivide the gaze in these observation machinesi How was one
to establisha network of communications between themi How was
one so to arnnge things that a homogeneous, continuous power
would result from their calculated multiplicityi
The perfect disciplinary apparatus would make it possible for a
single gaze to seeeverything constantly. A central point would be
both the source of light illuminating everything, and a locus of
convergencefor everything that must be known: a perfect eye that
nothing would escapeand a centre towards which all gazeswould be
turned. This is what Ledoux had imagined when he built Arc-etSenanslall the buildings were to be arrangedin a circle, opening on
the inside, at the centre of which a high constructionwas to house
the administrative functions of management,the policing functions
of surveillance,the economic functions of control and checking, the
religious functions of encouragingobedienceand work; from here
17,

Discipline
all orders would come, alt activities would be recorded, all ofiences
perceivedand iudged; and this would be done immediately with no
other aid than an exaet geometry. Among all the re:sons for the
prestige that was accorded in the second half of the eighteenth
century, to circular architecture, on!must no doubt include the fact
that it expresseda certain political utopia.
But, the disciplinary gaze did, in fact, need relays. The pyramid
was able to fulfil, more efficiently than the circle, two requiremens:
to be complete enough to form an uninterrupted network - consequently the possibility of multiplying its levels,and ofdistributing
them over the entire surfaceto be supervised;and yet to be discreet
enough not to weigh down with an inert masson the activity to be
disciplined, and not to act as a brake or an obstacle to it; to be
integrated into the disciplinary mechanism as a function that increas!sits possible effects. It had to be broken down into smaller
elements, but in order to increaseits productive function: specify
the surveillance and make it functional.
This was the problem of the great workshops and factories, in
which a new type of surveillance was organized. It was different
from the one practised in the r!gimes of the manufactories,which
had been carried out from the outside by inspectors,entrusted with
the task of applying the regulations; what was now needed was an
intense, continuous supervisionl it ran right through the labour
process;it did not bear - or not only - on production (the nature
and quantiry of raw materials, the type of instruments used, the
dimensions and quality of the products); it also took into account
the activity of the men, their skill, the way they set about their tasks,
their promptness,their zeal,their behaviour. But it was also different
from the domestic supervision of the master present beside his
workers and apprentices;for it was carried out by clerks, supervisors
and foremen. As the machinery of production became larger and
more complex, as the number of workers and the division of labour
increased,supervision becameever more necessaryand more difficult. It becamea special function, which had neverthelessto form
an integral part of the production process, to run parallel to it
throughout its entire length. A specializedpersonnel becameindispensable,constantlypresentand distinct from the workers: 'In the
large factory, everything is regulated by the clock. The workers are
t74

The means of correct training
treated strictly and harshly. The clerks, who are used to Eeating
them with an air of superiority and command, which is really
necessarywith the multitude, treat them with severity or contemPq
hence these workers either cost rhore or leave the factory soon after
'Manufacture'). But, although the
arrival' (EncyclopCdieoarticle on
workers preferred a framework of a guild type to this new r6gime
of surveillance,the employers saw that it was indissociablefrom the
systemof industrial production, private property and profit. At the
'the
objects of
scale of a factory, a great iron-works or a rnine,
expenditure are so multiplied, that the slightest dishonesty on each
object would add up to an immense fraud, which would not only
absorb the profits, but would lead to a loss of capital . . . the slightest
incompetence,if left unnoticed and therefore repeatedeachday, may
prove fatal to the enterprise to the extent ofdestroying it in a very
short time'; hence the fact that only agents, directly dependent on
the owner, and entrusted with this task alone would be able to see
'that
not a sou is spent uselessly,that not a moment of the day is
'to
supervisethe workers, to inspect all the
lost'; their role would be
places of work, to inform the directors of everything that takes
place' (Cournol). Surveillance thus becomes a decisive economic
operator both as an internal part of the production machinery and
'The work of
as a specific mechanism in the disciplinary power.
directing, superintendingand adjusting becomesone of the functions
of capital, from the moment that the labour under the control of
capital, becomes cooperative. Once a function of capital, it requires
specialcharacteristics'(Marx, Capital, vol. r, 3r3).
The same movem!nt was to be found in the reorganization of
elementary teaching: the details of surveillance were specified and
it was integrated into the teaching relationship. The development
of the parish schools, the increasein the number of their pupils, the
absenceof methods for regulating simultaneously the activiry of a
whole class,and the disorder and confusion that followed from this
made it necessaryto work out a system of supervision. In order to
help the teacher, Batencour selectedfrom among the best pupils a
'officers' whole seriesof
intendants, observers,monitors, tutors,
reciters of prayers, writing officers, receivers of ink, almoners and
visitors. The roles thus defined were of two kinds: the first involved
materialtasks(disrributing ink and paper,giving alms to'the poor,
17,

Discipline
reading spiritual texts on feast days, etc.); the secondinvolved sur'observers
veillance: the
must record who left his bench, who was
talking, who did not have his rosary, or Book of Hours, who did not
comport himself properly at mass,who committed an impure act,
'admoniwho indulged in idle talk or was unruly in the street'; the
'who
talk or hum when studying
tors' were placedin chargeof those
their lessonsand those who will not write and who waste their time
'visitors'
in play'; the
called on the families of pupils who had been
'intendants'
absent or who had committed serious offences. The
supervisedall the other officers.Only the'tutors'had a pedagogical
rols their task was to teach the pupils reading, two by two, in low
tones (M.I.D.B., 68-83). A few decadeslater, Demia favoured a
hierarchy of the sametype but almost all the functions of surveillance
were duplicated by a pedagogicalrole: an assistantteachertaught the
holding of the pen, guided the pupil's hand, corrected mistakesand
'marked
at the same time
down trouble-makers'; another assistant
teacher had the same tasks in the reading class;the intendant who
supervised the other officers and was in charge of behaviour in
general also had the task of initiating newcomers into the customs
of the school'; the decurions got the pupils to recite their lessonsand
'marked
down' those who did not know them.8 We have here a
'mutual'
sketch of an institution of the
type in which three procedures are integrated into a single mechanism:rcaching proper, the
acquisition of knowledge by the very practice of the pedagogical
activity and a reciprocal, hierarchized observation. A relation of
surveillance, defined and regulated, is inscribed at the heart of the
practice of teaching, not as an additional or adjacent part, but as a
mechanism that is inherent to it and which increasesits efficiency.
Hierarchized, continuous and functional surveillance may not be
'inventions'
one ofthe great technical
ofthe eighteenthcentury, but
its insidious extensionowed its importance to the mechanismsof
pov/er that it brought with it. By meansof such surveillance,dis'integrated'
ciplinary power became an
system, linked from the
inside to the economy and to the aims of the mechanismin which it
was practised. It was also organized as a multiple, automatic and
anonymous power; for although surveillance rests on individuals,
its functioning is that of a network of relationsfrom top to bottom,
but also to a certain extent from bottom to top and laterally; this
176

The means of correct training
'holds'
network
the whote together and traversesit in its entirety
with effects of power that derive from one another: supervisors,
perpetually supervised. The power in the hierarchized surveillance
of the disciplines is not possessedas a thing, or transferred as a
property; it functions like a piece of machinery. And, although it is
tme that its pyramidal organization gives it a'head', it is the appara'power'and
tus as a whole that produces
distributes individuals in
this permanent and continuous field. This enables the disciplinary
power to be both absolutely indiscreet, since it is everywhere and
always alert, since by its very principle it leavesno zone of shadeand
constantly supervisesthe very individuals who are entrusted with
the task of supervising and absolutely 'discreet', for it functions
permanently and largely in silence. Discipline makes possible the
operation of a relational power that sustains itself by its own
mechanismand which, for the spectacleof public events, substitutes
the uninterrupted play of calcularcdgazes.Thanks to the techniques
'physics'
of surveillance, the
of power, the hold over the body,
operate according to the laws of optics and mechanics,according
to a whole play of spaces,lines, screens,beams,degreesand without
recourse, in principle at least, to excess,force or violence. It is a
'corporal'
power that seems all the less
in that it is more subtly
'physical'.

Normali{ng judgement
r. At the orphanage of the Chevalier Paulet, the sessionsof the
tribunal that met each morning gave rise to a whole ceremonial:
'We found all
the pupils drawn up as if for battle, in perfect alignment, immobility and silence. The major, a young gentleman of
sixteen years, stood outside the ranks, sword in hand; at his command, the troop broke ranks at the double and formed a circle. The
council met in the centrel each officer made a report of his troop
for the preceding twenty-four hours. The accusedwere allowed to
defend themselvesl witnesses were heard; the council deliberated
and, when agreementwas reached,the major announcedthe number
of guilty, the nature of the offencesand the punishments ordered.
The troop then marched off in the greatest order' (Pictet). At the
heart of all disciplinary systemsfuncrions a small penal mechanism.

r77

Discipline
It enjoys a kind of judicial privilege with its own laws, its specific
offences,its particular forms of judgement. The disciplines established an 'infra-penality'; they partitioned an area that the laws had
left empty; they defined and represseda massof behaviour that the
relative indifferenceof the great systemsof punishment had allowed
to escape.'On entering, the companionswill greet one another . . .
on leaving, they must lock up the materialsand tools that they have
been using and also make sure that their lamps are extinguished';
'it
is expresslyforbidden to amusecompanionsby gesturesor in any
other way'; they must 'comport themselveshonestly and decently';
anyone who is absent for more than five minutes without warning
M. Oppenheim will be 'marked down for a half-day'; and in order
to be sure that nothing is forgotten in this meticulous criminal
iustice,it is forbidden to do'anything that may harm M. Oppenheim
and his companions'(Oppenheim, z9 Septemberr8o9). The workshop, the school, the army were subject to a whole micro-penality
of time (latenesses,absences,interruptions of tasks), of activiry
(inattention, negligence,lack of zeal), of behaviour (impoliteness,
disobedience),of speech (idle chatter, insolence), of the body
('incorrect' attitudes, irregular gestures, lack of cleanliness),of
sexuality(impurity, indecency).At the sametime, by way of punishment, a whole series of subtle procedureswas used, from light
physical punishmentto minor deprivationsand petty humiliations.
It was a questionboth of making the slightestdeparruresfrom correct behaviour subject to punishment, and of giving a punitive
function to the apparently indifierent elementsof the disciplinary
apparatus:so that, if necessary,everything might serve to punish
the slightestthing; eachsubjectfind himself caught in a punishable,
punishing universality.'By the word punishmenr,one must understand everything that is capableof making children feel the offence
they havecommitted,everything that is capableof humiliating them,
of confusing them: . . . a certain coldness,a certain indifference,a
question, a humiliation, a removal from office' (La Salle, Conduite
' '', 204-5)'
z. But disciplinebrought with it a specificway of punishing that
was not only a small-scalemodel of the court. What is specificto
the disciplinary penality is non-observance,that which does not
measureup to the rule, that departs from it. The whole indefinite
r78

The means of correct training
domain of the non-conforming is punishable: the soldier commits
an 'offence' whenever he does not reach the level required; a pupil's
'offence'
is not only a minor infraction, but also an inability to carry
out his tasks.The regulations for the Prussianinfantry ordered that
a soldier who had not correctly learnt to handle his rifle should be
treated with the 'greatest severity'. Similarly, 'when a pupil has not
retained the catechismfrom the previous day, he must be forced to
learn it, without making any mistake, and repeat it the following
day; either he will be forced to hear it standing or kneeling, his
hands joined, or he will be given some other penance'.
'fhe
order that the disciplinary punishments must enforce is of a
'artificial'
mixed nature: it is an
order, explicitly laid down by a law,
a programme, a set of regulations. But it is also an order defined by
natural and observableprocesses:the duration ofan apprenticeship,
the time taken to perform an exercise,the level of aptitude refer to
a regularity that is also a rule. The children of the Christian Schools
'lesson'
must never be placed in a
of which they are not yet capable,
for this would expose them to the danger of being unable to learn
anything; yet the duration ofeach stage is fixed by regulation and a
pupil who at the end of three examinationshas been unable to pass
into the higher order must be placed,well in evidence,on the bench
of the 'ignorant'. In a disciplinary r6gime punishment involves a
double juridico-natural reference.
3. Disciplinary punishment has the function of reducing gaps.
It must therefore be essentially correctiye.In addition to punish-,
ments borrowed directly from the judicial model (fines, flogging,
solitary confinement), the disciplinary systemsfavour punishments
that are exercise- intensified, multiplied forms of training, several
times repeated: the regulations of ry66 for the infantry laid down
that lance-corporals'who show some negligenceor lack of willingness will be reduced to the rank of private', and they will be able
to rise to their former rank only after new exercisesand a new
examination. As Jean-Baptistede La Salle put it: 'Of all penances,
impositions are the most honest for a teacher,the most advantageous
for the parents'; they make it possible to 'derive, from the very
offences of the children, means of advancing their progress by
correcting their defects';to those,for example,'who have not written
all that they were supposed to write or who have not applied

r7g

Discipline
themselvesto doing it well, one can give some impositions to write
out or to learn by heart' (La Salle, Conduite. . ., 2oi). Disciplinary
punishmentis, in the main, isomorphic with obligation itself; it is
not so much the vengeanceof an outraged law as its repetition, its
reduplicated insistence.So much so that the corrective effect expected of it involves only incidentally expiation and repentance;it is
obtained directly through the mechanics of a training. To punish
is to exercise
4. In discipline, punishment is only one element of a double
system:gratification-punishment. And it is this system that operates
'must
in the processof training and correction. The teacher
avoid,
as far as possible, the use of punishment; on the contrary, he must
endeavour to make rewards more frequent than penalties, the lazy
being more encouraged by the desire to be rewarded in the same
way as the diligent than by the fear of punishment; that is why it
will be very beneficial, when the teacher is obliged to use punishment, to win the heart of the child if he can before doing so' (Demia,
r7). This mechanism with two elements makes possible a number
of operations characteristic of disciplinary penality. First, the
definition of behaviour and performance on the basis of the two
opposed values of good and evil; instead of the simple division of
the prohibition, as practised in penal iustice, we have a distribution between a positive pole and a negative pole; all behaviour falls
in the field between good and bad marks, good and bad points.
Moreover, it is possible to quantify this field and work out an
arithmetical economy basedon it. A penal accountancy, consantly
brought up to date,'makesit possibleto obtain the punitive balance'justice',
sheetof eachindividual. School
rudimentsof which are to
be found in the army and the workshops, carried this system very
far. The Brothers of the Christian Schoolsorganized a whole micro'Privileges
economy of privileges and impositions:
may be used by
pupils to gain exemption from penanceswhich have been imposed
on them. . . For example, a pupil may have been given four or six
catechismquestions to copy out as an imposition; he will be able to
gain exemption from this penanceby accumulating a certain number
of privilege points; the teacher will assign the number for each
question. . . Since privileges are worth a certain number of points,
the teacheralso has others of lessvalue, which serveas small change
r8o

The means of correct taining
for the first. For example, a child has an imposition from which he
can redeem himself with six points; he earns a privilege of ten;
he presentsit to the teacherwho gives him back four points, and so
on' (La Salle,Conduite. . ., r y6ff). What we have here is a transposition of the systemof indulgences.And by the play of this guantification, this circulation of awards and debits, thanks to the continuous
calculation of plus and minus points, the disciplinary aPParatuses
'good' and the 'bad' subjects in relation .to one
hierarchized the
another. Through this micro-ecohomy of a perpetual penality
operatesa differentiation that is not one of acts, but of individuals
themselves,of their nature, their potentialities, their level or their
value. By assessingacts with precision, discipline iudges individuals
'in
truth'; the penaliry that it implements is integrated into the cycle
of knowledge of individuals.
5. The distribution according to ranks or grade hasa double role:
it marks the gaps, hierarchizesqualities, skills and aptitudes; but it
also punishesand rewards. It is the penal functioning of setting in
order and the ordinal character of judging. Discipline rewards
simply by the play of awards, thus making it possible to attain
higher ranks and places;itpunishes by reversing this process.Rank
inltself servesas a reward or punishment. At the Ecole Militaire, a
'honorary' classification was developed; this
complex system of
classification was visible to all in the form of slight variations in
uniform and more or less noble or ignoble punishments were
associated,as a mark of privilege or infamy, with the ranks thus
distributed. This classificatory, penal distribution was carried out
at short intervals by the reports that the officers, teachersand their
'the
assistantsmade, without consideration of age or grade, on
'their
universally recognized
moral qualities of the pupils' and on
'very good', were disclass,
known
as
the
The
first
behaviour'.
tinguished by a silver epaulette; they enjoyed the honour of being
'purely
military troops'; they therefore had a right to
treated as
military punishment (arrests and, in serious cases,imprisonment).
The secondclass,'the good', wore an epauletteof red silk and silver;
they could be arrestedand condemnedto prison, but also to the cage
'mCdiocres',
had the right to an epaulette
and to kneeling. The classof
penalties
was
added, if necessary,the
of red wool; to the preceding
was markedby
last
class,
that
of
the'bad'i
wearingof sackcloth.The

r8r

Discipline
an epauletteof brown woo!'the pupils of this classwill be subjected
to all the punishmentsused in the H6tel or all those that are thought
necessary,even solitary confinement in a dark dungeon'. To this
'shameful'
was added, for a time, the
class,for which specialregula'so
tions were drawn up
that those who belonged to it would always
be separatedfrom the others and would be dressedin sackcloth'.
Since merit and behaviour alone must decide the place of the pupil,
'those
of the last two classeswould be able to flatter themselvesthat
they would be able to rise to the first two and bear its marks, when,
by universal agreement, they will be recognized as having made
themselvesworthy of it by the changein their conduct and by their
progress; and those of the top classeswill Similarly descendinto the
others ifthey becomeslack and ifthe various reports taken together
are to their disadvantageand show that they no longer deservethe
rewards and prerogatives of the higher classes. .' The penal
'shameful'
classificationshould tend to disappear.The
classexisted
'In
only to disappear:
order to judge the kind of conversion
undergone by pupils of the shameful class who behave well', they
were reintroduced into the other classes,and given back their
uniformq but they would remain with their comrades in infamy
during mealsand recreation;they would remain there if they did not
'would leave
continue to behave well; they
it absolutely, if their
conduct was considered satisfactory both in this class and in this
division' (Archivesnationales,MM 6y8, 3o March r7y8 and MM 666,
r; September ry63). This hierarchizing penality had, therefore, a
double effect: it distributed pupils according to their aptitudes and
their conduct, that is, according to the use that could be made of
them when they left the school; it exercisedover them a constant
pressure to conform to the same model, so thar they might all be
'subordination,
subjected to
docility, attention in studies and
exercises,and to the correct practice of duties and all the parts of
discipline'. So that they might all be like one another.
In short, the art of punishing,in the r6gimeof disciplinarypower,
is aimed neither at expiation, nor even precisely at repression.It
brings five quite distinct operations into play: it refers individual
actions to a whole that is at once a field of comparison, a spaceof
differentiation and the principle of a rule to be followed. It differentiatesindividuals from one another, in terms of the following overall
r8z

The meansof correct training
rule: that the rule be made to function as a minimal threshold, as
an average to be respected or as an optimum towards which one
must move. ft measuresin quantitative terms and hierarchizesin
terms of value the abilities, the level, the 'nature' of individuals. It
introduces, through this'value-giving' measure, the constraint of
a conformity that must be achieved. Lastly, it traces the limit
that will define difference in relation to all other differences, the
external frontier of the abnormal (the 'shameful'class of the Ecole
Militaire). The perpetual penality that traverses all points and
supervisesevery instant in the disciplinary institutions compares,
differentiates, hierarchizes, homogenizes, excludes. In short, it
normalQes.
It is opposed, therefore, term by term, to a judicial penality
whose essential function is to refer, not to a set of observable
phenomena,but to a corpus of laws and texts that must be remembered; that operates not by difierentiating individuals, but by
spccifying acts according to a number of general categorieslnot by
hierarchizing, but quite simply by bringing into play the binary
opposition of the permitted and the forbidden; not by homogenizing, but by operating the division, acquired once and for all, of
condemnation. The disciplinary mechanismssecreteda'penaliry of
the norm', which is irreducible in its principles and functioning to
the traditional penality of the law. The minor court that seemsto sit
permanently in the buildings of discipline, and which somedmes
assumesthe theatrical form of the great legal apparatus, must not
mislead us: it does not bring, except for a few formal remnants, the
mechanismsof criminal justice to the web of everyday existencelor
at least that is not its essentialrole; the disciplines created- drawing
on a whole series of very ancient procedures - a new functioning
of punishment, and it was this that gradually invested the great
external apparatusthat it seemedto reproduce in either a modest or
an ironic way. The juridico-anthropological functioning revealedin
the whole history of modern penality did not originate in the superimposition of the human scienceson criminal iustice and in the
reguirementsproper to this new rationality or to the humanism that
it appearedto bring with it; it originated in the disciplinary technique that operated these new mechanisms of normalizing
iudgement.

r83

Discipline
The power of the Norm appearsthrough the disciplines. Is this
the new law of modern societyi Let us say rather that, since the
eighteenth cennrry, it has joined other powers - the Law, the Word
(Parol) and the Text, Tradition - imposing new delimitations upon
them. The Normal is establishedas a principle of coercion in teaching with the introduction of a standardized education and the
establishmentof the Ccolesnormales(teachers'training colleges); it
is establishedin the effort to organize a national medical profession
and a hospital system capableofoperating general norms ofhealth;
it is establishedin the standardization of industrial processesand
products (on this topic, one should refer to the important contribution of Canguilhem, ryty).
Like surveillanceand with it, normalization becomesone of the great instruments of power at the end of
the classicalage. For the marks that once indicated status, privilege
and affiliation were increasingly replaced- or at leastsupplemented
- by whole range of degreesof normality indicating membership
"
of a homogeneoussocial body but also playing a part in classification, hierarchization and the distribution of rank. In a sense,the
power of normalization imposes homogeneity; but it individualizes
by making it possible to measuregaps, to determine levels, to fix
specialitiesand to render the differencesuseful by fining them one
to another. It is easy to understand how the power of the norm
functions within a system of formal equality, since within a homogeneity that is the rule, the norm introduces, as a useful imperative
and as a result of measurement, all the shading of individual
differences.
The examination
The examinationcombines the techniquesof an observing hierarchy
and those of a normalizing judgement. It is a normalizing gaze,a
surveillance that makes it possible to qualify, to classify and to
punish. It establishesover individuals a visibility through which
one differentiates them and judges them. That is why, in all the
mechanismsof discipline, rhe examination is highly ritualized. In it
are combined the ceremony of power and the form of the experiment, the deployment of force and the establishmentof truth. At the
heart of the procedures of discipline, it manifests the subjection of
I84

The means of correct training
those who are perceived as objects and the objectification of those
who are subjected.The superimposition of the power relations and
knowledge relations assumes in the examination all its visible
brilliance. It is yet another innovation of the classicalage that the
historians of sciencehave left unexplored. People write the history
of experiments on those born blind, on wolGchildren or under
hypnosis. But who will write the more general, more fluid, but also
'examination' - its riruals, its
more determinant history of the
methods, its characters and their roles, its play of questions and
answers, its systems of marking and classificationi For in this
slender technique are to be found a whole domain of knowledge, a
whole type of power. One often speaks of the ideology that the
'sciences'
human
bring with them, in either discreetor prolix manner.
But does their very technology, this tiny operational schema that
has become so widespread (from psychiatry to pedagogy, from the
diagnosis of diseasesto the hiring of labour), this familiar method
of the examination, implement, within a single mechanism, power
relations that make it possible to extract and constitute knowledgei
It is not simply at the level of consciousness,of representationsand
in what one thinks one knows, but at the level of what makespossible
the knowledge that is transformed into political investment.
'thaw' of
One of the essentialconditions for the epistemological
medicine at the end of the eighteenth century was the organization
'examining'
of the hospital as an
apparatus.The ritual of the visit
was its most obvious form. In the seventeenthcentury, the physician, coming from the outside, added his inspection to many other
controls - religious, administrative, etc.; he hardly participated in
the everyday administration of the hospital. Gradually, the visit
became more regular, more rigorous, above all more extended: it
became an ever more important part of the functioning of the
hospital. In 166r, the physician of the H6tel-Dieu of Paris was
called upon to make a daily visit; in t687, an 'expectant' physician
v/as to examine, in the afternoon, certain seriously sick patients.
The eighteenth-century regulations laid down the hours of the visit
and its duration (at least two hours); they insisted on a rotation of
'even
physicians,which would guaranteevisits every day
on Easter
Sunday'; at last, in r77r, a resident physician was appointed, charged
'providing
with
all the servicesof his state, at night as well as in the

r8t

Discipline
day, in the intervals betweenvisits by an outside physician' (Registre
desdiliberations du bureau de l'H6tel-Diea). The old form of inspection, irregular and rapid, was ransformed into a regular observation
that placed the patient in a situation of almost perpetual examination. This had two consequences:in the internal hierarchy, the
physician, hitherto an external element, begins to gain over the
religious staff and to relegate them to a clearly specified,but subordinate role in the technique of the examinationl the category of the
'nurse'
then appears;while the hospital itself, which was once litde
more than a poorhouse, was to become a place of training and of
the correlation ofknowledge; it representeda reversal therefore of
the power relationsand the constitution of a corpus of knowledge.
'well-disciplined'
The
hospital becamethe physical counterpart of
'discipline';
the medical
this disciplinecould now abandonits textual
character and take its referencesnot so much from the tradition of
author-authorities as from a domain of objects perpetually offered
for examination.
Similarly, the school becamea sort of apparatusof uninterrupted
examination that duplicated along its entire length the operation of
teaching.It becamelessand lessa questionof joustsin which pupils
pitched their forces againstone another and increasingly a perpetual
comparison of eachand all that made it possibleboth to measureand
to judge. The Brothersof the Christian Schoolswanted their pupils
to be examinedevery day of.the week: on the first for spelling, on
the secondfor arithmetic, on the third for catechismin the morning
and for handwriting in the afternoon, etc. Moreover, there was to be
an examinationeachmonth in order to pick out thosewho deserved
to be submitted for examination by the inspector (La Salle, Coaduhe ..., 16o). Frcm ry71, there existedat the Ecole des Ponts et
Chaussdessixteen examinations a year: three in mathematics,three
in architecture, three in drawing, two in writing, one in stonecutting, one in style, one in surveying, one in levelling, one in
quantity surveying. The examination did not simply mark the end of
an apprenticeship;it was one of its permanent factors; it was woven
into it through a constantly repeatedritual of power. The examination enabled the teacher, while transmitting his knowledge, to
transfornr his pupils into a whole 6eld of knowledge. Whereas the
examination with which an apprenticeship ended in the guild
r86

The meansof correct training
'master-work'
tradition validated an acquired aptitude - the
authenticated a transmission of knowledge that had already been
accomplished - the examination in the school was a constant
exchangerof knowledgel it guaranteedthe movement of knowledge
from the teacher to the pupil, but it extacted from the pupil a
knowledge destinedand reservedfor the teacher.The school became
the place of elaboration for pedagogy. And just as the procedure of
the hospitalexaminationmadepossiblethe epistemological'thaw'of
'examining'
medicine, the age of the
school marked the beginnings
ofa pedagogy that functions as a science.The age ofinspections and
endlesslyrepeatedmovements in the army also marked the development of an immense tactical knowledge that had its effect in the
period of the Napoleonic wars.
The examination introduced a whole mechanism that linked to a
certain type of the formation of knowledge a certain form of the
exerciseof power.
r. The examination transformed the economyof visibility into the
exerciseof power. Traditionally, power was what was seen,what was
shown and what was manifested and, paradoxically, found the
principle of its force in the movement by which it deployed that
force. Those on whom it was exercisedcould remain in the shade;
they received light only from that portion of power that was
concededto them, or from the reflection of it that for a moment they
carried. Disciplinary power, on the other hand, is exercisedthrough
its invisibility; at the sametime it imposeson those whom it subjects
a principle of compulsory visibility. In discipline,it is the subjects
who have to be seen.Their visibility assuresthe hold of the power
that is exercised over them. It is the fact of being constantly seen,
of being able always to be seen, that maintains the disciplined
individual in his subjection. And the examination is the technique
by which power, insteadof emitting the signs of its potency, ingtead
of imposing its mark on its subjects,holds them in a mechanismof
objectification. In this space of domination, disciplinary power
manifests its potency, essentially, by arranging objects. The
examination isr as it were, the ceremony of this objectification.
Hitherto the role of the political ceremony had been to give rise
to the excessive,yet regulated manifestation of power; it was a
spectacularexpressionof potency,an'expenditure',exaggeratedand

r87

Discipline
coded, in which power renewed its vigour. It was always more or
lessrelated to the triumph. The solemn appearanceof the sovereign
brought with it something of the consecration,the coronation, the
return from victory; even the funeral ceremony took place with all
the spectacleof power deployed. Discipline, however, had its own
rype of ceremony. It was not the triumph, but the review, the
'parade',
an ostentatiousform of the examination. In it the 'subjects'
were presentedas 'objects' to the observation of a power that was
manifestedonly by its gaze.They did not receive directly the image
of the sovereign power; they only felt its effects - in replica, as it
were - on their bodies, which had become precisely legible and
docile. On r; March 1666,Louis XIV took his first military review:
I8rooo men, 'one of the most spectacularactions of the reign', which
was supposed to have 'kept all Europe in disquiet'. Several years
later, a medal was struck to commemor:rte the event (cf. Jucquiot,
'Disciplina
militaris restitua' and the
to-t4). It bears the exergue,
'Prolusio
legend
ad victorias'. On the right, the king, right foot
forward, commands the exercise itself with a stick. On the left,
several ranks of soldiers are shown full face and aligned in depth;
they have raised their right arms to shoulder height and are holding
their rifles exactly vertical, their right legs are slightly forward and
their left feet turned outwards. On the ground, lines intersect at
right angles, to form, beneath the soldiers' feet, broad rectangles
that serve as referencesfor different phases and positions of the
exercise.In the background is a piece of classicalarchitecture. The
columns of the palaceextend those formed by the ranks of men and
the erect rifles, just as the paving no doubt extends the lines of the
exercise. But above the balustrade that crowns the building are
statues representing dancing 6gures: sinuous lines, rounded gestures, draperies. The marble is covered with movements whose
principle of unity is harmonic. The men, on the other hand, are
frozen into a uniformly repeated attitude of ranks and lines: a
tactical unity. The order of the architecture, which frees at its summit the figures of the dance,imposesits rules and its geometry on the
disciplined men on the ground. The columns of power. 'Very good',
Grand Duke Mikhail once remarked of a regiment, after having
kept it for one hour presenting arms, 'only theybrea*a' (Kropotkin,
8; I owe this referenceto G. Canguilhem).
r88

The means of correct training
Let us take this medal as evidence of the moment when, paradoxically but significantly, the most brilliant figure of sovereign
power is joined to the emergenceof the rituals proper to disciplinary
power. The scarcely sustainablevisibility of the monarch is turned
into the unavoidablevisibility of the subjects.And it is this inversion
of visibility in the functioning of the disciplinesthat was to assurethe
exerciseof power even in its lowest manifestations.We are entering
the ageof the infinite examination and of compulsory objectification.
z. The examiaatioa ako introdtues inditi&nlity into the $eld of
documentationThe examination leavesbehind it a whole meticulous
archive constituted in terms of bodies and days. The examination
that placesindividuals in a field ofsurveillance also situatesthem in
a network of writing; it engagesthem in a whole massof documents
that capture and fix them. The procedures of examination were
accompaniedat the same time by a system of intense registration
'power of writing' was conand of documentary accumulation. A
stituted asan essentialpart in the mechanismsof discipline. On many
points, it was modelled on the traditional methods of administrative
documentation, though with particular techniques and important
innovations. Some concernedmethods of identification,signalling
or description. This was the problem in the army, where it was
necessaryto track down deserters, avoid repeating enrolments,
correct fictitious 'information' presented by officers, know the services and value of each individual, establish with certainty
the balance-sheetof those who had disappearedor died. It was the
problem of the hospitals, where it was necessary to recognize
the patients,expel shammers,follow the evolution of diseases,study
the effectivenessof treatments,map similar casesand the beginnings
of epidemics. It was the problem of the teaching establishments,
where one had to define the aptitude of each individual, situate his
level and his abilities, indicate the possible use that might be made
of them: 'The register enablesone, by being available in time and
place, to know the habits of the children, their progress in piety,
in catechism, in the letters, during the time'they have been at the
School' (M.I.D.B., C4).
Hence the formation of a whole series of codes of disciplinary
individuality that made it possible to transcribe, by meansof homogenization the individual features established by the examination:

r89

Discipline
the physical code of signalling, the medical code of symproms, the
educational or military code of conduct or performance. These
codes were still very crude, both in quality and quantity, but they
'formalization'
marked a first stage in the
of the individual within
power relations.
The other innovations of disciplinary writing concerned the
correlation of theseelements,the accumulation of documents, their
seriation, the organization of comparative fields making it possible
to classify, to form categories,to determine averages,to 6x norms.
The hospitals of the eighteenth century, in particular, were great
laboratories for scriptuary and documentary methods. The keeping
of registers,their specification,the modes of transcription from one
to the other, their circulation during visits, their comparisonduring
regular meetings of doctors and administrators, the transmission of
their data to centralizing bodies (either at the hospital or at the
central office ofthe poorhouses),the accountancyofdiseases,cures,
deaths,at the level ofa hospital,a town and even ofthe nation as a
whole formed an integral part of the process by which hospitals
were subjected to the disciplinary r!gime. Among the fundamental
'discipline',
conditionsof a good medical
in both sensesof the word,
one must include the proceduresof writing that madeit possibleto
integrateindividual datainto cumulativesystemsin such a way that
they were not lost; so to arrangethings that an individual could be
located in the general register and that, conversely, each datum of
the individual examinationmight affect overall calculations.
Thanks to the whole apparatusof writing that accompaniedit, the
examination opened up tv/o correlative possibilities: firstly, the
constitution of the individual as a describable,analysableobject, not
in order to reduce him to 'specific' fearures,as did the naturalists in
relation to living beings,but in order to maintain him in his individual features,in his particular evolution, in his own aptitudes or
abilities, under the gazeof a permanent corpus of knowledgel and,
secondly, the constitution of a compantive system that made
possible the measurementof overall phenomena,the description of
groups, the characterizationof collective facts, the calculation of the
gaps between individuals, their distribution in a given 'population'.
These small techniquesof notation, of registration, of constituting
6les, of arranging facts in columns and tables that are so familiar
r90

The means of correct training
to us now, were of decisiveimportance in the epistemological'thaw'
of the sciencesof the individual. One is no doubt right to pose the
Aristotelean problem: is a science of the individual possible and
legitimatel A great problem needs great solutions perhaps. But
there is the small historical problem of the emergence, towards the
end of the eighteenth century, of what might generally be termed
the'clinical'sciencesl the problem of the entry of the individual (and
no longer the species)into the field of knowledge; the problem of
the entry of the individual description, of the cross-examination,of
'file'
anamnesis,of the
into the general functioning of scientific discourse. To this simple question of fact, one must no doubt give an
'nobility':
answer lacking in
one should look into these procedures
of writing and registration, one should look into the mechanismsof
examination,into the formation of the mechanismsof discipline, and
of a new type of power over bodies. Is this the birth of the sciences
of manl It is probably to be found in these'ignoble' archives,where
the modern play of coercion over bodies, gesturesand behaviour
has its beginnings.
3. The exatnination, sunounded by all its documentary techniques,
makeseachindividual a'case': a casewhich at one and the sametime
constitutes an object for a branch of knowledge and a hold for a
branch of power. The case is no longer, as in casuistry or jurisprudence, a set of circumstancesdefining an act and capable of
modifying the application of a rulel it is the individual as he may be
described, judged, measured, compared with others, in his very
individuality; and it is also the individual who has to be trained or
corrected, classified,normalized, excluded, etc.
For a long time ordinary individuality - the everyday individuality of everybody - remained below the threshold of description.
To be looked at, observed, described in detail, followed from day
to day by an uninterrupted writing was a privilege. The chronicle of
a man, the account of his life, his historiography, written as he lived
out his life formed part of the rituals of his power. The disciplinary
methods reversedthis relation, lowered the threshold of describable
individuality and made of this description a meansof control and a
method of domination. It is no longer a monument for future
memory, but a document for possible use. And this new describability is all the more marked in that the disciplinary framework is

r9r

Discipline
a strict one: the child, the patient, the madman, the prisoner, were
to become,with increasing easefrom the eighteenth century and
according to a curve which is that of the mechanismsof discipline,
the object of individual descriptions and biographical accounts.
This turning of real lives into writing is no longer a procedure of
heroization; it functions as a procedure of objectification and subiection. The carefully collated life of mental patients or delinguents
belongs, as did the chronicle ofkings or the adventuresofthe great
popular bandits, to a certain political function of writing; but in a
quite different technique of power.
'scientific',
The examination as the fixing, at once ritual and
of
individual differences,as the pinning down of eachindividual in his
own particularity (in contrast with the ceremony in which status,
birth, privilege, function are manifested with all the spectacleof
their marks) clearly indicates the appearanceof a new modality of
power in which eachindividual receivesas his statushis own individuality, and in which he is linked by his status to the features,the
'marks'
measurements,the gaps, the
that characterizehim and make
him a'case'.
Finally, the examination is at the centre of the procedures that
constitute the individual as effect and obiect ofpower, as effect and
obiect of knowledge. It is the examination which, by combining
hierarchical surveillance and normalizing judgement, assures the
great disciplinary functions of distribution and classification,maximum extraction of forces and time, continuous genetic accumulation, optimum combination of aptitudesand, thereby, the fabrication
of cellular, organic, genetic and combinatory individuality. With it
are ritualized those disciplines that may be characterizedin a word
by saying that they are a modality of power for which individual
difference is relevant.
The disciplinesmark the moment when the reversalof the political
axis of individualization - as one might call it - takes place. In
certain societies,of which the feudal rdgime is only one example,
it may be said that individualization is greatest where sovereignty
is exercisedand in the higher echelons of power. The more one
possessespower or privilege, the more one is marked as an individual, by rituals, written accountsor visual reproductions. The'name'
r92

The means of correct training
and the genealogy that situate one within a kinship group, the
performance of deedsthat demonstratesuperior strength and which
are immortalized in literary accounts, the ceremonies that mark the
power relations in their very ordering, the monuments or donations
that bring survival after death, the ostentation and excessofexpenditure, the multiple, intersecting links of allegiance and suzerainty,
all these are procedures of an 'ascending' individualization. In a
'descenddisciplinary regime, on the other hand, individualization is
ing': as power becomes more anonymous and more functional,
those on whom it is exercisedtend to be more strongly individualized; it is exercisedby surveillancerather than ceremonies,by observation rather than commemorative accounts, by comparative
'norm'
measuresthat have the
as referencerather than genealogies
giving ancestors as points of reference; by 'gaps' rather than by
deeds. In a system of discipline, the child is more individualized
than the adult, the patient more than the healthy man, the madman
and the delinquent more than the normal and the non-delinquent.
In each case,it is towards the first of thesepairs that all the individualizing mechanismsare turned in our civilization; and when one
wishes to individualize the healthy, normal and law-abiding adult,
it is always by asking him how much of the child he has in him,
what secret madness lies within him, what fundamental crime he
has dreamt of committing. All the sciences,analysesor practices
'psycho-'
employing the root
have their origin in this historical
reversal of the procedures of individualization. The momenr that
saw the transition from historico-ritual mechanismsfor the formation of individuality to the scientifico-disciplinary mechanisms,
when the normal took over from the ancestral, and measurement
from status,thus substituting for the individuality of the memorable
man that of the calculable man, that moment when the sciencesof
man became possible is the moment when a new technology of
power and a new political anatomy of the body were implemented.
And if from the early Middle Ages to the presentday the'adventure'
is an account of individuality, the passagefrom the epic to the
novel, from the noble deed to the secret singularity, from long
exiles to the internal search for childhood, from combats to phantasies,it is also inscribed in the formation of a disciplinary society.
The adventureof our childhood no longer 6nds expressionin'le

r93

Discipline
bonpetit Henri', but in the misfortunes of 'little Hans'. The Romance
of the Roscis written today by Mary Barnes;in the place of Lancelot,
we have Judge Schreber.
It is often said that the model of a society that has individuals
as its constituent elements is borrowed from the abstract iuridical
forms of contract and exchange. Mercantile sociery, according to
this view, is represented as a contractual association of isolated
juridical subjects. Perhaps. Indeed, the political theory of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries often seems to follow this
schema.But it should not be forgotten that there existedat the same
period a technique for constituting individuals as correlative elements of power and knowledge. The individual is no doubt the
fictitious atom of an 'ideological' representationof society; but he is
also a reality fabricated by this specific technology of power that I
'discipline'.
have called
We must ceaseonce and for all to describe
'excludes', 'represses',
the effects of power in negative terms: it
it
'censofs', 'abstracb',
'conceals'.
'masks',
it
it
it
it
In fact, power
produces; it produces reality; it produces domains of objects and
rituals of truth. The individual and the knowledge that may be
gained of him belong to this production.
Is it not somewhatexcessiveto derive such power from the petty
machinations of disciplinei How could they achieveeffects of such
scopei

194

3. Panopticism

The following, according to an order published at the end of the
seventeenthcentury, were the measuresto be taken when the plague
appearedin a town.r
First, a strict spatial partitioning: the closing of the town and is
outlying districts, a prohibition to leave the town on pain of death,
the killing of all stray animals; the division of the town into distinct
quarters,eachgoverned by an intendant. Each street is placed under
the authority of a syndic, who keeps it under surveillance; if he
leavesthe street, he will be condemned to death. On the appointed
day, everyone is ordered to stay indoors: it is forbidden to leave
on pain of death. The syndic himself comes to lock the door of
each house from the outside; he takes the key with him and hands
it over to the intendant of the quarter; the intendant keeps it until
the end of the quarantine. Each family will have made its own
provisions; but, for bread and wine, small wooden canalsare set up
between the street and the interior of the houses,thus allowing each
person to receive his ration without communicating with the suppliers and other residents; meat, fish and herbs will be hoisted up
into the houseswith pulleys and baskets.If it is absolutely necessary
to leave the house, it will be done in turn, avoiding any meeting.
Only the intendants, syndics and guards will move ,about the
streets and also, between the infected houses, from one corpse to
another,the'crows', who can be left to die: theseare'peopleof little
substancewho carry the sick, bury the dead, clean and do many vile
and abject ofrces'. It is a segmented,immobile, frozen space.Each
individual is fixed in his place. And, if he moves, he does so at the
risk of his life, contagion or punishment.
'A
Inspection functions ceaselessly.The gazeis alert everywhere:
considerablebody of militia, commanded by good officers and men
t9t

Discipline
of substance', guards at the gates, at the town hall and in every
quarter to ensure the prompt obedienceof the people and the most
absoluteauthority of the magistrates,'as also to observe all disorder,
theft and extortion'. At each of the town gates there will be an
observation posq at the end ofeach street sentinels.Every day, the
intendant visits the quarter in his charge, inquires whether the
syndics have carried out their tasks, whether the inhabitants have
anything to complain of; they 'observe their actions'. Every day,
too, the syndic goes into the street for which he is responsible;
stops before each house: gets all the inhabitants to appear at the
windows (those who live overlooking the courtyard will be allocated a window looking onto the streer at which no one but they
may show themselves); he calls each of them by namel informs
himself as to the state of each and every one of them - 'in which
respect the inhabitants will be compelled to speak the truth under
pain of death'; if someonedoes not appearat the window, the syndic
'In
must ask why:
this way he will find out easily enough whether
dead or sick are being concealed.' Everyone locked up in his
cage,everyone at his window, answering to his name and showing
himself when asked - it is the great review of the living and the
dead.
This surveillanceis basedon a system of permanent registration:
reports from the syndics to the intendants, from the intendants to
the magistratesor mayor. At the beginning of the 'lock up', the role
of each of the inhabitants present in the town is laid down, one by
one; this document bears'the name, age, sex of everyone, notwithstandinghis condition': a copy is sentto the intendantofthe quarter,
another to the office of the town hall, another to enable the syndic
to make his daily roll call. Everything that may be observed during
the courseof the visits - deaths,illnesses,complaints, irregularities is noted down and transmitted to the intendants and magistrates.
The magistrateshave complete control over medical treatment; they
have appointed a physician in charge; no other practitioner may
treat, no apothecary prepare medicine, no confessor visit a sick
person without having received from him a written note 'to prevent
anyone from concealingand dealing with thosesick of the contagion,
unknown to the magistrates'. The registration of the pathological
must be constantlycentralized.The relation of eachindividual to his
r96

Panopticism
diseaseand to his death passesthrough the representativesofpower,
the registration they make of it, the decisions they take on it.
Five or six days after the beginning ofthe quarantine, the process
of purifying the housesone by one is begun. All the inhabitants are
'the
furniture and goods' are raised
made to leave; in each room
from the ground or suspended from the air; perfume is poured
around the rooml after carefully sealing the windows, doors and
even the keyholes with wax, the perfume is set alight. Finally, the
entire house is closed while the perfume is consumedl those who
'in
have carried out the work are searched,as they were on entry,
the presenceof the residents of the house, to see that they did not
have something on their persons as they left that they did not have
on entering'. Four hours later, the residentsare allowed to re-enter
their homes.
This enclosed, segmented space, observed at every point, in
which the individuals are inserted in a fixed place, in which the
slightest movementsare supervised,in which all events are recorded,
in which an unintermpted work of writing links the centre and
periphery, in which power is exercisedwithout division, according
to a continuous hierarchical figure, in which each individual is constantly located, examined and distributed among the living beings,
the sick and the dead - all this constitutes a compact model of the
disciplinary mechanism.The plague is met by order; its function is
to sort out every possible confusion: that of the disease,which is
transmitted when bodies are mixed together; that of the evil, which
is increased when fear and death overcome prohibitions. It lays
down for each individual his place, his body, his diseaseand his
death, his well-being, by means of an omniplesent and omniscient
power that subdivides itself in a regular, uninterrupted way even
to the uldmate determination of the individual, of what characterizes
him, of what belongs to him, of what happensto him. Against the
plague, which is a mixture, discipline brings into play its power,
which is one of analysis.A whole literary fiction of the festival grew
up around the plague suspended laws, lifted prohibitions, the
frenzy of passing time, bodies mingling together without respect,
individuals unmasked, abandoning their statutory identity and the
6gure under which they had been recognized, allowing a quite
different truth to appear. But there was also a political dream of the

r97

Discipline
plague, which was exactly its reverse: not the collective festival,
but strict divisions; not laws transgressed,but the penetration of
regulation into even the smallestdetails of everyday life through the
mediation of the complerc hierarchy that assuredthe capillary functioning of power; not masksthat were put on and taken off, but the
assignmentto each individual of his 'true' name, his 'true' place, his
'true'
'true'
body, his
disease.The plague as a form, at once real
and imaginary, of disorder had asits medical and political correlative
discipline. Behind the disciplinary mechanisms can be read the
haunting memory of 'contagions', of the plague, of rebellions,
crimes, vagabondage,desertions,people who appearand disappear,
live and die in disorder.
If it is true that the leper gave rise to rituals of exclusion, vhich to
a certain extent provided the model for and general form of the
great Confinement, then the plague gave rise to disciplinary projects. Rather than the massive, binary division between one set of
peopleand another,it calledfor multiple separations,
individualizing
distributions, an organizationin depth of surveillanceand control,
an intensification and a ramification of power. The leper was caught
up in a practice of rejection, of exile-enclosurel he was left to his
doom in a massamong which it was uselessto differentiate; those
sick of the plague were caught up in a meticulous tactical partitioning in which individual differentiations were the constricting effects
of a power that multiplied, articulated and subdivided itself; the great
confinement on the one hand; the correct training on the other.
The leper and his separation;the plague and its segmentations.The
first is marked; the second analysed and distributed. The exile of
the leper and the arrest of the plague do not bring with them the
same political dream. The 6rst is that of a pure community, the
second that of a disciplined society. Two ways of exercising pov/er
over men, of controlling their relations, of separatingout their
dangerous mixtures. The plague-stricken town, traversed throughout with hierarchy, surveillance, observation, writing; the town
immobilized by the functioning of an extensivepower that bearsin
a distinct v/ay over all individual bodies - this is the utopia of the
perfectly governed city. The plague (envisaged as a possibility at
least) is the trial in the course of which one may define ideally the
exerciseof disciplinary power. In order to make rights and laws
rg8

Panopticism
function according to pure theory, the jurists place themselvesin
imagination in the state of naturel in order to seeperfect disciplines
functioning, rulers dreamt of the state of plague. Underlying disciplinary projects the image of the plague stands for all forms of
confusion and disorder; just as the image of the leper, cut off from
all human contact, underlies projects of exclusion.
They are different proiects, then, but not incompatible ones. We
see them coming slowly together, and it is the peculiarity of the
nineteenth centlrry that it applied to the spaceof exclusion of which
the leper was the symbolic inhabitant (beggars,vagabonds,madmen
and the disorderly formed the real population) the technigue of
'plague
power proper to disciplinary partitioning. Treat'lepers' as
victims', project the subtle segmentations of discipline onto the
confusedspaceof internment, combine it with the methods of analytical distribution proper to power, individualize the excluded, but
use proceduresof individualization to mark exclusion - this is what
was operated regularly by disciplinary power from the'beginning
of the nineteenthcentury in the psychiatric asylum, the penitentiary,
the reformatoV, the approved school and, to some extent, the
hospital. Generally speaking,all the authorities exercisingindividual
control function according to a double mode; that of binary division
and branding (mad/sane; dangerous/harmlesslnormal/abnormal);
and that of coercive assignment,of differential distribution (who he
isl where he must be; how he is to be characterized; how he is to be
recognized;how a constant surveillanceis to be exercisedover him
in an individual way, etc.). On the one hand, the lepersare treated as
plague victims; the tactics of individualizing disciplines are imposed
on the excluded; and, on the other hand, the universality ofdisciplinary controls makes it possible to brand the 'leper' and to bring
into play against him the dualistic mechanismsof exclusion. The
constant division between the normal and the abnormal, to which
every individual is subjected, brings us back to our own time, by
applying the binary branding and exile of the leper to quite different
objects; the existenceof a whole set of techniques and institutions
for measuring, supervising and correcting the abnormal brings into
play the disciplinary mechanismsto which the fear of the plague
gave rise. All the mechanisms of power which, even today, are
disposedaround the abnormal individual, to brand him and to alter

r99

Discipline
him, are composed of those two forms from which they distantly
derive.
Bentham's Parupthon is the architectural 6gure of this composition. We know the principle on which it was based:at the periphery,
an annular building; at the centre, a tower; this tower is pierced with
wide windows that open onto the inner side of the ring; the peripheric building is divided into cells,eachof which extendsthe whole
width of the building; they have two windows, one on the inside,
corresponding to the windows of the tower; the other, on the outside, allows the light to cross the cell from one end to the other.
All that is needed, then, is to place a supervisor in a central tower
and to shut up in each cell a madman, a patient, a condemnedman,
a worker or a schoolboy. By the effect of backlighting, one can
observe from the tower, standing out precisely against the light,
the small captive shadows in the cells of the periphery. They are
like so many cages,so many small theatres,in which each actor is
alone, perfectly individualized and constantly visible. The panoptic
mechanismarrangesspatial unides that make it possible to seeconstantly and to recognize immediately. In short, it reversesthe principle of the dungeon; or rather of its three functions - to enclose,to
deprive of light and to hide - it preservesonly the 6rst and eliminates the other two. Full lighting and the eye of a supervisor capture
better than darkness,which ultimately protected. Visibility is a trap.
To begin with, this made it possible - as a negative effect - to
avoid those compact, swarming, howling massesthat were to be
found in placesof confinement, those painted by Goya or described
by Howard. Each individual, in his place, is securely confined to a
cell from which he is seenfrom the front by the supervisor; but the
side walls prevent him from coming into contact with his companions. He is seen,but he does not see;he is the object of information,
never a subject in communication. The arrangement of his room,
opposite the central tover, imposes on him an axial visibility; but
the divisions of the ring, those separated cells, imply a lateral
invisibility. And this invisibility is a guaranteeof order. If the inmates are convicts, there is no danger of a plot, an attempt at
collective escape,the planning of new crimes for the future, bad
reciprocal influencesl if they are patients, there is no danger of
200

Panopticism
contagion; if they are madmen there is no risk of their committing
violence upon one another; if they are schoolchildren, there is no
copying, no noise, no chatter, no waste of time; if they are workers,
there are no disorders, no theft, no coalitions, non! of those distractions that slow down the rate of work, make it less perfect or
cause accidents. The crowd, a compact mass, a locus of multiple
exchanges,individualities merging together, a collective effect, is
abolished and replaced by a collection of separatedindividualities.
From the point of view of the guardian, it is replacedby a multiplicity that can be numbered and supervised;from the point of view of
the inmates, by a sequesteredand observed solitude (Bentham,
Ctc-6$.
Hence the major effect of the Panopticon: to induce in the inmate
a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assuresthe automatic functioning of power. So to arrange things that the surveillance is permanent in its efiects, even if it is discontinuous in its
actionl that the perfection ofpower should tend to render its actual
exerciseunnecessary;that this architectural apparatus should be a
machine for creating and sustaining a power relation independent
of the person who exercisesit; in shon, that the inmates should be
caught up in a power situation of which they are themselves the
bearers.To achievethis, it is at once too much and too little that the
prisoner should be constandy observed by an inspector: too little,
for what matters is that he knows himself to be observed; too much,
becausehe has no need in fact ofbeing so. In view ofthis, Bentham
laid down the principle that power should be visible and unverifiable. Visible: the inmate will constantly have before his eyes the
tall oudine of the central tower from which he is spied upon.
Unverifiable: the inmate must never know whether he is being
looked at at any one moment; but he must be sure that he may always
be so. In order to make the presence or absenceof the inspector
unverifiable, so that the prisoners, in their cells, cannot even see a
shadow, Bentham envisaged not only venetian blinds on the
windows of the central observation hall, but, on the inside, partitions
that intersectedthe hall at right angles and, in order to pass from
one quarter to the other, not doors but zig-zag openings; for the
slightest noise, a gleam of light, a briglrtness in a half-opened door
would betray the presenceof the guardian.t The Panopticon is a

Discipline
machine for dissociating the see/being seen dyad: in the peripheric ring, one is totally se,en,without ever seeing; in the central
tower, on!seeseverything without ever being seen.8
It is an important mechanism, for it automatizes and disindividualizes power. Power has its principle not so much in a person as
in a cenain concerted distribution ofbodies, surfaces,lights, gazes;
in an arrangementwhose internal mechanismsproduce the relation
in ivhich individuals are caught up. The ceremonies,the rituals, the
marks by which the sovereign's surplus power was manifested are
useless.There is a machinery that assuresdissymmetry, disequilibrium, difference. Consequently, it does not matter who exercises
power. Any individual, taken almost at random, can operate the
machine: in the absenceof the director, his family, his friendi, his
visitors, even his servants (Bentham, a5). Similarly, it does not
matter what motive animateshim: the curiosity of the indiscreet, the
malice of a child, the thirst for knowledge of a philosopher who
wishes to visit this museum of human nature, or the perversity of
those who take pleasure in spying and punishing. The more
numerousthoseanonymous and temporary observersare, the greater
the risk for the inmate of being surprisedand the greater his anxious
awareness of being observed. The Panopticon is a marvellous
machine which, whatever use one may wish to put it to, produces
homogeneous effectsof power.
A real subjection is born mechanicalty from a fictitious relation.
So it is not necessaryto use force to constrain the convict to good
behaviour, the madman to calm, the worker to work, the schoolboy
to application, the patient to the observation of the regulations.
Bentham was surprised that panoptic institutions could be so light:
there were no more bars, no more chains, no more heavy locks; all
that was needed was that the separationsshould be clear and the
openingswell arranged.The heavinessof the old 'housesof security',
with their fortresslike architecture,could be replacedby the simple,
economic geometry of a 'house of certainty'. The efficiency of
power, its constraining force have, in a sense,passedover to the
other side - to the side of its surface of application. He who is
subjectedto a field of visibility, and who knows it, assumesresponsibility for the constraints of power; he makes them play spontaneously upon himself; he inscribesin himself the power relation in
2o2

Panopticism
playsboth roles;he becomesthe principle
which he simultaneously
By
of his own subiection. this very fact, the externalPowermay
throw off its physicalweighl; it tendsto the non-corporal;and,the
more it approachesthis limit, the more constant,profound and
permanentare its efiects:it is a perpetualvictory that avoidsany
physicalconfrontationand which is alwaysdecidedin advance.
Benthamdoesnot saywhetherhe wasinspired,in his proiect,by
in which the
Le Vaux'smenagerieat Versailles:the first menagerie
differentelementsarenot, asthey traditionallywere,distributedin
a park (Loisel; rc4-7). At the centrewas an octagonalpavilion
which, on the first floor, consistedof only a singleroom, the king's
saloq on every side large windows looked out onto sevencages
(the eighthsidewasreservedfor the enuance),containingdifferent
speciesof animals.By Bentham'stime, this menageriehad disappeared.But one finds in the programmeof the Panopticona
similarconcernwith individualizingobservation,with characterizawith the analyticalarangementof space.The
tion andclassification,
Panopticonis a royal menagerie;the animal is replacedby man,
individual distribution by specificgrouping and the king by the
machineryof a furtive power.With this exception,the Panopticon
alsodoesthe work of a naturalist.It makesit possibleto draw up
differences:
amongpatients,to observethesymptomsof eachindiviwithout
the proximity of beds,the circulationof miasmas,the
dual,
effectsof contagionconfusingthe clinical tables;among schoolchildren, it makesit possibleto observeperformances(without
therebeing any imitation or copying), to map aptitudes,to assess
and, in relation to
characters,to draw up rigorous classifications
from
to distinguish'laziness
andstubbornness'
normaldevelopment,
'incurableimbecility';amongworkers,it makesit possibleto note
the aptitudesof eachworker, comparethe time he takesto perform
a task, and if they are paid by the day, to calculatetheir wages
(Bentham,b-64).
, Somuchfor the questionof observation.But the Panopticonwas
alsoa laboratory;it could be usedasa machineto !rry out experiments,to alterbehaviour,to train or correctindividuals.To experiment with medicinesand monitor their effects.To try out difierent
punishmentson prisoners,accordingto their crimesand character,
and to seekthe most effectiveones.To teachdifferenttechniques
zot

Discipline
simultaneously to the workers, to decide which is the best. To try
out pedagogical experiments - and in particular to take up once
again the well-debated problem of secluded educarion, by using
orphans. One would see what would happen when, in their sixteenth or eighteenth year, they were presentedwith other boys or
girls; one could verify whether, as Helvetius thought, anyone could
learn anything; one would follow'the genealogyof every observable
idea'; one could bring up different children according to different
systems of thought, making certain children believe that two and
two do not make four or that,the moon is a cheese,then put them
together when they are twenty or twenty-five years old; one would
then have discussionsthat would be worth a great deal more than
the sermons or lectures on which so much money is spentl one
would have at least an opportuniry of making discoveries in the
domain of metaphysics. The Panopticon is a privileged place for
experimentson men, and for analysing with complete certainty the
tansformations that may be obtained from them. The Panopticon
may even provide an apparatusfor supervising its own mechanisms.
In this central tower, the director may spy on all the employeesthat
he has under his orders: nurses, doctors, foremen, teachers,warders; he will be able to judge them continuously, alter their behaviour, impose upon them the methods he thinks best; and it will
even be possible to observe the director himself. An inspector
arriving unexpectedlyat the centre of the Panopticon will be able to
judge at a glance,without anything being concealedfrom him, how
the entire establishmentis functioning. And, in any case,enclosed
as he is in the middle of this architectural mechanism, is not the
director's own fate entirely bound up with iti The incompetent
physician who has allowed contagion to spread, the incompetent
prison governor or workshop managerwill be the first victims of an
'
epidemic or a revolt. "By every tie I could devise", said the master
of the Panopticon, "my own fate had been bound up by me with
theirs"' (Bentham, r77). The Panopticon functions as a kind of
laboratory of power. Thanks to its mechanismsof observation, it
gains in efficiency and in the ability to penetrareinto men's behaviourl knowledge follows the advancesof power, discovering new
objects of knowledge over all the surfaces on which power is
exercised.
20.4

Panopticism
The plague-stricken town, the panoptic establishment - the
difierencesare important. They mark, at a distanceof a century and
a half, the transformations of the disciplinary programme. In the
first case,there is an exceptional situation: against an extraordinary
evil, power is mobilized; it makes itself everywhere present and
visible; it invents new mechanisms;it separates,it immobilizes, it
partitions; it constructs for a time what is both a counter-city and
the perfect society; it imposes an ideal functioning, but one that is
reduced,in the final analysis,like the evil that it combats, to a simple
dualism of life and death: that which moves brings death, and one
kills that which moves. The Panopticon, on the other hand, must
be understood as a generalizable model of functioning; a way of
defining power relations in terms of the everyday life of men. No
doubt Bentham presentsit as a particular institution, closed in upon
itself. Utopias, perfectly closed in upon themselves,are common
enough. As opposed to the ruined prisons, littered with mechanisms
of torture, to be seen in Piranese's engravings, the Panopticon
presentsa cruel, ingenious cage. The fact that it should have given
rise, even in our own time, to so many variations, projected or
realized, is evidence of the imaginary intensity that it has possessed
for almost two hundred years. But the Panopticon must not be
understood as a dream building: it is the diagram of a mechanismof
power reducedto its ideal form; its functioning, abstractedfrom any
obstacle,resistanceor friction, must be representedas a pure architectural and optical system:it is in fact a figure of political technology
that may and must be detachedfrom any specific use.
It is polyvalent in its applications; it serves to reform prisoners,
but also to treat patients, to instruct schoolchildren, to confine the
insane,to superviseworkers, to put beggarsand idlers to work. It is
a type of location of bodies in space,of distribution of individuals
in relation to one another, of hierarchical organization, of disposition of centres and channels of power, of definition of the instruments and modes of intervention of power, which can be implemented in hospitals, workshops, schools, prisons. Whenever one is
dealing with a multiplicity of individuals on whom a task or a
particular form of behaviour must be imposed, the panoptic schema
'to
may be used. It is - necessarymodifcations apart * applicable
all establishmentswhatsoever,in which, within a spacenot too large
20t

Discipline
to be covered or commanded by buildings, a number of personsare
meant to be kept under inspection' (Bentham, 4o; although Bentham
takes the penitentiary house as his prime example,it is becauseit has
many difierent functions to fulfil - safe custody, confinement,
solitude, forced labour and instruction).
In each of its applications,it makesit possible to perfect the exercise of power. It does this in severalways: becauseit can reduce the
number of those who exercise it, while increasing the number of
those on whom it is exercised.Becauseit is possible to intervene at
any moment and becausethe constant pressureacts even before the
offences,mistakesor crimes have been committed. Because,in these
conditions, its strength is that it never intervenes, it is exercised
spontaneouslyand without noise, it constitutes a mechanismwhose
effects follow from one another. Because,without any physical
instrument other than architecture and geometry, it acts directly on
'power
individuals; it gives
of mind over mind'. The panoptic
schema makes any apparatus of power more intense: it assuresits
economy (in material, in personnel, in time); it assuresits efficacity
by its preventative character, its continuous functioning and its
'in
automatic mechanisms.It is a way of obtaining from power
'a great
and new instrument of
hitherto unexampled quantity',
government . . .; its great excellenceconsists in the great strength
it is capableof giving to aay institution it may be thought proper to
apply it to' (Bentham,66).
It's a caseof it's easyonce you've thought of it' in the political
sphere. It can in fact be integrated into any function (education,
medical treatment, production, punishment); it can increase the
effect of this function, by being linked closely with it; it can constitute a mixed mechanismin which relations of power (and of knowledge) may be precisely adjusted, in the smallest detail, to the processesthat are to be supervised; it can establisha direct proportion
'surplus
'surplus
between
power' and
production'. In short, it
arranges things in such a way that the exercise of power is not
added on from the outside, like a rigid, heavy constraint, to the
functions it invests, but is so subtly present in them as to increase
their efficiency by itself increasing its own points of contact. The
panoptic mechanismis not simply a hinge, a point of exchange
between a mechanismof power and a function; it is a wav of making
zo6

Panopticism
power relations function in a function, and of making a function
function through these power relatiarns. Bentham's Preface to
Parcpticon opens with a list of the benefits to be obtained from his
'inspection-horrse':'Morab
reformed- health preserved- industry
in'igorated - instrucion difused - public burthenslighuned - Economy
seated,as it were, upon a rock - the gordian knot of the Poor-Laws
not cut, but untied - all by a simple idea in architecture!' (Bentham,

3il.
Furthermore, the arangement of this machine is such that its
enclosed nature does not preclude a perrnanent presence from the
outside: we have seenthat anyone may come and exercise in the central tower the functions ofsurveillance, and that, this being the case,
he cangain a clearideaofthewayinwhich the surveillanceis practised.
In fact, any panoptic institution, even if it is as rigorously closed
as a penitentiary, may without dimculry be subiected to such irregular and constant inspections:and not only by the appointed inspectors, but also by the public; any member of society will have the
right to come and seewith his own eyeshow the schools, hospitals,
factories, prisons function. There is no risk, therefore, that the
increaseof power created by the.panoptic machine may degenerate
into tyranny; the disciplinary mechanism wrll be democratically
controlled, since it will be constantly accessible'to the great ribunal
committee of the world'.a This Panopticon, subtly arranged so that
an observer may obsewe, at a glance, so many different individuals,
also enableseveryone to come and observe any of the observers.
The seeing machine was once a sort of dark room into which
individuals spied; it has become a transparent building in which the
exerciseof power may be supervised by sociery as a whole.
The panoptic schema,without disappearingas such or losing any
ofits properties, was destined to spreadthroughout the social body;
its vocation was to become a generalized function. The plaguestricken town provided an exceptional disciplinary model: perfect,
but absolutely violent; to the diseasethar brought death, power
opposed its perpetual threat of death; life inside it was reduced to
its simplest expression;it was, against the power of death, the meticulous exerciseof the right of the sword. The Panopticon, on the
other hand, has a role of amplification; although it arrangespower,
although it is intended to make it more economic and more effective,
207

Discipline
it does so not for power itself, nor for the immediate salvation of a
threatened society: its aim is to strengthen the social forces - to
increase production, to develop the economy, spread education,
raise the level of public morality; to increaseand multiply.
How is power to be strengthened in such a way that, far from
impeding progress, far from weighing upon it with its rules and
regulations, it actually facilitates such progressl What intensificator
of power will be able at the sametime to be a multiplicator of productionl How will power, by increasingits forces,be able to increase
those of society insteadof confiscating them or impeding theml The
Panopticon's solution to this problem is that the productive increase
ofpower can be assuredonly if on the one hand, it can be exercised
continuously in the very foundations of society, in the subtlest
possible way, and if on the other hand, it functions outside these
sudden, violent, discontinuous forms that are bound up with the
exercise of sovereignty. The body of the king, with its strange
material and physical presence,with the force that he himself deploys
or ransmits to some few others, is at the opposite extreme of this
new physics of power representedby panopticism; the domain of
panopticism is, on the contrary, that whole lower region, that region
of irregular bodies, with their details, their multiple movements,
their heterogeneousforces, their spatial relations; what are required
are mechanismsthat analyse distributions, Baps, series, combinations, and which use instruments that render visible, record,
differentiate and compare: a physics of a relational and multiple
power, which has its maximum intensity not in the person of the
king, but in the bodies that can be individualized by theserelations.
At the theoretical level, Bentham defines another way of analysing
the social body and the power relations that traverse iq in terms of
practice,he definesa procedure ofsubordination ofbodies and forces
that must increasethe utility of power while practising the economy
'political
of the prince. Panopticism is the general principle of a new
anatomy' whose object and end are not the relations of sovereignty
but the relations of discipline.
The celebrated, transparent, circular cage, with its high tower,
powerful and knowing, may have been for Bentham a project of a
perfect disciplinary institution; but he also set out to show how one
'unlock'
may
the disciplines and get them to function in a diffused,
zo8

Panopticism
multiple, polyvalent way throughout the whole social body. These
disciplines, which the classical age had elaborated in specific,
relatively enclosed places - barracks, schools, workshops - and
whose total implementation had been imagined only at the limited
and temporary scaleof a plague-stricken town, Bentham dreamt of
uansforming into a network of mechanismsthat would be everywhere and always alert, running through society without interruption in space or in time. The panoptic arrangement provides the
formula for this generalization. It programmes, at the level of an
elementary and easily transferablemechanism,the basic functioning
of a sociery penetrated through and through with disciplinary
mechanisms.
There are two images, then, of discipline. At one exreme, the
discipline-blockade, the enclosed institution, established on the
edges of society, turned inwards towards negative functions:
arresting evil, breaking communications, suspending time. At the
other extrerne, with panopticism, is the discipline-mechanism: a
functional mechanism that must improve the exerciseof power by
making it lighter, more rapid, more effective, a design of subtle
coercion for a society to come. The movement from one proiect
to the other, from a schema of exceptional discipline to one of
a generalized surveillance, rests on a historical transformation:
the gradual extension of the mechanismsof discipline throughout
the seventeenthand eighteenth centuries, their spreadthroughout the
whole social body, the formation of what might be called in general
the disciplinary society.
A whole disciplinary generalization - the Benthamite physics of
power represents an acknowledgement of this - had operated
throughout the classicalage. The spreadof disciplinary institutions,
whose network was beginning to cover an ever larger surface and
occupying above all a less and less marginal position, testifies to
this: what was an islet, a privileged place, a circumstantial measure,
or a singular model, became a general formula; the regulations
characteristic of the Protestant and pious armies of William of
Orange or of Gustavus Adolphus were transformed into regulations
for all the armies of Europe; the model collegesof the Jesuits,or the
schoolsof Batencouror Demia, following the exampleset by Sturm,

Discipline
provided the outlines for the general forms of educational discipline; the ordering of the naval and military hospitals provided
the model for the entire reorganization of hospitalsin the eighteenth
cenrury.
But this extension of the disciplinary institutions was no doubt
only the most visible aspect of various, more profound processes.
r The fmctional inyersion of the disciplines. At first, they were
expected to neutralize dangers, to fix uselessor disturbed populations, to avoid the inconveniencesof over-large assemblies;now
they were being asked to play a positive role, for they were becoming able to do so, to increase the possible utility of individuals.
Military discipline is no longer a mere meansof preventing looting,
desertion or failure to obey orders among the troops; it has become
a basic technique to enable the army to exist, not as an assembled
crowd, but as a unity that derives from this very unity an increase
in its forcesl discipline increasesthe skill of each individual, coordinates these skills, acceleratesmovements, increasesfire power,
broadens the fronts of attack without reducing their vigour, increasesthe capacity for resistance,etc. The discipline of the workshop, while remaining a way of enforcing respectfor the regulations
and authorities, of preventing thefts or losses, tends to increase
aptitudes, speeds,output and therefore profits; it still exerts a moral
influence over behaviour, but more and more it treats actions in
terms of their results,introduces bodies into a machinery, forces into
an economy. When, in the seventeenth century, the provincial
schools or the Christian elementary schools were founded, the
justifications given for them were above all negative: those poor
'in ignorance
who were unable to bring up their children left them
of their obligations: given the difficulties they have in earning a
living, and themselves having been badly brought up, they are
unable to communicate a sound upbringing that they themselves
never had'; this involves three major inconveniences:ignorance of
God, idleness(with its consequentdrunkenness,impurity, larceny,
brigandage); and the formation of those gangs of beggars, always
'virtually
ready to stir up public disorder and
to exhaust the funds
of the H6tel-Dieu' (Demia, 6v6r). Now, at the beginning of the
Revolution, the end laid down for primary education was to be,
'develop
'fortify',
among other things, to
to
the body', to prepare
2to

Panopticism
'an
the child lfor a future in some mechanical work', to give him
observant eye, a sure hand and prompt habits' (Talleyrand's Report
to the Constituent Assembly, ro September r79r, quoted by L6on,
ro6). The disciplines function increasingly as techniquesfor making
useful individuals. Hence their emergencefrom a marginal position
on the confines of society, and detachment from the forms of
exclusion or expiation, confinement or retreat. Hence the slow
loosening of their kinship with religious regularities and enclosures.
Hence also their rooting in the most important, most central and
most productive sectorsof society. They become attached to some
of the great essentialfunctions: factory production, the transmission
of knowledge, the diffusion of aptitudesand skills, the war-machine.
Hence, too, the double tendency one seesdeveloping throughout
the eighteenth century to increasethe number of disciplinary institutions and to discipline the existing apparatuses.
z. The swarming of disciplinary mechanisms.While, on the one
hand, the disciplinary establishments increase, their mechanisms
have a c!rtain tendency to become 'de-institutionalized', to emerge
from the closed fortresses in which thev once functioned and to
circulate in a'free'state; the massive,
disciplinesare broken
"orni"",
down into flexible methods of control,
which may be transferred
and adapted.Sometimesthe closedapparatusesadd to their internal
and specific function a role of external surveillance, developing
around themselves a whole margin of lateral controls. Thus the
Christian School must not simply train docile children; it must also
make it possible to supervise the parents, to gain information as to
their way of life, their resources, their piety, their morals. The
school tends to constitute minute social observatoriesthat penetrate
even to the adults and exercise regular supervision over thern: the
bad behaviour of the child, or his absence,is a legitimate pretext,
according to Demia, for one to go and question the neighbours,
especially if there is any reason to believe that the family will not
tell the truth; one can then go and question the parents themselves,
to find out whether they know their catechism and the prayers,
whether they are determined to root out rhe vices of their children,
how many bedsthere are in the houseand what the sleepingarrangements are; the visit may end with the giving of alms, the presentof a
religious picture, or the provision of additional beds(Demia,39-4o).

2I I

Discipline
Similarly, the hospital is increasingly conceived of as a base for
the medical observation of the population outside; after the buming
down of the H6tel-Dieu in t772, there were several demands that
the large buildings, so heavy and so disordered, should be replaced
by a seriesof smaller hospitals; their function would be to take in
the sick of the quarter, but also to gather information, to be alert
to any endemic or epidemic phenomena, to op!n dispensaries,to
give advice to the inhabitants and to keep the authorities informed
of the sanitary state of the region.5
One also seesthe spread of disciplinary procedures, not in the
form of enclosed institutions, but as centres of observation disseminated throughout society. Religious groups and charity
'disciplining'
the populaorganizations had long played this role of
tion. From the Counter-Reformation to the philanthropy of the
July monarchy, initiatives of this type continuid to incriase; their
aims were religious (conversion and moralization), economic (aid
and encouragementto work) or political (the struggle against discontent or agitation). One has only to cite by way of example the
regulations for the charity associationsin the Paris parishes. The
territory to be covered was divided into quarters and cantons and
the members of the associationsdivided themselvesup along the
same lines. These members had to visit their respective areas
'They will strive
regularly.
to eradicateplacesof ill-repute, tobacco
shops, life-classes,gaming house, public scandals,blasphem/, impiety, and any other disorders that may come to their knowledge.'
They will also have to make individual visits to the poor; and the
information to be obtained is laid down in regulations: the stability
of the lodging, knowledge of prayers, attendanceat the sacraments,
knowledge of a trade, morality (and 'whether they have not fallen
'one must learn
into poverty through their own fault'); lastly,
by
skilful questioning in what way they behaveat home. Whether there
is peacebetween them and their neighbours, whether they are careful to bring up their children in the fear of God . . . whether they do
not have their older children of different sexessleeping together and
with them, whether they do not allow licentiousnessand cajolery
in their families, especially in their older daughters. If one has any
doubts as to whether they are married, one must ask to see their
marriage certificat!'.5
2t2

Panopticism
3. The state-control of the mcchanismsof disciplirc.In England, it
was private religious groups that sarried out, for a long time, the
functions of social discipline (cf. Radzinovia, zo3-t4); in Francc,
although a part of this role remained in the hands of parish guilds
or charity associations, another - and no doubt the most imporant
part - was very soon taken over by the police apparatus.
The organization of a centralizd police had long been regarded,
even by contemporaries, as the most direct expression of royal
absolutism; the sovereign had wished to have'his own magistrateto
whom he might directly entrust his orders, his commissions,intentions, and who was entrusted with the execution of orders and
orders under the King's private seal' (a note by Duval, first secretary
at the police magistrature, quoted in Funck-Brentano, r). In effect,
in taking over a number of pre-existing functions - the search for
criminals, urban surveillance, economic and political supervision the police magistratures and the magistrature-general that presided
over them in Paris uansposed them into a single, strict, administra'All
tive machins
the radiations of force and information that
spread from the circumference culminate in the magistrate-general.
. . . It is he who operatesall the wheels that together produce order
and harmony. The effects of his administration cannot be better
compared than to the movement of the celestial bodies' (Des
Essarts, 344 and gB).
But, although the police as an institution were certainly organized
in the form of a state apparatus, and although this was certainly
linked directly to the centre of political sovereignty, the type of
power that it exercises, the mechanisms it operates and the elements
to which it applies them are specific. It is an apparatusthat must be
coextensivewith the enfire social body and not only by the extreme
limits that it embraces, but by the minuteness of the details it is
'over
everything': it is not
concernedwith. Police power must bear
however the totality of the state nor gf the kingdom as visible and
invisible body of the monarch; it is the dust of events, actions,
'everything
behaviour, opinions that happens';? the police are
'unimportant
'those
concernedwith
things of every moment', those
things', of which Catherine II spoke in her Great Instruction
(Supplement to the Instructionfor the draving up of a new code, ry69,
article i3y). With the police, one is in the indefinite world of a

2rt

Discipline
supervision that seeksideally to reach the most elementary particle,
the most passingphenomenon of the social body: 'The ministry of
the magistrates and police officers is of the greatest importance; the
objects that it embracesare in a sensede6nite, one may perceive
them only by a sufficiently detailed examination' (Delamare, unnumbered Preface): the infinitely small of political power.
And, in order to be exercised, this power had to be given the
instnrment of permanent, exhaustive, omnipresent surveillance,
capableof making all visible, as long as it could itself remain invisible. It had to be like a faceless gaze that transformed the whole
social body into a field of perception: thousands of eyes posted
everywhere, mobile attentions ever on the alert, a long, hierarchized
network which, according to Le Maire, comprised for Paris the
forty-eight commissaires,the twenty ftsp ecteurs,then the 'observers',
who were paid regularly, the'hassesmouches',or secretagents,who
were paid by the day, then the informers, paid according to the job
done, and finally the prostiartes. And this unceasing observation
had to be accumulatedin a seriesof reports and registerslthroughout
the eighteenth centurlr an immensepolice text increasingly covered
society by means of a complex documentary organization (on the
police registers in the eighteenth century, cfl Chassaigne).And,
unlike the methods of judicial or administrative writing, what was
registered in this way were forms of behaviour, attitudes, possibilities, suspicions- a perrnanentaccount ofindividuals'behaviour.
Now, it should be noted that, although this police supervision
was entirely'in the handsof the king', it did not function in a single
direction. It was in fact a double-entry system:it had to correspond,
by manipulating the machinery of justice, to the immediate wishes
of the king, but it was also capable of responding to solicitations
from below; the celebrated lettes de cachet, or orders under the
king"s private seal, which were long the symbol of arbirary royal
rule and which brought detention into disrepute on political
grounds, were in fact demandedby families, masters,local notables,
neighbours, parish priests; and their function was to punish by
confinement a whole infra-penality, that of disorder, agitation, disobedience,bad conduct; those things that Ledoux wanted to exclude
from his architecturally perfect city and which he called 'offencesof
non-surveillance'. In short, the eighteenth-century police added a
214

Panopticism
disciplinary function to its role as the auxiliary of justice in the
pursuit of criminals and as an instrument for the political supervision
of plots, opposition movements or revolts. It was a complex function since it linked the absolute power of the monarch to the lowest
levels of power disseminated in society; since, between these different, enclosedinstitutions of discipline (workshops, armies,schools),
it extended an intermediary nefwork, acting where they could not
intervene, disciplining the non-disciplinary spaces;but it filled in
the gaps, linked them together, guaranteed with its armed force an
interstitial discipline and a meta-discipline. 'By means of a wise
police, the sovereign accustomsthe people to order and obedience'
flattel, 16z).
The organization of the police apparatusin the eighteenth century
sanctioneda generalization of the disciplines that becameco-extensive with the state itself. Although it was linked in the most explicit
way with everything in the royal power that exceeded the exercise
of regular justice, it is understandablewhy the police offered such
slight resistanceto the rearrangementof the judicial power; and why
it has not ceasedto impose its prerogatives upon it, with everincreasing weight, right up to the present day; this.is no doubt
becauseit is the seculararm of the judiciary; but it is also because,
to a far greater degree than the judicial institution, it is identified,
by reason of its extent and mechanisms, with a sociery of the
disciplinary type. Yet it would be wrong to believe that the disciplinary functions were confiscatedand absorbed once and for all
by a state appantus.
'Discipline'
may be identified neither with an institution nor with
an apparatus;it is a type of power, a modality for its exercise,comprising a whole set of instruments, techniques,procedures,levels of
'physics'
'anatomy' of power, a
application, tirgets; it is a
or an
'specialized'institutechnology. And it may be taken over either by
'houses
tions (the penitentiaries or
of correction' of the nineteenth
century), or by institutions that useit asan essentialinstrument for a
particular end (schools, hospitals), or by pre-existing authorities
that 6nd in it a means of reinforcing or reorganizing their internal
mechanismsof power (one day we should show how intra-familial
relations, essentially in the parents-children cell, have become'disciptined', absorbing since the classical age external schemata, first
21,

Discipline
educationaland military, then medical,psychiatric,psychological,
which have madethe family the privileged locus of emergencefor
the disciplinaryquestionof the normal and the abnormal);or by
that have made disciplinetheir principle of internal
apparatuses
functioning(the disciplinarizationof the administmtiveapparahrs
from the Napoleonicperiod),or finally by stateappantuseswhose
major, if not exclusive,function is to assurethat disciplinereigns
over societyasa whole (the police).
On the whole, therefore,one can speakof the formation of a
disciplinary society in this movement that stretchesfrom the
'quarantine',to an indefinitely
encloseddisciplines,a sort of social
'panopticism'.
Not becausethe discigeneralizable
mechanismof
plinary modality of power hasreplacedall the others;but because
it has infiltrated the others, sometimesundermining them, but
servingas an intermediarybetweenthem, Iinking them together,
extendingthemandaboveall makingit possibleto bring the effects
of power to the most minute and distant elements.It assuresan
infinitesimaldistributionof the power relations.
A few yearsafter Bentham,Julius gave this society its birth
certificate(Julius, l8c4). Speakingof the panopticprinciple, he
said that therewas much more therethan architecturalingenuity:
it wasan eventin the 'history of the humanmind'. In appearance,
it is merelythe solution of a technicalproblem;but, through it, a
Antiquity had beena civilizationof
whole type of societyemerges.
'To renderaccessible
spectacle.
to a multitudeof menthe inspection
of a smallnumberof objects':this was the problem to which the
architecfure of temples, theatres and circuses responded. With
spectacle,
therewasa predominance
of public life, the intensityof
festivals,sensualproximity. In theseritualsin which blood flowed,
societyfound new vigour and formed for a momenta singlegreat
body. The modernage posesthe oppositeproblem: 'To procure
for a smallnumber,or evenfor a singleindividual,theinstantaneous
view of a great multitude.' In a society in which the principal
elementsare no longerthe communiryand public life, but, on the
one hand,privateindividualsand,on the other, the state,relations
can be regulated only in a form that is the exact reverseof the
spectacle'It wasto the modernage,to the ever-growinginfluence
of thestate,to its evermore profound interventionin all thedetails
zr6

Panopticism
and all the relations of social life, that was reserved the task of
increasing and perfecting its guarantees, by using and directing
towards that great aim the building and disribution of buildings
intended to observe a great multitude of men at the sametime.'
Julius saw as a fulfilled historical processthat which Bentham had
described as a technical programme. Our society is one not of
spectacle,but of surveillance; under the surface of images, one
invests bodies in depth; behind the great abstraction of exchange,
there continues the meticulous, concrete training of useful forcesl
the circuits of communication are the supports of an accumulation
and a centralization of knowledge; the play of signs defines the
anchoragesof power; it is not that the- beautiful totality of the
individual is amputated, repressed,altered by our social order, it is
rather that the individual is carefully fabricated in it, according to a
whole technique of forcesand bodies.We are much lessGreeks than
we believe. We are neither in the amphitheatre, nor on the stage,
but in the panoptic machine,invested by its effectsof power, which
we bring to ourselves since we are part of its mechanism. The
importance, in historical mythology, of the Napoleonic character
probably derives from the fact that it is at the point of junction of
the monarchical, ritual exerciseof sovereignty and the hierarchical,
p!rnanent exerciseof indefinite discipline. He is the individual who
looms over everything with a single gazewhich no detail, however
'You
minute, c:ln esdlpe:
may consider that no part of the Empire
is without surveillance,no crime, no offence, no contravention that
remains unpunished, and that the eye of the genius who can enlighten all embracesthe whole of this vast machine, without, however, the slightest detail escapinghis attention' (Treilhard, l4). At
the moment of its full blossoming, the disciplinary society still
assumeswith the Emperor the old aspectof the power of spectacle.
As a monarch who is at one and the same time a usurper of the
ancient throne and the organizer of the new state, he combined
into a single symbolic, ultimate figure the whole of the long process
by which the pomp of sovereignty, the necessarily spectacular
manifestationsof power, were extinguished one by one in the daily
exerciseof surveillance,in a panopticism in which the vigilance of
intersecting gazeswas soon to render uselessboth the eagle and
the sun.
217

Discipline
The formation of the disciplinary society is connected with a
number of broad historical processes- economic, juridico-political
and, lastly, scientific - of which it forms part.
r. Generally speaking, it might be said that the disciplines are
techniques for assuring the ordering of human multiplicities. It is
true that there is nothing exceptional or even characteristicin this:
every system of power is presentedwith the sameproblem. But the
peculiarity of the disciplines is that they try to define in relation to
the multiplicities a tactics of power that fulfils three criteria: firstly,
to obtain the exerciseof power at the lowest possiblecost (economically, by the low expenditureit involves;politically, by its discretion,
its low exteriorization, its relative invisibility, the little resistanceit
arouses);secondly, to bring the effectsof this social power to their
maximum intensity and to extend them as far as possible, without
'economic'
either failure or interval; thirdly, to link this
growth of
power with the output of the apparatuses(educational, military,
industrial or medical) within which it is exercised; in short, to
increaseboth the docility and the utility of all the elements of the
system. This triple objective of the disciplines corresponds to a
well-known historical conjuncture. One aspectof this conjuncture
was the large demographic thrust of the eighteenth century; an
increasein the floating population (one of the primary objects of
discipline is to fix; it is an anti-nomadic technique); a change of
guantitative scale in the groups to be supervised or manipulated
(from the beginning of the seventeenthcentury to the eve of the
French Revolution, the school population had been increasing
rapidly, as had no doubt the hospital population; by the end ofthe
eighteenth century, the peace-time army exceededzoorooo men).
The other aspectof the coniuncture was the growth in the apparatus
of production, which was becoming more and more extended and
complex; it was also becoming more costly and its profitability had
to be increased. The development of the disciplinary methods
correspondedto thesetwo processes,or rather, no doubt, to the new
need to adjust their correlation. Neither the residual forms of feudal
power nor the structures of the administrative monarchy, nor the
local mechanismsof supervision, nor the unstable, tangled mass
they all formed together could carry out this role: they were
hindered from doing so by the irregular and inadequateextension of
zr8

Panopticism
their network,by their often conflictingfunctioning,but aboveall
'costly' natureof the power that was exercisedin them. It
by the
was costly in severalsenses:becausedirectly it cost a great deal to
the systemof corrupt officesand farmed-out
the Treasury;because
taxes weighed indirectly, but very heavily, on the population;
it encounteredforcedit into a cycleof perbecausethe resistance
petualreinforcement;becauseit proceededessentiallyby levying
(levying on moneyor productsby royal, seigniorial,ecclesiastical
by
of press-ganging,
taxationllevying on men or time by corvdes
The developmentof the discilockingup or banishingvagabonds).
of elementarytechniquesbelongingto
plinesmarksthe appearance
of power which, insteadof
a quite differenteconomy:mechanisms
proceedingby deduction,are integratedinto the productiveeffifrom within, into the growth of this
ciency of the apparagrses
efficiencyand into the useof what it produces.For the old principle
of 'levying-violence',which governedthe economyof power, the
'mildness-production-profit'.
disciplinessubstitutethe principleof
Thesearethe techniquesthat makeit possibleto adjustthe multiof producplicity of men and the multiplicationof the apparatuses
'production'in the strict sense,
tion (and this meansnot only
.but
also the production of knowledgeand skills in the school, the
productionofhealth in.the hospitals,the productionofdestructive
force in the army).
In this task of adiustment,disciplinehad to solve a numberof
problemsfor which the old economyof powerwasnot sufficiently
equipped.It could reduce the inefficiencyof massphenomena:
reducewhat, in a multiplicity, makesit much lessmanageablethan
a unity; reducewhat is opposedto the useof eachof its elemens
andof theirsumlreduceeverythingthatmaycountertheadvantages
of number. That is why discipline 6xes; it arrestsor re.gulates
movements;it clearsup confusion;it dissipates
compactgroupings
ways;
of individualswanderingaboutthe country in unpredictable
it establishes
calculateddistributions.It must also masterall the
forcesthat are formed from the very constitutionof an organized
multiplicity; it rnust neutralizethe effectsof counter-powerthat
to the power that
spring from them and which form a resistance
organizations,
wishesto dominateifi agitations,revolts,spontaneous
coalitions- anything that may establishhorizontalconjunctions.
2r9

Discipline
Hence the fact that the disciplines use procedures of partitioning
and verticality, that they inuoduce, between the different elements
at the same level, as solid separationsas possible, that they define
compact hierarchical networks, in short, that they oppose to the
intrinsic, adverseforce of multiplicity the technique of the continuous, individualizing pyramid. They must also incredsethe particular
utility of eachelement of the multiplicity, but by meansthat are the
most rapid and,the least costly, that is to say, by using the multipliciry itself as an instrument of this growth. Hence, in order to
extract from bodies the maximum time and force, the use of those
overall methods known as time-tables,collective training, exercises,
total and detailed surveillance. Furthermore, the disciplines must
increasethe effect of utility proper to the multiplicities, so that each
is made more useful than the simple sum of its elements: it is in
order to increasethe utilizable eflects of the multiple that the disciplines define tactics of distribution, reciprocal adjustment of bodies,
gestures and rhythms, differentiation of capacities, reciprocal coordination in relation to apparatusesor tasks.Lastly, the disciplines
have to bring into play the power relations, not above but inside
the very texture of the multiplicity, as discreetly as possible, as well
articulated on the other functions of these multiplicities and also in
the least expensive way possible: to this correspond anonymous
instruments of power, coextensive with the multiplicity that they
regiment, such as hierarchical surveillance,continuous registration,
perpetual assessmentand classification.In short, to substitute for a
power that is manifestedthrough the brilliance of those who exercise
it, a power that insidiously objectifies those on whom it is applied;
to form a body of knowledge about theseindividuals, rather than to
deploy the ostentatioussigns of sovereignty. In a word, the disciplines are the ensembleof minute technical inventions that made it
possible to increasethe useful size of multiplicities by decreasingthe
inconveniencesof the power which, in order to make them useful,
must control them. A multiplicity, whether in a workshop or a
nation, an arrny or a school, reachesthe threshold of a discipline
when the relation of the one to the other becomesfavourable.
If the economic take-off of the West began with the techniques
that made possible the accumulation of capital, it might perhaps be
said that the methods for administering the accumulation of men
220

Panopticism
made possiblea political take-offin relation to the traditional, ritual,
costly, violent forms of power, which soon fell into disuseand were
supersededby a subtle, calculatedtechnology ofsubiection. In fact,
the two processes- the accumulation of men and the accumulation
of capital - !nnot be separated;it would not have been possible
to solve the problem of the accumulation of men without the growth
ofan apparatusofproduction capableofboth sustaining them and
using them; conversely, the techniques that made the cumulative
multiplicity of men useful acceleratedthe accumulation of capital.
At a lessgeneral level, the technological mutations of the apparatus
of production, the division of labour and the elaboration of the
disciplinary techniquessustainedan ensembleof very close relations
(cf. Marx, Capital, vol. r, chapter XIII and the very interesting
analysisin Guerry and Deleule). Each makes the other possible and
necessary;each provides a model for the other. The disciplinary
pyramid constituted the small cell of power within which the
separation,coordination and supervision of tasks was imposed and
made efficient; and analytical partitioning of time, gestures and
bodily forces constituted an operational schemathat could easily be
transferred from the groups to be subjected to the mechanismsof
production; the massiveprojection of military methods onto industrial organization was an example of this modelling of the division
of labour following the model laid down by the schemataof power.
But, on the other hand, the technical analysis of the process of
production, its 'mechanical' breaking-down, were projected onto
the labour force vrhose task it was to implement ic the constitution
of those disciplinary machines in which the individual forces that
they bring together are composed into a whole and therefore
increasedis the effect of this proiection. Let us say that discipline
'political'
is the unitary technique by which the body is reduced as a
force at the least cost and maximized as a useful force. The growth
of a capitalist economy gave rise to the specific modality of disciplinary power, whose general formulas, techniques of submitting
'political
forces and bodies, in short,
anatomy', could be operated
in the most diverse political rdgimes, apparatusesor institutions.
z. The panoptic modaliry of power - at the elementary, technical, merely physical level at which it is situated - is not under
the immediate dependence or a direct extension of the great
221

Discipline
is nonetheless not
iuridico-political structures of a society; it
absolutely independent. Historically, the process by which the
bourgeoisiebecamein the courseof the eighteenthcentury the politically dominant classwas maskedby the establishmentof an explicit,
coded and formally egalitarian juridical framework, made possible
by the organization of a parliamentary' rePresentativer6gime. But
the development and generalization of disciplinary mechanisms
constituted the other, dark side of these Processes.The general
were egaliiuridical form that guaranteed a system of rights that
tarian in principle was suPPortedby these tiny, everyday, physical
mechanisms,by all those systemsof micro-power that are essentially
non-egalitarian and asymmeuical that we call the disciplines. And
although, in a formal way' the rePresentativer6gime makcs it pos-_
sible, directly or indirectly, with or without relays, for the will of
atl to form the fundamental authority of sovereignty, the disciplines
provide, at the base, a guarantee of the submission of forces and
todies. The real, corporal disciplines constituted the foundation of
the formal, juridical liberties. The contract may have been regarded
as the ideal foundation of law and political Power; panopticism
constituted the technique, universally widespread, of coercion.
It continued to work in depth on the iuridical structures of society,
in order to make the effective mechanisms of power function in
opposition to the formal framework that it had acquired' The
'Et light"ntn.nt', which discovered the liberties, also invented the
disciplines.
Irr appearance,the disciplines constitute nothing more than an
infm-law. They seemto extend the general forms defined by law to
the infinitesimal level of individual lives; or they appear as methods
of training that enable individuals to become integrated into these
general demands.They seem to constitute the same type of law on
i diffetent scale, thereby making it more meticulous and more
indulgent. The disciplines should be regarded as a sort of counterlaw. ihey have the precise role of introducing insuperable asymmetries and excluding reciprocities. First, becausediscipline creates
between individuals a'private'link, which is a relation of constraints
entirely different from contractual obligation; the accePtanceofa
discipline may be underwritten by contractl the way in which itis
imposed, the mechanisms it brings into play, the non-reversible

222

Panopticism
'surplus'
subordinationof one group of people by another,the
power that is alwaysfixed on the sameside, the inequaliry of position of the different'partners'in relationto the commonregulation,
all thesedistinguishthe disciplinary link from the conractual link,
and makeit possibleto distort the contractuallink systematically
from the momentit has as its contenta mechanismof discipline.
We know, fior example,how many real proceduresunderminethe
legal fiction of the work contmct workshop discipline is not the
least important. Moreover, whereasthe juridical systemsdefine
iuridical subjectsaccording to universal norrns, the disciplines
characterize,classify, specialize;they distribute along a scale,
around a norrn, hierarchizeindividualsin relation to one another
and,ifnecessary,disqualifyandinvalidate.In any case,in the space
and during the time in which they exercisetheir control and bring
into play the asymmetries
of their power, they effecta suspension
of the law that is nevertotal, but is neverannulledeither.Regular
is a
and institutionalasit may be, the discipline,in its mechanism,
'counter-law'.And, although the universaljuridicism of modern
societyseemsto fix limits on the exerciseof power,its universally
widespreadpanopticismenablesit to operate,on the undersideof
the law, a machinerythat is both immenseand minute,which supports, reinforces,multiplies the asymmetryof power and underminesthe limits that are tracedaround the law. The minute disciplines,the panopticismsof every day may well be below the level
of emergenceof the great apparatusesand the great political
struggles.But, in the genealogyof modernsociety,they havebeen,
with the classdominationthat raversesit, the politicalcounterpart
of the juridicalnormsaccordingto which powerwasredistributed.
Hence,no doubt, the importancethat hasbeengiven for so long
of discipline,to thoseapparentlyinsignificant
to thesmalltechniques
'sciences'
that give it a
tricks that it hasinvented,and evento those
respectable
face;hencethe fear of abandoningthem if one cannot
find any substitute;hencethe affirmationthat they are at the very
foundationof society,and an elementin its equilibrium,whereas
for unbalancingpower relations
they are a seriesof mechanisms
in regardingthem
definitivelyandeverywherelhencethepersistence
as the humble,but concreteform of every morality, whereasthey
area setofphysico-political
techniques.
223

Discipline
To return to the problemof legalpunishments,the prison widr
all the correctivetechnologyat its disposalis to be resituatedat the
point wherethe codifiedpower to punishturns into a disciplinary
power to observelat the point wherethe universalpunishmentsof
the law areappliedselectivelyto certainindividualsand alwaysthe
sameones;at thepoint wherethe redefinitionof the juridicalsubiect
by the penaltybecomes
a usefultrainingof thecriminal;at the point
wherethe law is invertedand passesoutsideitself, and where the
counter-lawbecomesthe effectiveand institutionalizedcontentof
the juridical forms.What generalizes
the power to punish,then, is
not the universalconsciousness
of the law in eachiuridical subiect;
it is the regular extension,the infinitely minute web of panoptic
techniques.
3. Taken one by one, most of thesetechnigues have a long
history behind them. But what was new, in the eighteenth century,
was that, by being combined and generalized,they attained a level
at which the formation of knowledge and the increase of power
regularly reinforce one another in a circular process.At this point,
the disciplines crossed the 'technological' threshold. First the
hospital, then the school, then, later, the workshop were not sim'reordered'
ply
by the disciplines; they became, thanks to them,
apparatusessuch that any mechanism of objectification could be
used in them as an instmment of subjection, and any growth of
power could give rise in them to possible branches of knowledge;
it was this link, proper to the technological systems, that made
possible within the disciplinary element the formation of clinical
medicine, psychiatry, child psychology, educational psychology,
the rationalization oflabour. It is a double process,then: an epistemological 'thaw' through a refinement of power relationsl a
multiplication of the effects of power through the formation
and accumulation of new forms of knowledge.
The extension of the disciplinary methods is inscribed in a broad
historical process:the development at about the same time of many
other technologies- agronomical, industrial, economic. But it must
be recognized that, compared with the mining industries, the
emerging chemical industries or methods of national accountancy,
compared with the blast furnacesor the steam engine, panopticism
has received little attention. It is regarded as not much more than a
224

Panopticism
bizarre little utopia, a perverse dream - rather as though Bentham
had been the Fourier of a police society,'and the Phalanstery had
taken on the form of the Panopticon. And yet this representedthe
abstract forrnula of a very real technology, that of individuals.
There were many reasons why it received little praise; the most
obvious is that the discoursesto which it gave rise rarely acquired,
except in the academicclassifications,the status of sciences;but the
real reason is no doubt that the power that it operatesand which it
augments is a direct, physical power that men exercise upon one
another. An inglorious culmination had an origin that could be
only grudgingly acknowledged. But it would be unjust to compare
the disciplinary techniqueswith such inventions as the steamengine
or Amici's microscope. They are much less;and yet, in a way, they
are much more. If a historical equivalent or at least a point of
comparison had to be found for them, it would be rather in the
'inquisitorial' technique.
The eighteenth century invented the techniquesof discipline and
the examination, rather as the Middle Ages invented the iudicial
investigation. But it did so by quite different means.The investigation procedure, an old fiscal and administrative technique, had
developed above all with the reorganization of the Church and the
increase of the princely states in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries..At this time it permeated to a very large degree the jurisprudence first of the ecclesiasticalcourts, then of the lay courts.
The investigation as an authoritarian search for a truth observed
or attested was thus opposed to the old procedures of the oath,
the ordeal, the judicial duel, the judgement of God or even of the
transaction between private individuals. The investigation was the
sovereign power arrogating to itself the right to establish the ruth
by a number of regulated techniques.Now, although the investigation has since then been an integral part ofwestern justice (even up
to our own day), one must not forget either its political origin, its
link with the birth of the statesand of monarchical sovereignty, or
its later extension and its role in the formation. of knowledge. In
fact, the investigation has been the no doubt crude, but fundamental
element in the constitution of the empirical scienceslit has been the
juridico-political matrix of this experimental knowledge, which, as
we know, was very rapidly releasedat the end of the Middle Ages.
22t

Discipline
It is perhaps true to say that, in Greece, mathematics were born
from techniquesof measurement;the sciencesof nature, in any case,
were born, to some extent, at the end of the Middle Ages, from the
practices of investigation. The great empirical knowledge that
covered the things of the world and transcribed them into the
ordering of an indefinite discourse that observes, describes and
establishesthe 'facts' (at a time when the western world was beginning the economic and political conquest of this same world) had
its operating model no doubt in the Inquisition - that immense
invention that our recent mildness has placed in the dark recesses
of our memory. But what this politico-juridical, administrative and
criminal, religious and lay, investigation was to the sciences of
nature, disciplinary analysishas been to the sciencesof man. These
sciences,which have so delighted our'humanity' for over a century,
have their technical matrix in the petty, malicious minutiae of the
disciplinesand their investigations. These investigationsare perhaps
to psychology, psychiatry, pedagogy, criminology, and so many
other strange sciences,what the terrible power of investigation was
to the calm knowledge of the animals, the plants or the earth.
Another power, another knowledge. On the threshold of the classical age,Bacon, lawyer and statesman,tried to develop a methodology
of investigation for the empirical sciences.What Great Observer
will produce the methodology of examination for the human
sciencesl Unless, of course, such a thing is not possible. For,
although it is true that, in becoming a technique for the empirical
sciences,the investigation has detacheditself from the inquisitorial
procedure, in which it was historically rooted, the examination has
remained extremely close to the disciplinary power that shaped it.
It has always been and still is an intrinsic element of the disciplines.
Of course it seemsto have undergone a speculativepurification by
integrating itself with such sciencesas psychology and psychiatry.
And, in effect, its appearancein the form of tests, interviews,
interrogations and consultations is apparently in order to rectify
the mechanismsof discipline: educationalpsychology is supposedto
correct the rigours of the school, just as ttri meaicat or psychiaric
interview is supposedto rectify the effectsof the discipline of work.
But we must not be misled; thesetechniquesmerely refer individuals
from one disciplinary authority to another, and they reproduce, in
zz6

Panopticism
a concentrated
or formalizedform, the schemaof power-knowledge
proper to each discipline(on this subject,cf. Tort). The great
investigationthat gave rise to the sciencesof nature has become
detachedfrom its politico-iuridicalmodel;the examination,on the
other hand,is still caughtup in disciplinarytechnology.
In the Middle Ages, the procedureof investigationgradually
superseded
the old accusatoryjustice,by a processinitiated from
above;the disciplinarytechnique,on the other hand, insidiously
and as if from below, has invadeda penaljusticethat is still, in
principle,inquisitorial.All the great movementsof extensionthat
of the criminal
characterize
modernpenality- the problematization
behindhis crime,theconcernwith a punishmentthat is a correction,
a therapy,a normalization,the division of the act of iudgement
betweenvariousauthoritiesthat are supposedto measure,assess,
diagnose,cure,ransform individuals- all this betraysthe penetration of the disciplinaryexaminationinto the iudicial inquisition.
What is now imposedon penaljusticeasits point of application,
its 'useful'object,will no longerbe the body of the guilty manset
up againstthe body of the king; nor will it be the juridical subject
of an ideal contract;it will be the disciplinaryindividual. The
extremepoint of penaljusticeunder the Ancien R6gimewas the
infinite segmentation
of the body of the regicide:a maniGstation
of the strongestpower over the body of the greatestcriminal,
whosetotal destructionmadethe crimeexplodeinto its truth. The
idealpoint of penalitytoday would be an indefinitediscipline:an
interrogationwithout end,an investigationthat would be extended
without limit to a meticulousand evermoreanalyticalobservation,
a judgementthat would at the sametime be the constitutionof a file
that wasneverclosed,thecalculated
leniencyof a penaltythatwould
be interlacedwith the ruthlesscuriosityof an examination,a procedure that would be at the sametime the permanentmeasureof a
gap in relationto an inaccessible
norm and the asymptoticmovement that strivesto meetin infinity. The public executionwasthe
logicalculminationof a proceduregovernedby theInquisition.The
practiceof placingindividualsunder'observation'isa naturalextension of a justiceimbuedwith disciplinarymethodsandexamination
procedures.
Is it surprisingthat the cellularprison,with its regular
chronologies,forced labour, its authorities of surveillanceand

Discipline
registration,its expertsin normality,who continueandmultiply the
functionsof the iudge, should havebecomethe moderninstnrment
of penalirylIs it surprisingthat prisonsresemblefactories,schools,
barracks,hospitals,which all resembleprisonsl

zz8

PART FOUR

Prison

r. Completeand austereinstitutions

It would not be true to say that the prison wasborn with the new
codes.The prison form antedatesis systematicuse in the penal
system.It had alreadybeenconstituted outside the legal apparatus
when,throughout thesocialbody, procedureswerebeingelaborated
for disuibuting individuals,fixing them in space,classifyingthem,
extractingfrom themthe maximumin time and forces,training their
bodies,coding their continuousbehaviour,mainaining them in
perfectvisibility, forming around them an appaftltusof observation,
registrationand recording,constitutingon them a body of knowledge that is accumulatedand centralized.The generalform of an
apparatus
intendedto renderindividualsdocileanduseful,by means
of precisework upon their bodies,indicatedthe prison institution,
before the law ever definedit as the penaltypar excellettce.
At the
turn of the eighteenthandnineteenthcenturies,therewas,it is true,
a penalityof detention;andit wasa new thing. But it wasreallythe
openingup of penalityto mechanisms
ofcoercionalreadyelahorated
elsewhere.The 'models' of penal detention - Ghent, Gloucester,
Walnut Street- markedthe first visible points of this transition,
rather than innovationsor points of deparnrre.The prison, an
essential
elementin thepunitivepanopoly,certainlymarksanimportant momentin the history of penaliustice its access
to 'humanity'.
But it is also an important momentin the history of thosedisciplinary mechanisms
that the new classpower wasdeveloping:that
in which they colonizedthe legal institution. At the turn of the
aentury,a new legislationdefinedthe power to punish as a general
function of societythat wasexercisedin the samemannerover all its
members,andin which eachindividualwasequallyrepresented:
but
in makingdetentionthe penaltyparexcelhnce,
it introducedproceduresof dominationcharacteristic
of a particularrype of power.A

2r,

Prison
supposedto be 'equal', a legal machinerythat is
iustice that is 'autonomous',
supposed
to be
but whichcontainsall theasymmetries
of disciplinarysubiection,this conjunctionmarkedthe birth of the
prison,'the penaltyof civilizedsocieties'(Rossi,r@).
Onecanunderstand
theself-evidentcharacterthat prisonpunishmentvery soonassumed.In the first yearsof the nineteenthcentury,
peoplewerestill awareof its novelty;and yet it appearedso bound
up and at such a deeplevel with the very functioning of society that it banishedinto oblivion all the other punishmentsthat
the eighteenth-centuryreformershad imagined.It seemedto have
no alternative,asif carriedalongby the very movementof histoqn
'It is not chance,it
is not the whim of the legislatorthat havemade
imprisonmentthe baseand almostthe entireedificeof our present
pertalscale:it is the progressof ideasand the improvementin
morals' (Van Meenan,Jz9-3o). And, although,in a little over a
century, this self-evidentcharacterhas becometransformed,it has
not disappeared.
We :re awareof all the inconveniences
of prison,
and that it is dangerouswhen it is not useless.
And yet onecannot
'see'how to replaceit. It is
the detestable
solution,which oneseems
unableto do without.
This 'self-evident'characterof the prison,which we find so difficult to abandon,is basedfirst of all on the simpleform of 'deprivation of liberty'. How could prisonnot be the penalrypar excellcnce
in a societyin which liberty is a good that belongsto all in the same
way and to which eachindividualis attached,as Dupon put it, by
a'universal and constant'feelingllts loss has thereforethe same
valuefor all; unlike tlrc 6ne, it is an 'egalitarian'punishment.The
prison is the clearest,simplest,most equitableof penalties.Moreover, it makesit possibleto quantify the penaltyexactlyaccording
to the variableof time.Thereis a wages-formof imprisonmentthat
- and
constifirtes,in industrialsocieties,
its economic'self-evidence'
enablesit to appearas a reparation.By levying on the time of the
prisoner,the prisonseemsto expressin concretetermsthe ideathat
theoffencehasinjured,beyondthevictim, societyasa whole.There
is an economico-moralself-evidence
of a penality that metesout
punishmentsin days,monthsand yearsand drawsup quantitative
equivalencesbetweenoffencesand duratiorts. Hence the expression, so frequently heard, so consistentwith the functioning of
232

Completeand austereinstitutions
punishments,though contrarl to the strict theory of penal law,
'pay one's debt'. The prison is
thatone is in prison in order to
'natural'
'natural',
iust as the useof time to mqxlure exchangesis
in our society.r
But the self-evidenceof the prison is also basedon its role,
supposedpr demanded,asanapp:ratusfor transformingindividuals.
How could theprison not beimmediatelyacceptedwhen,by locking
up, retraining and rendering docile, it merely reproduces,with a
little more emphasis,all the mechanismsthat are to be found in the
socialbodyl The prison is like a ratherdisciplinedbarracks,a strict
This double
school,a darkworkshop,but not qualitativelydifferent.
foundation- juridico-economicon the onehand,technico-disciplinary on the other - madethe prison seemthe most immediateand
civilized form of all penalties.And it is this double functioning that
immediatelygaveit its solidity. One thing is clear:the prison was
not at first a deprivationof liberty to which a technicalfunction of
'legal
correctionwas later added;it was from the ouset a form of
detention'entmstedwith an additionalcorractivetask,or an enterprise for reforming individuals that the deprivation of liberty
allowedto function in the legalsystem.In short, penalimprisonment, from the beginning of the nineteenthcentury, coveredboth
the deprivation of liberty and the technicalransformation of
individuals.
Let usremembera numberof facts.In thecodesof r8o8and r8ro,
and the measuresthat immediately precededor followed them,
imprisonmentwasneverconfusedwith meredeprivationof liberty.
It was,or in any casehadto be,a differentiatedandfinalizedmechanism. Differentiatedbecauseit had to have the sameform, whether
the prisonerhad beensentencedor wasmerelyaccused,whetherhe
was a minor offenderor a criminaL the various types of prison maisond'arr!t, maisonde correction,maisoncentrale- ought in
principleto correspondmoreor lessto thesedifferencesand provide
a punishmentthat would be not only graduatedin intensity,but
diversifiedin its ends.For the prison hasa purpose,which is laid
down at the outset:'The law inflicting penalties,someof which are
more seriousthan others, cannot allow the individual condemned
to light penaltiesto be imprisonedin the sameplaceasthe criminal
condemnedto more seriouspenalties. . . although the penaltyfixed
23'

Prison
by the law has as its principal aim the reparation of the crime, it also
desires the amendment of the guilty man' (Real, 244). And this
transformation must be one of the internal effectsof imprisonment.
Prison-punishment,prison-apparatus:'The order that must reign in
the maison deforce may contribute powerfully to the regeneration
of the convictsl the vices of upbringing, the contagion of bad
example,idleness.. . have given birth to crime. Well, let us try to
close up all these sourcesof comrption; let the rules of a healthy
morality be practisedinthe maisonsdeforce;that, compelled to work,
convicts may come in the end to like it; when they have reaped the
reward, they will acquire the habit, the taste, the need for occupation; let them give each other the example of a laborious life; it will
soon becomea pure life; soon they will begin to know regret for the
past, the first harbinger of a love of duty.'t The techniquesof correction immediately form part of the institutional framework of
penal detention.
One should also recall that the movement for reforming the prisons, for controlling their functioning is not a recent phenomenon.
It does not even seemto have originated in a recognition offailure.
Prison 'reform' is virtually contemporary with the prison itselfi it
constitutes, as it were, its programme. From the outset, the prison
was caught up in a series of accompanying mechanisms, whose
purpose was apparently to correct it, but which seem to form part
of its very functioning, so closely have they been bound up with its
existencethroughout its long history. There was, at once, a prolix
technology of the prison. There were inquiries: that of Chaptal in
rSor (whose task it was to discover what could be used to introduce
the modern prison system into France), that of Decazesin r8r9,
Villermd's work published in r8zo, the report on the maisonscentrales drawn up by Martignac in 1829, the inquiries carried out in
the United Statesby Beaumont and Tocqueville in r83r, by Demetz
and Blouet in 1835, the questionnairesaddressedby Montalivet to
the directors of the maisonscentralesand to the general councils of
the dCpartemezrs
during the debate on solitary confinement. There
were societiesfor supervising the functioning of the prisons and for
suggesting improvements: in r8r8, the very official SociCtCpour
l'amilioration des prkons, a little later the SocidtCdes prisons and
various philanthropic groups. Innumerable measures - orders,
2t4

Complete and austereinstitutions
instructions or laws: from the reform that the first Restoration had
envisagedin Septembert8r4, and which was never implemented, to
the law of fi44, drawn up by Tocqueville, which ended for a time
the long debate on the means of making imprisonment effective.
There were programmes drawn up to improve the functioning of
the machine-prison:sprogrammes for the treatment of the prisoners,
models for material improvement, some of these, like those of
Danjou and Harou-Romain, remaining no more than proiects,
others becoming embodied in instructions (like the circular of 9
August r84r on the building of maisonsd'arr6t), others becoming
actual buildings, such as the Petite Roquette in which cellular
imprisonment was organized for the first time in France.
To these should be added the publications that sprang more or
less directly from the prison and were drawn up either by philan'specialists' (such as the
thropists like Appert, or a little later by
Atnales de la Charitd)a or, again, by former prisonersl Pauvre
Jacquei at the end of the Restoration, or the Gaqettede SaintePClagieat the beginning of the July monarchy.d
The prison should not be seen as an inert institution, shaken at
'theory of the prison' was its
intervals by reform movements. The
constant set of operational instructions rather than its incidental
criticism - one of its conditions of functioning. The prison has
always formed part of an active 6eld in which proiects, improvements, experiments, theoretical statements,personal evidence and
investigations have proliferated. The prison institution has always
been a focus ofconcern and debate.Is the prison still, then, a dark,
abandoned regionl Is the fact that one has ceasedto say so for
almost 2oo years sufficient proof that it is notl In becoming a legal
punishment, it weighted the old juridico-political question of the'
right to punish with all the problems, all the agitations that have
surrounded the corrective technologies of the individual.
'complete
and austereinstitutions' (Baltard,
Baltard called them
r8z9). In severalrespects,the prison must be an exhaustivedisciplinary apparatus:it must assumeresponsibility for all aspectsof the
individual, his physical training, his aptitude to work, his everyday
conduct, his moral attitude, his stateof mind; the prison, much more
than the school, the workshop or the army, which always involved a

2rt

Prison
certain specialization, is'omni-disciplinary'. lVloreover, the prison
has neither exterior nor gap; it cannot be interrupted, except when
its task is totally completed; its action on the individual must be
uninterrupted: an unceasingdiscipline. Lastly, it gives almost total
power over the prisoners;it has its internal mechanismsof repression
and punishmenc a despotic discipline. It carries to their greatest
intensity all the procedures to be found in the other disciplinary
mechanisms.It must be the most powerful machinery for imposing
a new form on the perverted individual; its mode of action is the
'In
prison the government may
constraint of a total education:
disposeof the liberty of the person and of the time of the prisoner;
from then on, one can imagine the power of the education which,
not only in a day, but in the successionofdays and even years, may
regulatefor man the time ofwaking and sleeping,ofactivityand rest,
the number and duration of meals, the quality and ration of food,
the nature and product of labour, the time of prayer, the use of
speechand even, so to speak,that ofthought, that education which,
in the short, simple journeys from refectory to workshop, from
workshop to the cell, regulatesthe movementsof the body, and even
in moments of rest, determines the use of time, the time-table, this
education, which, in short, takes possessionof man as a whole, of
all the physical and moral faculties that are in him and of the time
in which he is himself' (Lucas, II, rz3-4). This complete 'reformatory' lays down a recoding of existencevery different from the mere
juridical deprivation of liberty and very different, too, from the
simple mechanismof exemplaimagined by the reformers at the dme
of the iddologues.
r. The first principle was isolation. The isolation of the convict
from the externalworld, from everything that motivated the offence,
from the complicities that facilitated it. The isolation of the prisoners
from one another. Not only must the penalty be individual, but it
must also be individualizing- in two ways. First, the prison must be
designedin such a way as to effaceof itself the harmful consequences
to which it gives rise in gathering together very different convicts
in the sameplace:to stifle plots and revolts, to prevent the formation
of future complicities that may give rise to blackmail (when the
convicts are once again at liberty), to form an obstacle to the immorality of so many 'mysterious associations'.In short, the prison

46

Complete and austereinstitutions
should form from the malefactorsthat it gathers together a homogeneousand interdependentpopulation: 'There existsat this moment
among us an organized society of criminals . . . They form a small
nation within the greater. Almost all these men met or meet again
in prison. We rnust now disperse the members of this society'
(Tocqueville, Rapport d la Chambredes Ddputis, quoted in Beaumont and Tocqueville, 3921). Moreover, through the reflection
that it gives rise to and the remorse that cannot fail to follow,
'Thrown
into
solitude must be a positive instrument of reform:
solitude, the convict reflects. Placed alone in the presenceof his
crime, he learns to hate it, and, if his soul is not yet blunted by evil,
it is in isolation that remorsewill come to assailhim' (Beaumont and
Tocqueville, ro9). Through the fact, too, that solitude assuresa
sort of self-regulaiion of the penalty and makespossible a spontaneous individualization of the punishment: the more the convict is
capable of reflecting, the more capable he was of committing his
crime; but, also, the more lively his remorse, the more painful his
solitude; on the other hand, when he has profoundly repented and
made amendswithout the leastdissimulation, solitude will no longer
weigh upon him: 'Thus, according to this admirable discipline, each
intelligence and each morality bears within itself the principle and
mezrsureof a punishment whose error and human fallibility Grnnot
alter the certainty and invariable equiry . . . Is it not in truth like
the sealof a divine and providential lusticei' (Aylies, ri'2-t). Lastly,
and perhaps above all, the isolation of the convicts guaranteesthat
it is possible to exercise over them, with maximum intensity, a
power that will not be overthrown by any other influence; solitude
is the primary condition of total submission: 'Just imaginer' said
Charles Lucas, referring to the role of the governor, the instructor,
the chaplain and other'charitable persons' as regards the isolated
'just
convict,
imagine the power of human speech intervening in
the midst of the terrible discipline of silence to speak to the heart,
to the soul, to the human pirson' (Lucas, l, 67).Isolation provides
an intimate exchange between the convict and the power that is
exercisedover him.
It is at this point that the debate on the rwo American systemsof
imprisonment, that of Auburn and that of Philadelphia, was situated.
In fact, this debate,which was so wide-ranging and long drawn out,e

237

Prison
concerned only the way in which isolation should be used, it being
acceptedby all.
The Auburn model prescribed the individual cell during the
night, work and meals in common, but under the rule of absolute
silence, the convicts being allowed to speak only to the warders,
with their permission and in a low voice. It was a clear referenceto
the monastic model; a reference,too, to the discipline of the workshop. The prison must be the microcosm of a perfect society in
which individuals are isolated in their moral existence,but in which
they come together in a strict hierarchical framework, with no
lateral relation, communication being possible only in a vertical
direction. The advantageof the Auburnian system, according to its
advocates,was that it formed a duplication of society itself. Constraint was assuredby material means, but above all by a rule that
one had to learn to respectand which was guaranteedby surveillance
and punishment.Rather than keep the convicts'under lock and key
like wild beasts in their cages', they must be brought together,
'made join
to
together in useful exercises,forced together to adopt
good habits, preventing moral contagion by active surveillance,
maintaining reflection by the rule of silence'; this rule accustomsthe
convict'to regard the law as a sacredprecept whose violation brings
just and legitimate harm' (Mittermaier, in Revuefrangaiseet Ctrangire
de.ldgislation,1836). Thus this operation of isolation, assembly
without communication and law guaranteed by unintermpted
supervision, must rehabilitate the criminal as a social individual: it
'useful
trains him to a
and resigned activity' (Gasparin); it restores
'habits
for him
of sociability' (Beaumont.andTocqueville, r rz).
In absolute isolation - as at Philadelphia - the rehabilitation of
the criminal is expected not of the application of a common law,
but of the relation of the individual to his own conscienceand to
'Alone
what may enlighten him from within.T
in his cell, the convict
is handed over to himself; in the silence of his passionsand of the
world that surrounds him, he descendsinto his conscience,he
questions it and feels awakening within him the moral feeling that
never entirely perishesin the heart of man' (Journal desiconomistes,
II, r84z). It is not, therefore, an external respectfor the law or fear
of punishment alone that will act upon the convict but the workings
of the conscienceitself. A profound submission,rather than a super-

48

Complete and austereinstitutions
'morality',
ficial training; a change of
rather than of attitude. In the
Pennsylvanian prison, the only operations of correction were the
conscienceand the silent architecture that confronted it. At Cherry
'the
Hill,
walls are the punishment of the crime; the cell confronts
the convict with himself; he is forced to listen to his conscibnce'.
Hence work there is more in the nature of a consolation than an
obligation; supervisors do not have to exert force - this is assured
by the materiality of things - and conseguently,their authority may
'At
be accepted:
each visit, a few benevolent words flow from this
honest mouth and bring to the heart of the inmate gratitude, hope
and consolation; he loves his warder; and he loves him becausehe
is gentle and sympathetic. Walls are terrible, but man is good'
(Blouet). In this closed cell, this temporary sepulchre,the myths of
resurrectionariseeasilyenough. After night and silence,the regenerated life. Auburn was society itself reduced to its bare essentials.
Cherry Hill was life annihilated and begun again. Catholicism soon
'I
absorbed this Quaker technique into its discourses. seeyour cell
as no more than a frightful sepulchre where, instead of worms,
remorseand despaircome to gnaw at you and to turn your existence
into a hell in anticipation. But . . . what is for an irreligious prisoner
merely a tomb, a repulsive ossuary, becomes, for the sincerely
Christian convict, the very cradle of blessedimmortality.'8
A whole seriesof different conflicts stemmedfrom the opposirion
betweenthesetwo models: religious (must conversion be the principal element of correctionl), medical (does total isolation drive
convicts insanel), economic (which method costs lessl), architectural and administrative (which form guaranteesthe best surveillancei). This, no doubt, was why the argument lasted so long. But,
at the heart of the debate,and making it possible, was this primary
objective of carceral action; coercive individualization, by the
termination of any relation that is not supervised by authority or
arranged according to hierarchy.
'Work
z.
alternating with meals accompanies the convict to
evening prayer; then a new sleepgives him an agreeablerest that is
not disturbed by the phantoms of an unregulatedimagination. Thus
the six weekdays pass by. They are followed by a day devoted
exclusively to prayer, instruction and salutary meditations. Thus
the weeks, the months, the years follow one another; thus the
239

Prison
prisoner who, on entering the establishment, was an inconstant
man, or one who was single-minded only in his irregularity, seeking
to destroy his existenceby the variety of his vices,gradually becomes
by dint of a habit that is at first purely external, but is soon transformed into a secondnature, so familiar with work and the pleasures
that derive from it, that, provided wise instruction has opened up
his soul to repentance,he may be exposedwith more confidence to
temptations, when he finally recovers his liberty' (Julius, 4r7-r8).
Vork is de6ned, with isolation, as an agent of carceral fansformation. This is to be found as early as the code of r8o8: 'Although the
penalty inflicted by the law has as its aim the reparation of a crime,
it is also intended to reform the convict, and this double aim will
be fulfilled if the malefactor is snatched from that fatal idleness
which, having brought him to prison, meets him again within its
walls and, seizing hold of him, brings him to the ultimate degree of
depravity.'s Work is neither an addition nor a corrective to the
r!gime of detention: whether it is a question of forced labour,
reclusion or imprisonment, it is conceived, by the legislator himself,
as necessarilyaccompanying it. But the necessityinvolved is precisely not the necessityof which the eighteenth-century reformers
spoke, when they wished to make imprisonment either an example
for the public or a useful reparation for society. In the carceral
r6gime, the link between work and punishment is of another type.
Several polemics that took place under the Restoration and the
July Monarchy throw light on the function attributed to penal
labour. First, there was the debate on the subject of wages. The
labour of prisoners was remuneratedin France. This posed a problem: if work in prison is remunerated,that work cannot really form
part ofthe penalty; and the prisoner may therefore refuse to perform
it. Moreover, wages reward the skill of the worker and not the
improvement of the convict: 'The worst subjectsare almost everywhere the most skilful workersl they are the most highly remunerated, consequently the most intemperate and least ready to repent'
(Marquet-Wasselot, quoted in Lucas, 3z$. The debate, which had
never quite died down, was resumed with great liveliness in the
early r84os:it was a period of economiccrisis,a period of workers'
agitation and a period, too, in which the opposition between the
worker and the delinquent was beginning to crystallize (cf. below,
240

Complete and austereinstitutions
z8y). There were strikes against the prison workshops: when a
Chaumont glove-maker succeededin organizing a workshop at
Clairvaux, the workers protested, declared that their labour was
dishonoured, occupied the manufactory and forced the employer to
abandonhis project (cf. Aguet, 3o-3r). There was also a widespread
press campaign in the workers' newspapers:on the theme that the
government encouragedpenal labour in order to reduce'free'wagesl
on the theme that the inconveniences of these prison workshops
were even more evident for women, who were thus deprived of their
labour, driven to prostitution and therefore to prison, where these
samewomen, who could no longer work when they were free, then
competed with those who were still at work (L'AteEer, yd year,
no. 4, December I84z); on the theme that prisoners were given the
'in warm and shelteredconditions thieves execute the
safestjobs work of hat-making and cabinet-making', while the unemployed
'to
the human slaughter-houseto make white'
hatter is forced to go
(L'Atelierr6thyearrno.
z, November 1845);
lead at two francsa day'
on the theme that philanthropy is more concerned about the work'We
are sure
ing conditions of prisoners than those of free workers:
would
science
that if prisoners worked with mercury, for example,
the
protecting
be a great deal more ready than it is to 6nd ways of
"Those
convictsl"
poor
workers from the dangers of its fumes:
someone would exclaim, who scarcely has a word for the gilders.
But what can you expectl One has to have killed or robbed to
arouse compassion or interest.' On the theme above all that, if the
prison was tending to become a workshop, it would not be long
before beggars and the unemployed were sent there, thus reconstituting the old hLpitaux gdniraux of France or the workhouses of
England. In addition, there were petitions and letters, especially
after the law of fi44 - one petition, rejected by the Chambre de
'found inhuman that one should propose to apply murderers
Paris,
and thieves to work that is today the lot of a few thousand workers';
'the
Chambre preferred Barrabasto us' (L'Atelier, 4th year' no. 9'
June 1844 and yth year, no. 7, April fi41; cf. also, of the same
period, La Dimocratie pacifque); typographical workers sent a
letter to the minister when they learnt that a printing-works was to
'You
have decided between
be set up in the prison at Melun:
reprobates iustly punished by the law and citizens who sacrifice
24r

Prison
their days, in abstinenceand probity, to the lives of their families and
to the wealth of their nation' (L'Atelier, tth year, no. 6, March l84y).
The answersgiven by the government and the administration to
this whole campaign changed very little. Penal labour cannot be
criticized for any unemployment it may give rise to: with its limited
extent, and its low output, it cannot have a general effect on the
economy. It is intrinsically useful,not as an activity of production,
but by virtue of the effect it has on the human mechanism. It is a
principle of order and regularity; through the demands that it
imposes,it conveys, imperceptibly, the forms of a rigorous power;
it bends bodies to regular movements, it excludes agitation and
distraction, it imposesa hierarchy and a surveillance that are all the
more accepted,and which will be inscribed all the more deeply in
the behaviour of the convicts, in that they form part of its logic:
'the
with work
rule is introduced into a prison, it reigns there without effort, without the use of any repressive and violent means.
By occupying the convict, one gives him habits oforder and obedience; one makes the idler that he was diligent and active . . . with
time, he finds in the regular movement of the prison, in the manual
labours to which he is subjected . . . a certain remedy against the
wanderings of his imagination' (Bdrenger). Penal labour must be
seen as the very machinery that transforms the violent, agitated,
unreflective convict into a part that plays its role with perfect
regularity. The prison is not a workshop; it is, it must be of itself,
a machine whose convict-workers are both the cogs and the products;it'occupies them continually,with the soleaim of filling their
moments. When the body is agitated, when the mind applies itself
to a particular object, importunate ideas depart, calm is born once
again in the soul' (Danjou, r8o). If, in the final analysis,the work of
the prison has an economic effect, it is by producing individuals
mechanizedaccording to the general norms of an industrial society:
'Work
is the providence of the modern peoples;it replacesmorality,
fills the gap left by beliefsand is regardedas the principle of all good.
Work must be the religion of the prisons. For a machine-society,
purely mechanical means of reform are required' (Faucher, 64; in
England the 'treadmill' and the pump provided a disciplinary
mechanization of the inmates, with no end product). The making
of machine-men, but also of proletariansl in effect, when one has
242

Complete and austereinstitutions
'from
'pair
only a
of arms for any good work', one can live only
the product ofone's labour, through the practice ofa profession or
from the product ofthe labour ofothers, by thieving'; but, although
the prison did not force offenders to work, it seemsto have reintroduced into its very institution and, obliquely, by meansof taxation,
'The question of
this levying by some on the labour of others:
idlenessis the sameas in society; it is from the labour of others that
the convicts live, if they do not exist from their own labour' (Lucas,
Il, 3t3-r4). The labour by which the convict contributes to his
own needs turns the thief into a docile worker. This is the utility
of remuneration for penal labour; it imposes on the convict the
'moral'
form of wages as the condition of his existence. Wages
'love
inculcate the
and habit' of work (Lucas, lI, z4); they give
those malefactors who do not know the difference between mine
'what
and thine a senseof property - of
one has earnedby the sweat
of one's brow' (Danjou, 2ro-rr; cf. also L'Atelierr 6th year, no. z,
November 1845); they also teach those who have lived in dissipation the virtues ofthrift and foresight (Lucas; a third ofthe prisoner's
daily wageswas set asidefor the day when he left the prison); lastly,
by proposing a quantity of work to be carried out, they make it
possible to expressquantitatively the convict's zeal and the progress
of his improvement (Ducpdtiaux, 1o-jr). The wagesof penal labour
do not reward production; they function as a motive and measure
of individual transformation: it is a legal fiction, since it does not
'free' granting
of labour power, but an artifice that
represent the
is presumed to be effective in the techniques of correction.
What, then, is the use of penal labourl Not profit; nor even the
formation of a useful skill; but the constitution of a power relation,
an empty economic form, a schemaof individual submission and of
adjustment to a production apparatus.
The perfect image of prison labour was the women's workshop
at Clairvauxl the silent precision of the human machinery is reminis'On
cent of the regulated rigour of the convent:
a throne, above
which is a crucifix, a sister is sitting; before her, arranged in two
rov/s, the prisoners are carrying out the task imposed on them, and,
as needlework accountsfor almost all the work, the strictest silence
is constantly maintained. . . ft seemsthat, in these halls, the very
air breathes penitence and expiation. One is carried back, as by a
243

Prison
spontaneousmovement, to the time of the venerable habits of this
ancient place, one remembers those voluntary penitents who shut
themselvesup here in order to say farewell to the q/orld'. Compare
'Go
this with the following;
into a cotton-mill; listen to the conversationsof the workers and the whistling of the machines.Is there
any contrast in the world more affiicting than the regularity and
predictability of these mechanical movements, compared with the
disorder of ideas and morals, produced by the contact of so many
men, women and children' (Faucher zo).
3. But prison goes beyond the mere privation of liberty in a
more important way. It becomesincreasingly an instrument for the
modulation of the penalty; an apparatuswhich, through the execution of the sentencewith which it is entrusted, seemsto have the
right, in part at least, to assumeits principle. Of course, the prison
institution was not given this 'right' in the nineteenth century or
even in the twentieth, except in a fragmentary form (through the
oblique way of releaseon licence, semi-release,the organization of
reformatories). But it should be noted that it was claimed very
early on by those responsiblefor prison administration, as the very
condition of the good functioning of a prison, and of its efficiency
in the task of reformation that the law itself had given it.
The same goes for the duration of the punishment; it makes it
possible to quantify the penaltiesexactly, to graduate them according to circumstancesand to give to legal punishment the more or less
explicit form of wages;but it also runs the risk of having no corrective value, if it is 6xed once and for all in the sentence.The length
'exchange
of the penalty must not be a measurementof the
value'
'useful'
of the offencel it must be adjusted to the
transformation of
the inmate during his term of imprisonment. It is not a timemeasure, but a time finalized. The form of the operation, rather
'Just
than the form of the wages.
as the prudent physician ends his
medication or continues it according to whether the patient has
or has not arrived at a perfect cure, so, in the first of these two
hypotheses,expiation ought to end with the complete reform of the
prisoner; for, in this case,all detention has becomeuseless,and from
then on asinhuman to the reformed individual as it is vainly burdensome for the State.'loThe correct duration of the penalty must be
calculated,therefore, not only according to the particular crime and
244

Complete and austere institutions
its circumstances, but also according to the penalty iself as it takes
place in actual fact. This amounts to saying that, although the
penalty must be individualized, it is so not on the basis of the
individual-offender, the juridical subject ofhis act, the responsible
author ofthe offence, but on the basis ofthe individual punished,
the obiect ofa supervisedtransforrnation, the individual in detention
'It
insened in the prison apparatus,modified by it or reacting to it.
is a question only of reforming the evil-doer. Once this reform has
come about, the criminal must return to society' (C. Lucas, quoted
in the Gaqettedes tihwtauxr 6 April 1837).
The quality and content of detention should no longer be determined by the nature of the ofience alone. The juridical gravity of a
crime does not at all have the value of a univocal sign for the
characterof the convict, whether or not he is capableof reform. In
particular the crime-offence distinction, which the penal code
recognized in drawing the corresponding distinction between mere
imprisonment and imprisonment with hard labour, is not operational in terms of reform. This was the almost universal opinion
expressedby the directors ofthe maisow centales, during an inquiry
'The
minor offendersare genercarried out by the ministry in 1836:
ally the most vicious. . . Among the criminals, one meets many
men who have given in to the violence of their passionsand to the
'The
behaviour of criminals is much better
needsof a large family.'
than that of the minor offenders; the former are more submissive,
harder-working than the latter, who, in general, are pickpockets,
debaucheesand idlers.'ll Hence the idea that punitive rigour must
not be in direct proportion to the penal importance of the offencenor determined once and for all.
As an operation of correction, imprisonment has its own requirements and dangers. It is its effects that must determine its stages,its
temporary increases,its successivereductions, in severity; what
'mobile
classification of moralities'. The
Charles Lucas called the
applied
progressive system
at Geneva since t8zy was often advo(Fresnel,
zg-3r).It
took the form, for example, of'
cated in France
for
prisoners
in general, a punishment area
three areas:a trial area
and a reward areafor those who had embarked on the v/ay of reform
(Lucas, II, 44o). Or it took the form of four phases:a period of
intimidation (deprivation of work and of any internal or external
24t

Prison
relations); a period of work (isolation, but work which, after the
phaseof forced idleness,would be welcomed as a benefit); a rdgime
of moralization (more or less frequent 'lectures' from the directors
and official visitors); a period of work in common (Duras). Although
the principle of the penalty was certainly a legal decision, its
administration, its quality and its rigours must belong to an autonomous mechanismthat supervisesthe effectsof punishment within the
veryapparafts that produces them. A whole r6gime of punishments
and rewards that is a way not simply of gaining respectfor the prison
regulations, but of making the action of the prison on the inmates
effective. The legal authority itself came to accept this: 'One should
not be surprised, said the supreme coun of appeal,when consulted
on the subject ofa bill concerning the prisons, at the idea ofgranting
rewards, which might consist either for the most part in money, or
in a better diet, or even in a reduction ofthe duration ofthe penalty.
If anything can awaken in the minds of convicts the notions of good
and evil, bring them to moral reflections and raise them to some
extent in their own eyes, it is the possibility of obtaining some
reward' (Lucas, ll, 44r-z).
And it must be admitted that the legal authorities can have no
immediate control over all these procedures that rectify the penalty
as it proceeds. It is a question, in effect, of measures that by
definition can intervene only after the sentenceand can bear only on
something other than the offences.Those who administer detention
must therefore have an indispensableautonomy, when it comes to
the question of individualizing and varying the application of the
penalty: supervisors,a prison governor, a chaplain or an instructor
are more capable of exercising this corrective function than those
who hold the penal povier. It is their judgement (understood as
observation, diagnosis, characterization, information, differential
classification)and not a verdict in the form of an attribution of guilt,
that must serve as a support for this internal modulation of the
penalty - for its mitigation or even its interruption. When in 1846,
Bonneville presentedhis project of releaseon licence, he defined it
as'the right of the administration,with the previousapproval of the
legal authority, to placein temporary liberty, after a sufficient period
of expiation, the completely reformed convict, on condition that he
will be brought back into prison on the slightest well-founded
246

Complete and,austereinstitutions
'arbitrariness' which, in the
complaint' (Bonneville, y). All this
old penal system, enabled the judges to modulate the penalty
and the princes to ignore it if they so wished, all this arbitrariness,
which the modern codes have withdrawn from the iudicial power,
has been gradually reconstituted on the side of the power that
administers and supervises punishment. It is the sovereignry of
'He
is a veritable magistrate
knowledge possessedby the warder:
called upon to reign as sovereign in the prison . . . who, in order not
to fall short in his mission, must combine the most eminent virtue
with a profound knowledge of mankind' (Bdrenger).
And so we arrive at a principle, clearly formulated by Charles
Lucas, which, although it marks the virtual beginning of modern
penal functioning, very few jurists would dare to accept today
without some hesitation; let us call it the Declaration of Carceral
Independence- in it is claimed the right to be a power that not only
possessesadministrative autonomy, but is also a part of punitive
sovereignty. This affirmation of the rights of the prison posits as a
principle: that criminal judgement is an arbitrary unity; that it must
be broken down; that the writers of the penal codeswere correct in
distinguishing the legislative level (which classifiesthe acts and attributes penalties to them) and the judicial level (which passesthe
sentences);that the task today is to analysein turn this later judicial
level; that one should distinguish in it what is properly judicial
'the intentionalities that
(assessnot so much acts as agents,measure
give human acts so many different moralities', and therefore rectify
of the legislator); and to give autonomy to
if it can the assessments
'penitentiary judgement', which is perhaps the most important; in
'way
of prerelation to it the assessmentof the court is merely a
'only when
assessed
morality
of
the
agent
can
be
for
the
iudging',
put to the test. The judge, therefore, requires in turn a compulsory
and this supervision
and rectifying supervision of his assessments;
is that provided by the penitentiary prison' (Lucas, II, 4I8-zz).
One may speak,therefore, of an excessor a seriesof excesseson
'carthe part of imprisonment in teffns of legal detention - of the
'judicial'.
Now this excesswas observedvery
ceral'in relation to the
early on, from the very birth of the prison, either in the form of real
practices, or in the form of projects. It did not come later, as a
secondaryeffect. The great carceral machinery was bound up with
247

Prison
the very functioning of the prison. The sign of this autonomy is
very apparentin the'useless'actsofviolence perpetratedby warders
or in the despotismof an administration that has all the privileges of
an enclosedcommunity. Its roots lie elsewhere:precisely in the fact
'useful',
that the prison is required fo be
that the deprivation of
liberty - that juridical levying on an ideal property - must, from
the outset, have exerciseda positive technical role, operating transformations on individuals. And, for this operation, the carceral
apparatushas recourse to three great schemata:the politico-moral
schemaof individual isolation and hierarchy; the economic model
of force applied to compulsory work; the technico-medical model
of cure and normalization. The cell,,the workshop, the hospital.
The margin by which the prison exceedsdetention is filled in fact
by techniquesof a disciplinary type. And this disciplinary addition
to the juridical is what, in short, is called the 'penitentiary'.
This addition was not acceptedeasily. To begin with, there was
the question of principle: the penalty must be nothing more than
the deprivation of liberty; like our present rulers, but with all the
freshnessof his language, Decazessays: 'The law must follow the
convicted man into the prison where it has sent him' (Decazes).But
very soon - and this is a characteristicfact - thesedebateswere to
become a battle for appropriating control of this additional penitentiary elementl the judges were to demand a right of inspection
over the carceral mechanisms: 'The moral enlightenment of the
inmates requires innumerable cooperators; it is only by visits of
inspection, commissionsof surveillanceand charity associationsthat
this may be accomplished.Auxiliaries, then, are neededand it is the
judges who must provide them' (Ferrus, viiil an ordinance of fi47
had set up commissions of surveillance). From this period, the
penitentiary order had become suficiently well establishedfor there
to be no question of dismantling it; the question was how to get
control of it. This gave rise to the figure of the judge obsessedby a
desire for prison. A century later, this was to give birth to a bastard,
yet deformed child: the magistrateentrusted with the determination
of penalties.
But, if the penitentiary, in so far as it went well beyond mere
detention, was able not only to establish itself, but to entrap the
248

Complete and austereinstitutions
whole of penal justice and to imprison the judges themselves,it was
becauseit was able to introduce criminal justice into relations of
knowledge that have since become its infinite labyrinth.
The prison, the place where the penalty is carried out, is also the
place of observation of punished individuals. This takes two forms:
surveillance, of course, but also knowledge of each inmate, of his
behaviour, his deeper statesof mind, his gradual improvement; the
prisons must be conceived as places for the formation of clinical
'the penitentiary system cannot be
knowledge about the convictsl
an a priori conception;it is an'induction of the social state.There are
moral diseases,as well as breakdowns in health, where the treatment
dependson the site and direction of the illness' (Faucher, 6). This
involves two essentialmechanisms.It must be possible to hold the
prisoner under permanent observation; every report that can be
made about him must be recorded and cornputed. The theme of the
Panopticon - at once surveillance and observation, security and
knowledge, individualization and totalization, isolation and transparency - found in the prison its privileged locus of realization.
Although the panoptic procedures,as concreteforms of the exercise
of power, have become extremely widespread, at least in their less
concentrated forms, it was really only in the penitentiary institutions that Bentham's utopia could be fully expressedin a material
form. In the r83os, the Panopticon became the architectural programme of most prison projects. It vzas the most direct way of
'the
intelligence of discipline in stone' (Lucas, I, 69); of
expressing
niaking architecture transparent to the administration of powerl12
of making it possible to substitute for force or other violent constraints the gentle efficiency of total surveillancel of ordering space
according to the recent humanization of the codes and the new
'The
authorities, on the one hand, and the
penitentiary theory:
architect, on the other, must know, therefore, whether the prisons
are to be basedon the principle of milder penalties or on a system
of reforming convicts, in accordance with legislation which, by
getting to the root causeof the people's vices, becomesa principle
that will regeneratethe virtues that they must practice' (Baltard, 4-5).
In short, its task was to constitute a prison-machinert with a cell
'in
the
of visibility in which the inmate will find himself caught as
glass house of the Greek philosopher' (Harou-Romain, 8) and a
249

Prison
central point from which a permanent gaze may control prisoners
and staff. Around these two requirements, several variations were
possible the Benthamite Panopticon in its strict form, the semicircle, the cross-plan, the star shape. In the midst of all these discussions,the Minister of the Interior in r84r sums up the fundamental principles: 'The central inspection hall is the pivot of the
system. Without a central point of inspection, surveillance ceases
to be guaranteed, continuous and general; for it is impossible to
have complete trust in the activity, zeal and intelligence of the
warder who immediately supervisesthe cells. . . The architect must
therefore bring all his attention to bear on this object; it is a question
both of discipline and economy. The more accurate and easy the
surveillance,the lessneed will there be to seekin the strength of the
building guaranteesagainst attempted escapeand communication
beween the inmates.But surveillancewill be perfect if from a central
hall the director or head-wardersees,without moving and without
biing seen,not only the entrancesofall the cellsand even the inside
of most of them when the unglazed door is open, but also the
warders guarding the prisoners on every floor. . . With the formula
of circular or semi-circular prisons, it vzould be possible to seefrom
a single centre all the prisoners in their cells.and the warders in the
inspectiongalleries'(Ducatel, 9).
But the penitentiaryPanopticonwas alsoa systemof individualizing and permanent documentation. The same year in which
variants of the Benthamite schema were recommended for the
building of prisons, the system of 'moral accounting' was made
compulsory:an individual report of a uniform kind in every prison,
on which the governor or head-warder, the chaplain and the
instructor had to fill in their observations on each inmate: 'It is in a
way the vademecumof prison administration,making it possibleto
assesseach case, each circumstance and, consequently, to know
what treatment to apply to eachprisoner individually' (Ducp6tiaux,
y6-7). Many other, much more complete,systemsof recording were
planned or tried out (cf., for example, Gregory, r99ff; GrelletWammy, z3-5 and ryg-zq). The overall aim was to make the
prison a place for the constitution of a body of knowledge that
would regulate the exerciseof penitentiary practice. The prison has
not only to know the decisionof the judgesand to apply it in terms
2to

Complete and austereinstitudons
ofthe establishedregulations: it has to extract unceasingly from the
inmate a body of knowledge that will make it possible to transform
the penal measureinto a penitentiary operation; which will make of
the penalty required by the offencea modification of the inmate that
will be of use to society. The autonomy of the carceralrdgime and
the knowledge that it createsmake it possible to increasethe utility
of the penalty, which the code had made the very principle of its
'The governor
must not lose sight of a single
punitive philosophy:
inmate, becausein whatever part of the prison the inmate is to be
found, whether he is entering or leaving, or whether he is staying
there, the governor must also justify the motives for his staying in
a particular classificationor for his movement from one to another.
He is a veritable accountant. Each inmate is for him, in the sphere
of individual education, a capital invested with penitentiary interest'
(Lucas, Tl, 449-1o). As a highly efficient technology, penitentiary
practiceproducesa return on the capital invested in the penal system
and in the building of heavy prisons.
Similarly, the ofiender becomes an individual to know. This
demand for knowledge was not, in the first instance, inserted into
the legislation itself, in order to provide substancefor the sentence
and to determine the true degreeof guilt. It is as a convict, as a point
of application for punitive mechanisms,that the offender is constituted himself as the object of possible knowledge.
But this implies that the penitentiary apparatus,with the whole
technological programme that accompanies it, brings about a
curious substitution: from the hands ofjustice, it certainly receives
a convicted person; but what it must apply itself to is not, of course,
the offence, nor even exactly the offender, but a rather different
object, one defined by variableswhich at the outset at leastwere not
taken into account in the sentence,for they were relevant only for
a corrective technology. This other character, whom the penitentiary apparatus substitutes for the convicted offender, is the
delinquent.
The delinquent is to be distinguished from the offender by the
fact that it is not so much his act as his life that is relevant in characterizing him. The penitentiary operation, if it is to be a genuine
re-education,must becomethe sum total existenceof the delinquent,
making of the prison a sort of artificial and coercive theatre in which

2tr

Prison
his life will be examined from top to bottom. The legal punishment
bears upon an act; the punitive technique on a life; it falls to this
punitive technique, therefore, to reconstitute all the sordid detail of
a life in the form of knowledge, to fill in the gaps of that knowledge
and to act upon it by a practiceof compulsion.It is a biographical
knowledge and a technique for correcting individual lives. The
observation of the delinquent 'should go back not only to the
circumstances,but also to the causesof his crime; they must be
sought in the story of his life, from the triple point of view of
psychology, social position and upbringing, in order to discover the
dangerousproclivities of the first, the harmful predispositionsof the
second and the bad antecedentsof the third. This biographical
investigation is an essentialpart of the preliminary investigation for
the classificationof penalities before it becomesa condition for the
classification of moralities in the penitentiary system. It must
accompany the convict from the court to the prison, where the
governor's task is not only to receiveit, but also to complete, supervise and rectify its various factors during the period of detention'
(Lucas, IIr 44o-42). Behind the offender, to whom the investigation
of the facts may attribute responsibility for an offence, stands the
delinquent whose slow formation is shown in a biographical
investigation.The introduction of the 'biographical' is important
in the history of penality. Becauseit establishesthe 'criminal' as
existing before the crime and even outside it. And, for this reason,
a psychologicalcausality, duplicating the juridical attribution of
responsibility, confuses its effects. At this point one enters the
'criminological'
labyrinth from which we have certainly nor yer
emerged: any determining cause,becauseit reducesresponsibility,
marks the author of the ofience with a criminality all the rnore formidable and demands penitentiary measuresthat are all the more
strict. As the biography of the criminal duplicates in penal practice
the analysisof circumstancesused in gauging the crime, so one sees
penal discourse and psychiatric discourse crossing each other's
frontiers; and there, at their point of junction, is formed the notion
of the 'dangerous' individual, which makes it possible to draw up a
network of causality in terms of an entire biography and to present
a verdict of punishment-correction.14
The delinquent is also to be distinguished from the offender in
2t2

Complete and austereinstitutions
that he is not only the author of his acts (the author responsible in
terms of certain criteria of free, consciouswill), but is linked to his
offence by a whole bundle of complex threads (instincts, drives,
tendencies,character). The penitentiary technique bears not on the
relation betweenauthor and crime, but on the criminal's affinity with
his crime. The delinquent, the strange manifestation of an overall
phenomenon of criminality, is to be found in quasi-natural classes,
each endowed with its own characteristicsand requiring a specific
treatment, what Marquet-Wasselot called in r84r the'ethnography
'The
convicts are . .. another people within the
of the prisons';
same people; with its own habits, instincts, morals' (Marquet'picturesque'
Wasselot, p). We are still very close here to the
descriptions of the world of the malefactors- an old tradition that
goes back a long way and gained new vigour in the early nineteenth
century, at a time when the perception of another form of life was
being articulated upon that of another class and another human
species.A zoology of social sub-speciesand an ethnology of the
civilizations of malefactors,with their own rites and language,was
beginning to emerge in a parody form. But an attempt was also
being made to constitute a new obiectivity in which the criminal
belongs to a typology that is both natural and deviant. Delinquency,
a pathological gap in the human species,may be analysedas morbid
syndromes or as great teratological forms. With Ferrus's classification, we probably have one of the first conversions of the old
'ethnography'
of crime into a systematic typology of delinquens.
The analysis is slender, certainly, but it reveals quite clearly the
principlc that delinquency must be specified in terms not so much
of the law as of the norm. There are three types of convicq there are
'with
intellectual resourcesabove the average
thosewho areendowed
of intelligencethat we haveestablished',but who havebeenperverted
'tendencies
'native preof their organization' and a
either by the
'pernicious
'iniquitous morality',
logic', an
a
disposition', or by
'dangerous
attitude to social duties'. Those that belong to this category require isolation day and night, solitary exercise,and, when one
is forced to bring them into contact with the others, they should
wear'a light mask made of metal netting, of the kind used for stone'vicious,
cutting or fencing'. The secondcategory is madeup of
stupid
or passiveconvicts, who have been led into evil by indifference to

2tt

Prison
either shameor honour, through cowardice, that is to say, laziness,
and becauseof a lack of resistanceto bad incitements'; the rdgime
suitableto them is not so much that of punishmentasofeducation, and
if possible of mutual education: isolation at night, work in common
during the day, conversationspermitted provided they are conducted
aloud, readingin common, followed by mutual questioning, for which
rewards may be given. Lastly, there are the 'inept or incapable
convicts', who are'rendered incapable,by an incomplete organization, of any occupation requiring considered effort and consistent
will, and who are therefore incapable of competing in work with
intelligent workers and who, having neither enough education to
know their social duties, nor enough intelligence to understand this
fact or to struggle against their personal instincts, are led to evil by
their very incapacity. For these, solitude would merely encourage
their inertia; they must therefore live in common, but in such a way
as to form small groups, constantly stimulated by collective
operations, and subjected to rigid surveillance' (Ferrus, r8zff and
278tr). Thus a 'positive' knowledge of the delinquents and their
species,very different from the juridical definition of offencesand
their circumstances,is gradually established;but this knowledge is
also distinct from the medical knowledge that makes it possible to
introduce the insanity ofthe individual and, consequently,to efface
the criminal character of the act. Ferrus states the principle quite
'Considered
clearly:
as a whole, criminals are nothing less than
madmenl it would be unjust to the latter to confuse them with
consciously perverted men.' The task of this new knowledge is to
define the act'scientifically' qua offenceand above all the individual
gza delinquent. Criminology is thus made possible.
. The correlative of penal justice may well be the offendir, but the
correlative of the penitentiary apparatusis someoneother; this is the
delinquent, a biographical unity, a kernel ofdanger, representing a
type of anomaly. And, although it is true that to a detention that
deprives of liberty, as defned by law, the prison added the additional element of the penitentiary, this penitentiary element introduced in turn a third character who slipped berween the individual
condemned by the law and the individual who carries out this law.
At the point that marks the disappearanceof the branded, dismembered, burnt, annihilated body of the tortured criminal, there
2t4

Complete and austereinstitutions
appearedthe body ofthe prisoner, duplicated by the individuality
of the'delinquent', by the little soul of the criminal, which the very
apparatusof punishment fabricated as a point of application of the
power to punish and as the object of what is still called today
penitentiary science.It is said that the prison fabricated delinquents;
it is true that it brings back, almost inevitably, before the courts those
who have been sent there. But it also fabricates them in the sense
that it has introduced into the operation ofthe law and the ofience,
the judge and the offender, the condemnedman and the executioner,
the non-corporal reality ofthe delinquency that links them together
and, for a century and a half, has caught them in the sametrap.
The penitentiary technique and the delinquent are in a sensetwin
brothers. It is not true that it was the discovery of the delinquent
through a scientific rationality that introduced into our old prisons
the refinement of penitentiary techniques. Nor is it true that the
internal elaboration of penitentiary methods has finally brought to
'objective'
light the
existenceof a delinquency that the abstraction
law were unable to perceive. They appeared
rigidity
the
and
of
extending
from the other, as a technological
together, the one
fragments
forms
and
ensemblethat
the object to which it appliesits
instmments. And it is this delinquency, formed in the foundations
of the iudicial apparatus,among the'basseseuTtres'
, the servile tasks,
from which justice avertsits gaze,out of the shameit feelsin punishing those it condemns, it is this delinquency that now comes to
haunt the unuoubled courts and the majesty of the laws; it is this
delinquency that must be known, assessed,measured, diagnosed,
treated when sentencesare passed.It is now this delinquency, this
anomaly, this deviation, this potential danger, this illness, this form
of existence,that must be taken into account when the codes are
rewritten. Delinquency is the vengeanceof the prison on justice.
It is a revenge formidable enough to leave the judge speechless.
It is at this point that the criminologists raise their voices.
But we must not forget that the prison, that concentrated and
austerefigure of all the disciplines, is not an endogenouselement in
the penal system as defined at the turn of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The theme of a punitive society and of a general
'ideological'
semio-techniqueof punishment that has sustainedthe

2tt

Prison
codes - Beccarian or Benthamite * did not itself give rise to the
universal use of the prison. This prison camefrom elsewhere- from
the mechanismsproper to a disciplinary power. Now, despite this
heterogeneity, the mechanismsand effectsof the prison have spread
right through modern criminal justice; delinquency and the delinquents have becomeparasiteson it through and through. One must
seekthe reasonfor this formidable 'efficiency' of the prison. But gne
thing may be noted at the outset: the penal justice defined in the
eighteenth century by the reformers traced two possible but divergent lines of objectification of the criminal: the first was the series
'monsters',
of
moral or political, who had fallen outside the social
pact; the second was that of the juridical subject rehabilitated by
punishment.Now the'delinquent' makesit possibleto join the two
Iines and to constitute under the authority of medicine, psychology
or criminology, an individual in whom the offender of the law and
the object of a scientific technique are superimposed- or almost one upon the other. That the grip ofthe prison on the penal system
should not have led to a violent reaction of rejection is no doubt
due to many reasons.One of theseis that, in fabricating delinquency,
it gave to criminal justice a unitary field of objects, authenticated
'sciences',
by the
and thus enabled it to function on a general
'truth',
horizon of
The prison, that darkest region in the apparatusof justice, is the
place where the power to punish, which no longer dares to manifest
itself openly, silently organizes a field of obiectivity in which
punishment will be able to function openly as treatment and the
sentence be inscribed among the discourses of knowledge. It is
understandablethat justice should have adopted so easily a prison
that was not the offspring of its own thoughts. Justicecertainly owed
the prison this recognition.

216

z. Illegalitiesand delinquency

From the point of view of the law, detention may be a mere deprivation of liberty. But the imprisonment that performs this function
has always involved a technical prol'ect. The transition from the
public execution, with its spectacularrituals, its art mingled with the
ceremony of pain, to the penaltiesof prisons buried in architectural
massesand guarded by the secrecy of administrations, is not a
transition to an undifferentiated, abstract,confusedpenality; it is the
transition from one art ofpunishing to another, no less skilful one.
It is a technicalmutation. From this transition spring a symptom and
a symbol: the replacement,in 1837,of the chain-gang by the police
carriage.
The chain-gang, a tradition that went back to the time of the
galley slaves, was still surviving under the July monarchy. The
imporunce it seemsto have assumedas a spectacleat the beginning
of the nineteenth century may be bound up with the fact that it
combined in a single manifestation the two modes of punishment:
the way to detention unfolded as a ceremonial of torture. (Faucher
'especially
remarked that the chain-gang was a popular spectacle
since the scaffoldswere almost entirely abolished'.) The accountsof
'last
the
chain-gangs' - those that crossed France in the summer of
r836 - and ofits scandalsallow us to rediscover this functioning, so
'penitentiary
science'. It began with a scaffold
alien to the rules of
ritual: the fixing of iron collars and chains in the courtyard of
Bicdtre prison. The convict's neck was thrown back upon a block;
but this time the art of the executioner was to strike without crushing the head - an inverted skill that knew how not to deliver the
'The
courtyard of Bic!tre displays its instruments of
death blow.
torture: severalrows of chainswith their iron-collars. The artoupans
(head-warders), who serve as temporary blacksmiths, arrange the
2t7

Prison
block and hammer. Around the bars of the wall walk are stuck all
those heads,wearing a gloomy or bold expression;which the operator is to rivet. lligher up, at every storey of the prison, one seeslegs
and arms dangling through the bars of the cells, as at some bazaar
of human flesh; these are the prisoners who have come to assistat
the toilet of their comrades of the day before. . . Here they are in
the attitude of sacrifice.They are stitring on the ground, coupled at
random by the waist; the chains they must carry, each weighing
eight pounds, rest heavily on their knees. The operator inspects
them, measuring heads and adapting the enormous inch-thick
collars. It takes three men to rivet an iron-collar; the first holds up
the block, the second holds the two branches of the iron-collar
together and, with his two outstretched arms, securesthe patient's
head; the third strikes with repeated blows and flattens the bolt
under his huge hammer. Each blow shakesthe head and the body.
. . . Indeed, one does not think of the danger that the victim might
face if the hammer missed its mark; this impression is nullified or
rather defaced before the profound impression of horror one
experiencesin contemplating one of God's creaturesin such a state
of abasement.'rIt also had the dimension of a public spectacle;
according to the Galette des tribuzaux, over roo,ooo people watched
the chain-gang leave Paris on 19 July: 'The descentfrom the Courtille to the Mardi Gras. . .' Order and wealth came to watch from a
distancethe passing of the great nomadic tribe that had been put in
chains, that other species,'the race apart that has the privilege of
populating the convict-ships and prisons'. The spectators of the
lower classes,as at the time of the public executions,kept up their
ambiguous exchangeswith the convicts, alternating insults, threats,
words of encouragement,blows, signs of hateor complicity. Something violent aroused and accompanied the procession along its
entire course: anger against a justice that was too severe or too
indulgent; shouts against the detested criminals; movements in
favour of prisoners one knew and greeted; confrontations with the
police: 'During the whole journey from the Fontainebleau barrier,
groups of enraged spectatorshurled insults at Delacollonge: Down
with the priest, they said, down with that hateful man; he should
have got his deserts.Without the energy and firmness of the municipal guard, seriousdisorders could have taken place.At Vaugirard,
2t8

Illegalities and delinquency
it was the women who were the most angry. They cried: Down with
the wicked priest! Down with the monster Delacollonge! The
police inspectors of Montrouge and Vaugirard and several mayors
and deputy-mayors ran the gauntlet in their attempt to enforce the
decision of the courts. Shortly before reaching Issy, Frangois,
recognizing M. Allard and the officers of the brigade, threw his
wooden bowl at them. It was then remembered that the families of
some of the former comradesof the convict lived at lvry. From that
moment the police inspectors spread out along the route and followed the convicts' cart closely. Those of the Paris gang all threw
their wooden bowls at the headsof the police, some of whom were
struck. At that moment, the crowd reactedstrongly. They started to
fight amongst themselves' (Galette des tibunau4 zo July 1836).
Between Bicdtre and Sdvresa considerable number of houseswere
looted as the chain-gang passedby (La Phalange, r August 1836).
In this festival of the departing convicts, there was something of
the rites of the scapegoatthat is struck as it is chasedaway, something of the festival of fools, in which the reversal of roles is practised, something of the old ceremoniesof the scaffold, in which the
truth must burst forth in the full light of day, something, too, of
those popular spectacles,in which famous charactersor traditional
types were recognized:the play of truth and infamy, the procession
of notoriety and shame,invective against the guilty who have been
unmaskedand, on the other hand, the ioyous avowal of crimes. One
sought to rediscover the face of the criminals who had had their
glory; broadsheetsrecalled the crimes'of those one saw pass;newspapers provided their names and recounted their livesl sometimes
they provided a description oftheir personsand dress,so that their
identity might not passunnoticed: like programmes for spectators.2
People also came to examine different types of criminals, trying to
'profession' of
decide, according to facial appearanceor dress, the
the convict, whether he was a murderer or thiefi it was a game of
masqueradesand marionnettes, which was also, for more educated
eyes, something of an empirical ethnography of crime. From spectacles on trestles to Gall's phrenology, according to the milieu to
which one belonged, one practisedthe semiologiesof crime at one's
'Physiognomies are
disposal:
as varied as clothes: here a maiestic
head,a Murillo face;there a vicious face,framed with thick eyebrows,
219

Prison
which convey all the energy of the determined villain. . . Elsewhere
the head of a Fagin emergesfrom the body of an urchin. Here are
the smooth, feminine features of accomplices; there the glazed,
debauched faces of teachers.'3The convicts themselvesresponded
to this game, displaying their crimes and enacting their misdeeds:
this was one of the functions of tattooing, a vignette of their deeds
'They
or their fate:
bear the insignia of their crimes, either a guillotine tattooed on their left arms, or on their chestsa dagger plunged
into a bleeding heart.' As they passed,they mimed the scenesof their
crimes, mocking the judges or the police, boasting of as yet undiscovereddeedsof wickedness.Frangois,Lacenaire'sformer accomplice, said that he had invented a method for killing a man without
making him cry out and without spilling a single drop of blood.
The great travelling fair of crime had its tumblers and its mummers,
in which the comic affirmation of truth answeredcuriosity and invective. A whole seriesof scenes,in this summer of 1836,took place
around Delacollonge: his crime (he had cut his pregnant mistress
into pieces) was made much more spectacularby the fact that he
was a priestl this fact had also savedhim from the scaffold. It seems
that he aroused considerablehate among the people. Earlier, in the
cart thathad broughthim to Parisin June r836,he had beeninsulted
and had been unable to hold back his tearsl however, he had
expresseda wish not to be conveyed in a closed carriage, believing
that the humiliation formed part of his punishment. As he left
'one
Paris,
cannot imagine the virtuous indignation, the moral anger
and base actions unleashed by the crowd on this man; he was
covered with earth and mud; stones and insults rained down upon
him from the furious bystanders. . It was an explosion of unparalleledrage; the women above all, like veritable furies, displayed
an unbelievable exaltation of hate' (La Phalange, r August 1836).
For his protection, his clothes had to be changed. Certain spectators
were misled by this and thought that Frangois was he. Frangois
entered into the spirit of the game and acceptedthe role; but, to the
comedy of the crime that he did not commit, he added that of the
priest that he was not; to the account of 'his' crime, he added the
prayers and broad gesturesofblessing directed at the jeering crowd.
A few stepsarvay,the real Delacollonge,'who seemedlike a martyr',
was undergoing the double affront of the insults that he was not
z6o

Illegalities and delinquenry
receiving, but which were addressed to him, and the ridicule that
brought back, under the appearancesofanother criminal, the priest
that he was and would have liked to have concealed.His passion
was laid out before his eyes,by a buffoon murderer to whom he was
chained.
In every town it passed through, the chain-gang brought its
festival with it; it was a saturnalia of punishment, a penalty turned
into a privilege. And, by a very curious tradition which seemsto
have escaped the ordinary rites of the public execution, it aroused
in the convict not so much the compulsory marks of repentanceas
the explosion of a mad ioy that denied the punishment. To the
ornaments of the collar and chain, the convicts themselvesadded
ribbons, braided strawr.flowers or precious stuffs. The chain was the
round and the dance; it was also a coupling, a forced marriage in
'They ran in
forbidden love. Wedding, festival and rite in chains:
front of the chains, bunches of flowers in their hands, ribbons or
straw tasselsdecorated their caps and the most skilful made crested
helmets. . . Others wore open-work stockings and clogs or a
fashionablewaistcoat, under a workman's smock.'a And throughout
the evening that followed the riveting, the chain-gang formed a
great merry-go-round, which went round and round the courtyard
'Woe
of Bic6tre:
betide the warders if the chain-gang recognized
them; they were enveloped and drowned in its rings; the prisoners
remainedmastersof the field of battle until nightfall.'6 The convicts'
Sabbath corresponded to the ceremonial of justice through the
spectacleit invented. It inverted the splendours, the order ofpower
and its signs, the forms of pleasure.But something of the political
Sabbath.was not far away. One would have had to be very deaf
indeed not to hear something of these new accents.The convicts
sang marching songs, which rapidly became famous and were
repeated everywhere for a long time after. No doubt an echo was
to be found in them of the complaints that the broadsheetsattributed
to criminals - an affirmation of the crime, a black heroization, an
evocation of terrible punishments and of the general hate that
'Renown, let
the tmmpets blow for us. . .
surrounded them:
Courage, children, let us submit without fear to the terrible fate
that hangs over our heads. . . Our chains are heavy, but we will
bear them. For the convicts, no voice rises to say: relieve them of
z6t

Prison
their suffering.' Yet there was in those collective songs a totally new
tonality; the moral code, which most of the old complaints obeyed,
was reversed.Instead of bringing remorse, torture sharpenedpride;
the justice that brought the sentencewas rejected, and the crowd
that cameto witnesswhat it believed to be repentanceor humiliation
was scorned: 'So far from our homes, we sometimes moan. Our
stern brows will make our iudges blench. . . Avid of misfortune
you turn your eyes upon us, hoping to find a blighted, humiliated,
tearful race. But there is pride in our eyes.' One also finds the
assertionthat the convict's life with its companionship has pleasures
that liberty cannot know. 'With time let us link odr pleasures.Under
Iock and key feast days will be born. . . Pleasuresare turncoats.
They will flee the executioners;they follow where the song leads.'
And, above all, the present order will not last foreverl not only will
the convicts be freed and resumetheir rights, but their accuserswill
take their place. Between the criminals and their judges, the day of
the great reverse judgement will come: 'The contempt of men
belongs to us convicts. The gold they worship is also ours. One day,
this gold will passinto our hands. We will buy it with our lives.
Others will seizethesechains that today you make us bearl they will
become slaves.As we break out of our shackles,the star of liberty
will shine for us. . . Farewell, for we brave both your chains and
your laws.'6 The pious theatre imagined by the broadsheets,in
which the convict exhorted the crowd never to imitate him, was
becoming a threatening scene in which the crowd was asked to
choosebetweenthe barbarity of the executioners,the injustice of the
judges and the misfortune of convicts who, though defeatedtoday,
q/ould triumph one day.
The great spectacleof the chain-gang was linked with the old
tradition of the public execution;it was alsolinked with that multiple
rePresentationof crime that gave rise at the time to newspapers,
broadsheets,
mountebanksand streettheatresl?but it was also linked
with the confrontationsand struggleswhose first rumblings it conveyed; it gave them a kind of symbolic outlen though vanquished
by the law, the army of disorder promised to return; what the
violence of order had driven away would overthrow that order and
bring liberty on its return. 'f was horrified to see so many sparks
reappear in those ashes' (Ze Dernier jour d'un condamni). The
z6z

Illegalities and delinquency
agitation that had always surrounded the public executions now
found an echo in precisethreats.One can seewhy the July monarchy
decidedto abolish the chain-gang for the same- but more pressingreasonsthat brought about, in the eighteenth century, the abolition
'ft
of the public executions: is no part of our morality to treat men
in this way; one must avoid providing in the towns that the convoy
passesthrough so hideous a spectacle,which, in any case,teaches
the population nothing' (Ga1ettedes tribuneaux, I9 July 1836). It
vft$ necessary,therefore, to break with thesepublic rites; to subject
the movementsof convicts to the samemutation as the punishments
themselvesland to bring them, too, under the veil of administrative
decency.
But what, in June t837, wasadopted'to replacethe chain-gangwas
not the simple covered cart, which had been suggestedat one time,
but a machine that had been very meticulously designed:a carriage
conceivedasa moving prison, a mobile equivalentof the Panopticon.
A central corridor divided it along its entire length: on either side
were six cells in which the two rows of convicts sat facing one
another. Their feet were placed in rings that were lined on the inside
with wool and linked together by chains eighteen inches long; the
legs were secured in metal knee-guards.The convict sat on a kind
'zinc and oak funnel that emptied onto the public way'. The cell
of
had no window onto the outside; it was completely lined with sheet
iron; only a ventilator, also of sheet-iron, with holes piercgd in it,
'suitable flow
allowed a
of air'. On the corridor side, the door of
eachcell was provided with a hatch, divided into two compartments:
'The
one for food, the other, covered by a grill, for sutveillance.
opening and the oblique direction of the hatcheswere so arranged
that the warders had the prisoners constantly in view and heard
every word they spoke, though the prisoners themselves were
'the
same carriage
unable to seeor hear one another.' In this way,
may, without the slightest inconvenience, contain at one and the
sametime a convict and a simple offender, men and women, children
and adults. Whatever the length of the journey, all would be
brought to their destination without having been able to perceive
one another or to speak to one another.' Lasdy, the constant surveillance of the two warders, who were eacharmed with a small oak
'with
club,
thick nails of crushed diamond' made it possible to
263

Prison
operate a whole system of punishments in conformity with the
internal regulation of the carriage: a diet of bread and water, thumbscres/s,lack of a cushion that would allow one to sleep, chains on
'Any
both arms.
reading other than that of books of morality is
forbidden.'
'would
If only for its mildnessand speed,this machine
have done
honour to the sensibility of its author'; but its merit lay in the fact
that it was a veritable penitentiary carriage. By its external effects,
it had a quite Benthamite perfection: 'In the rapid passageof this
mobile prison which, on its dark, silent flanks, bears no other
inscription than the following words - Transport of Convicts there is something mysterious and gloomy, which Bentham requires
in the carrying out of criminal sentencesand which leaves in the
minds of onlookers a more salutary and lasting impression than the
sight of those cynical and joyous travellers' (GaTeuedcs tribunaux,
15 June 1837). It also had internal effects;even in a journey lasting
only a few days (during, which the inmates had not been detached
for a single moment), it functioned as an apparatus of correction.
One emerged from it astonishingly calm: 'From a moral point of
view, this transportation, which lasts no more than seventy-two
hours, is a terrible torture whose effectson the prisoner seem to be
lasting.' The convicts themselves support this view: 'In the cell
carriage, when you don't sleep, you can only think. And when I
thought, I came to regret what I had done; in the end, you see, I
would have been afraid to mend my ways and I don't want to.'8
The panoptic carriage had only a.short history. Yet the way in
which it replacedthe chain-gang and the reasonsfor this replacement
recapitulated the whole process by which in eighty years penal
detention replaced public execution as a calculated technique for
altering individual behaviour. The cell-carriagewas an apparatusof
reform. What replaced the public execution was not a massive
enclosure,it was a carefully articulated disciplinary mechanism- at
least in principle.
For the prison, in its reality and visible effects,was denounced at
once as the great failure ofpenal justice. In a very strange way, the
history of imprisonment does not obey a chronology in which one
sees,in orderly succession,the establishmentof a penality of deten264

Illegalities and delinquency
tion, then the recognition ofits failure; then the slow rise ofprojects
of reform, seeming to culminate in the more or less coherent
definition of penitentiary technique; then the implementation of this
proiect; lastly, the recognition of its successesor its failure. There
was in fact a telescoping or in any casea different distribution of
these elements. And, just as the proiect of a corrective technique
accompaniedthe principle of punitive detention, the critique of the
prison and its methods appeared very early on, in those sam!years
r8zo-41; indeed, it was embodied in a number of formulations
which - figures apart - are today repeatedalmost unchanged.
- Prisons do not diminish the crime rate: they can be extended,
multiplied or transformed, the quantity of crime and criminals
'fn
France, one calculates at
remains stable or, worse, increases:
individuals
who
are in a stateof flagrant
about ro8rooothe number of
repression
at one's disposal are;
hostility to society. The means of
the scaffold,the iron-collar, three convict-ships, 19maisonscentrales,
86 maisons de justice, 362 rnaisons d'arrdt, zr8oo cantonal prisons,
2,238 cells.in police stations. Despite all these,vice goes unchecked.
The number of crimes is not diminishing . . . the number of recidivists is increasing, rather than declining' (Lo FraternitC, no. ro,
February r84z).
- Detention causesrecidivism; those leaving prison have more
chancethan before ofgoing back to itl convicts are, in a very high
proportion, former inmatesl 38 per cent of thosewholeft the maisons
centraleswere convicted again and 33 per cent of those sent to convict-ships (a figure given by G. de Rochefoucauldduring the debate
on the reform of the penal code, z December 1834 Archives parlementaires,LXX[, zo9-ro); between r8z8 and 1834,out of almost
3trooo convicted of crime, about 7r4oo were recidivists (that is,
r out of 4.7 of those convicted); out of over 2ooro@ correctionels,
or petty offenders, almost 3trooo were also recidivists (r out of 6);
in all, one recidivist out of ;.8 of those convicted (Ducpdtiaux, 1837,
276tr);in r83r, outof zS74 of thosecondemnedfor recidivism,3;o
had been in convict-ships, 1168zin maisonscenffales, r4z in four
maisons de correction that followed the same rdgime as the centrales
(Ducp6tiaux, t837, 276ff). And the diagnosis became even more
severeduring the July monarchy: in r83y, out of 7,223 convicted
criminals, r1486were recidivists; in r839, rr74g outof 71818;in 1844,
26,

Prison
rr8zr out of 7rt9l.Among the 98o prisonersat Loos, therewere y7o
recidivists and, at Melun, 741 out of rroo8 prisoners (Ferrus, 16l-z).
Instead of releasing corrected individuals, then, the prison was
setting loose a swarm of dangerous delinquents throughout the
population:'7rooopersonshandedback eachyear to society. . . they
are Troooprinciples of crime or corruption spread throughout the
socialbody. And, when one thinks that this population is constantly
increasing, that it lives and moves around us, ready to seizeevery
opporrunity of disorder, to avail itself of every crisis in society to
try out its strength, can one remain unmoved by such a spectaclei'
(Beaumontand Tocqueville, uz-3).
- The prison cannot fail to produce delinquents' It does so by
the very type of existencethat it imposes on its inmates: whether
they are isolated in cells or whether they are given uselesswork,
for which they will find no employment, it is, in any case,not 'to
think of man in society;it is to createan unnatural,uselessand dangerous existence';the prison should educate its inmates, but can a
system ofeducation addressedto man reasonablyhave as its object
to act against the wishes of naturei (Lucas, I, rz7 and r3o). The
prison also produces delinquentsby imposing violent constraints
on its inmates; it is supposedto apply the law, and to teach respect
for it; but all its functioning operates in the form of an abuse of
power. The arbitrary power of administration: 'The feeling of injustice that a prisoner has is one of the causesthat may make his
character untamable. When he seeshimself exposed in this way to
suffering, which the law has neither ordered nor envisaged, he
becomes habitually angry against everything around him; he sees
every agent ofauthority as an executioner;he no longer thinks that
he was guilty: he accusesjusticeitself'(Bigot Pr6ameneu).Corrup'Between
tion, fear and the inefficiency of the warders:
rrooo and
lrSoo convicts live under the surveillance of between thirty and
forty supervisors,who can preserve some kind of security only by
dependingon informers, that is to say, on the corruption that they
carefully sow themselves.Who are thesewardersi Retired soldiers,
men uninstructed in their task, making a trade of guarding malefactors' (La Fraternitd, March r84z). Exploitation by penal labour,
which can in these conditions have no educational character: 'One
inveighs against the slave-trade. But are not our prisoners sold,
266

Illegalities and delinquency
like the slaves, by entrepreneursand bought by manufacturers. . .
Is this how we teach our prisoners honestyl Are they not still more
demoralized by these examplesof abominable exploitationl'e
- The prison makes possible, even encourages,the organization
of a milieu of delinquents, loyal to one another, hierarchized, ready
'Society prohibits associato aid and abet any future criminal act:
tions of more than twenty persons . . . and it constitutes for itself
associationsof zoo, too, rr2oo convicts in the maisons centrales,
which are constructed for them ad hoc, and which it divides up for
their greater convenienceinto workshops, courryards, dormitories,
refectories, where they can all meet together. . . And it multiplies
them across France in such a way that, where there is a prison,
there is an association. . . and as many anti-social clubs' (l\4oreauChristophe, 7). And it is in these clubs that the education of the
young first oflender takes place: 'The first desire that is born within
him will be to learn from his cleverer seniors how to escapethe
rigours of the law; the first lesson will be derived from the strict
logic of thieves who regard society as an enemy; the morality will
be the informing and spying honoured in our prisons; the first
passionto be arousedin him will be to frighten the young mind by
thesemonsters that must have been born in the dungeon and which
the pen refusesto name. . . Henceforth he has broken with everything that has bound him to society' (L'Almanach populaire de
France, 4g-t6). Faucher spoke of'barracks of crime'.
- The conditions to which the free inmates are subjected necessarily condemn them to recidivism: they are under the surveillance
ofthe police; they are assignedto a particular residence,or forbidden
'they
others;
leaveprison with a passportthat they must show everywhere they go and which mentions the sentence that they have
served'(Barb!Marbois, r7). Being on the loose, being unable to find
work, leading the life of a vagabond are the most freguent factors in
recidivism. The GaTettedes tribunaux, but also the workers' newspapers, regularly cited caseslike that of the worker,convicted of
theft, placed under surveillance at Rouen, caught again for theft,
and whom no lawyers would defend; so he took it upon himself to
speak before the court, told the story of his life, explained how, on
leaving prison and forced to reside in a particular place, he was
unable to take up his trade as a gilder, since as an ex-convict he was
267

Prison
tumed down wherever he wentl the police refused him the right to
seekwork elsewhere:he found himself unable to leave Rouen, with
nothing to do but die of hunger and poverty as a result of this
terrible surveillance.He went to the town hall and asked for work;
for eight days he was given work in the cemeteriesfor fourteen sous
'Butr'
'I
a day:
he said, am young, I have a good appetite, I eat more
than two pounds ofbread a day at five sousa pound; what can I do
with fourteen sousto feed myself, wash my clothesand find lodgingi
I was driven to despair, I wanted to become an honest man againl
the surveillance plunged me back into misfortune. I became disgusted with everything; it was then that I met Lemaitre, who was
also a pauper; we had to live and wicked thoughts of thieving came
back to us.'10
- Lastly, the prison indirectly produces delinquents by throwing
the inmate's family into destitution: 'The sameorder that sendsthe
head of the family to prison reduceseachday the mother to destitution, the children to abandonment,the whole family to vagabondage
and begging. It is in this way that crime can take root' (Lucas, II,6a).
It should be noted that this monotonous critique of the prison
always takes one of two directions: either that the prison was insufficiently corrective, and that the penitentiary technique was still
at the rudimentary stage; or that in attempting to be corrective it
lost its power as punishment,rr that the true penitentiary technique
was rigourrr2 and that prison was a double economic error: directly,
by its intrinsic cost and, indirectly, by the cost of the delinquency
thatit did not abolish.lsTheanswerto thesecriticismswasinvariably
the same:the reintroduction of the invariable principles of penitentiary technique. For a century and a half the prison had always been
offered as its own remedy: the reactivation of the penitentiary
techniquesas the only meansof overcoming their perpetual failure;
the realization of the corrective project as the only method of overcoming the impossibility of implementing it.
This is shown conclusively in the fact that the prisoners' revolts
of recent weeks* have been attributed to the fact that the reforms
proposed in ry41 never really took effect; that one must therefore
return to the fundamental principles of the prison. But these
* A seriesof uprisingsin French prisons,between
ry72 and ry74, in
protestagainstliving conditions.
268

Illegalities and delinquency
principles, of which such wonderful results are still expectedtoday,
are well enough known: for the past r to years they have constituted
'penitential
condition'.
the seven universal maxims of the good
r. Penal detention must have as its essentialfunction the trans'The
reform of the convict
formation of the individual's behaviour:
as the principal aim of the penalty is a sacredprinciple whose formal
appearancein the domain of scienceand above all in that of legislation is quite recent' ('Congrds p6nitentiaire de Bruxelles', 1847).
'The
And the Amor commission, of May ry41, faithfully repeats:
penalty that deprives ofliberty has as its essentialaim the reformation and social rehabilitation of the convict.' The principle of
correction.
z. Convicts must be isolated or at least distributed according to
the penal gravity of their act, but above all according to age, mental
attitude, the technique of correction to be used, the stagesof their
'One
must take into account, in using methods for
transformation.
altering the great physical and moral differencesto be found in the
characters of convicts, their degree of perversity, the unegual
opportunities for correction that they may offer' (February, r81o).
'The
r94y:
distribution in the penitentiary establishmentsof individuals serving a light sentenceof up to one year is based on sex,
personality and the degreeof perversion of the delinquent' Theprinciple of classifc ation.
3. It must be possible to alter the penalties according to the
individuality of the convicts, the results that have been obtained,
progress or relapses.'Since the principal aim of the penalty is the
reform of the convict, it is desirable that any convict whose moral
regenerationis sufficiently assuredshould be set free' (Lucas, 1838),
rg41:'A progressive r6gime is applied . . . with a view to adapting
the treatment of the prisoner to his attitude and to his degree of
improvement. This rdgime stretches from solitary confinement to
semi-liberty. . . The benefit of parole is extended to all penalties
involving a term of imprisonment.' The principle of the modulaion
of penahies.
4. Work must be one of the essentialelementsin the transformation and progressive socialization of convicts. Penal labour 'must
not be regarded as the complement and as it were an aggravation
of the penalty, but as a mitigation, of which it is no longer pogsible
269

Prison
to deprive the prisoner'. It must enable him to learn or to practise a
trade, and to provide the prisoner and his family with a source of
income (Ducp6tiaux, t817). ry4y.'Every common-law prisoner is
obliged to work. . . No prisoner may be forced to remain unoccupied.' The principle of work as obligation and right.
y. The education of the prisoner is for the authorities both an
indispensableprecaution in the interestsofsociety and an obligation
'Education
to the prisoner.
alone may serve as a penitentiary
instrument. The question of penitentiary imprisonment is a guestion
of education'(Lucas, 1838). l94y: 'The treatmentmeted out to the
prisoner, outside any corrupting promiscuiry . . . must be directed
principally to his general and professional instruction, and to his
improvement.' The principle of penitentiary education.
6. The prison r6gime must, at least in part, be supervised and
administeredby a specializedstaffpossessingthe moral qualities and
technicalabilities required ofeducators. In r8;o, on the subject of
prison medicine, Ferrus remarked: 'It is a useful addition to all
forms of imprisonment . . . no one could possessmore intimately
than a physician the trust of the prisoners, know their characters
better, influence their mental attitudes more effectively, while relieving their physical ills and, by this means, reprimand or encourage
'In
as he thinks fit.' 1945:
every penitentiary establishment, there
functions a social and medico-psychological service.' The principle
of the technical supervision of detention.
7. Imprisonment must be followed by measuresof supervisionand
assistanceuntil the rehabilitation of the former prisoner is complete.
Not only must he be placed under surveillance on leaving prison,
'but
he must be given help and support' (Boulet and Benquot at the
'Assistance
Chambre de Paris). r94;:
is given to prisoners during
and after imprisonment with a view to facilitating their rehabilitation.' The prirciple of auxiliary institutions.
Word for word, from one century to the other, the same fundamental propositions are repeated.They reappearin eachnew, hardwon, finally accepted formulation of a reform that has hitherto
always been lacking. The same sentencesor almost the same could
have beenborrowed from other'fruitful'periods of reform: the end
of the nineteenth century and the 'movement of social defence'; or
again, the last few years, with the prisoners'revolts.
270

Illegalities and delinguencY
'failure' and its
One must not, therefore, regard the prison, its
more or less successful reform as three successive stages. One
should think rather of a simultaneous system that historically has
been superimposedon the furidical deprivation of liberty; a fourfold
systemcomprising: the additional, disciplinary elementof the prison
- the elernent of 'super-power'1 the production of an objectivity, a
'rationality' the element of auxiliary
technique, a penitentiary
knowledge; the defacto reintroduction, if not actual increase,of a
criminality that the prison ought to destroy * the element of in'reform'
that is isomorverted efficiency; lastly, the repetition of a
'idealism',
with the disciplinary functioning of the
phic, despite its
prison - the element of utopian duplication. It is this complex
ensemblethat constitutes the'carceral system', not only the institution of the prison, with its walls, its staff, its regulations and its
violence. The carceralsystem combines in a single figure discourses
and architectures, coercive regulations and scientific propositions,
real social effectsand invincible utopias, Programmesfor correcting
delinquents and mechanismsthat reinforce delinquency. Is not the
supposed failure part of the functioning of the prisoni Is it not to
be included among those effects of power that discipline and the
auxiliary tech4ology of imprisonment have induced in the apparatus
of justice, and in society in general, and which may be grouped
'carceral
system'i If the prison-institutogether under the name of
tion has survived for so long, with such immobility, if the principle
of penal detention has never seriously been questioned, it is no
doubt becausethis carceral system was deeply rooted and carried
out certain very precisefunctions. As evidence of this strength and
immobility, let us take a recent fact the model prison opened at
Fleury-Mdrogis in 1969 simply took over in its overall plan the
panoptic star-shape that made such a stir in 1816 at the PetiteRoquette. It was the same machinery of power that assumeda real
bo.dy and a symbolic form. But what role was it supposedto playl
If the law is supposed to define offences, if the function of the
penal apparatusis to reduce them and if the prison is the instrument
of this repression,then failure has to be admitted. Or rather - for in
order to establishit in historical terms, one must be able to measure
the effects of the penality of detention on the overall level of

Prison
criminality - one should be surprised that for the past r 5o years the
proclamation of the failure of the prison has always been accompanied by its maintenance.The only alternafive actually envisaged
was deponation, which England abandonedat the beginning of the
nineteenth cenrury and which France took up under the Second
Empire, but rather as a rigorous and distant form of imprisonment.
But perhapsone should reversethe problem and ask oneselfwhat
is servedby the failure of the prison; what is the use of thesedifferent
phenomenathat are continually being criticized; the maintenanceof
delinquency, the encouragementof recidivism, the transformation of
the occasionaloffender into a habitual delinquent, the organization
of a closedmilieu of delinquency.Perhapsone should look for what
is hidden beneath the apparent cynicism of the penal institution,
which, after purging the convicts by means of their sentence,continues to follow them by a whole seriesof 'brandings' (a surveillance
that was once dejure and which is today defacto; the police record
that has taken the place of the convic's passport) and which thus
pursuesas a 'delinquent' someonewho has acquitted himself of his
punishment as an offenderi Can we not see here a consequence
rather than a contradiction? If so, one would be forced to suppose
that the prison, and no doubt punishment in general,is not intended
to eliminate offences,but rather to distinguish them, to distribute
them, to use th!m; that it is not so much that they render docile
those who are liable to transgressthe law, but that they tend to
assimilatethe transgressionof the laws in a generaltactics of subiection. Penality would then appear to be a way of handling illegalities,
of laying down the limits of tolerance, of giving free rein to some,
of putting pressureon others, of excluding a particular section,of
making another useful, of neutralizing certain individuals and of
profiting from others. In short, penality does not simply 'check'
illegalities; it 'differentiates' them, it provides them with a general
'economy'.
And, if one can speakof iustice, it is not only because
the lawitself or the wayof applyingitservestheinterestsof a class,it
is also becausethe differential administration of illegalities through
the mediationof penalityforms part of thosemechanismsof domination. Legal punishments are to be resituated in an overall strategy
of illegalities.The'failure'of the prison may be understoodon this
basis.
272

Illegalities and delinquency
The generalschemaofpenal reform had taken shapeat the end of
the eighteenth century in the struggle against illegalities: a whole
equilibrium of tolerance,mutual support and interestswhicl5 under
the Ancien R6gime, had maintained the illegalities of different social
strata side by side, was disturbed. There then emergedthe utopia of
a universally and publicly punitive society in which ceaselessly
active penal mechanismswould function without delay, mediation
or uncertaintyl one law, doubly ideal becauseperfect in its calculations and engraven on the minds of eachcitizen would stop, at their
very origin, all practices of illegaliry. Now, at the turn of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and against the new codes, the
danger of a new popular illegality arose. Or, to be more precise,
perhaps the popular illegalities began to develop according to new
dimensions: those that were introduced by the rnovements which,
from the r78os to the Revolutions of 1848, linked together social
conflicts, the struggles against the political r6gimes, the resistance
to the movement of industrialization, the effects of the economic
crises. Broadly speaking, there were three characteristic processes.
First, the development of the political dimension of the popular
illegalities. This occurred in two ways: hitherto localized practices,
limited in.some senseto themselves(like the refusal to pay taxesand
rents or to comply with conscription; the violent confiscation of
hoardedgoods; the looting ofshops and the forced selling ofpro'fair price';
confrontations with the representativesof
ducts at a
power), were able during the Revolution to lead to directly political
struggles,whose aim was not simply to extract concessionsfrom the
rt"t ot to rescind some intolerable measure, but to change the
government and the very structlrre of power. On the other hand,
certain political movements were explicitly basedon existing forms
of illegality (for example,the royalist agitation of the west and south
ofFrance usedthe peasants'rejectionofthe new laws on ProPerty'
religion and conscription); this political dimension of illegality was
to becomemore complex and more marked in the relations between
the workers' movement and the republican parties in the nineteenth
century, in the passagefrom the workers' stmggles (strikes, prohibited coalitions, illegal associations)to political revolution. In any
case,on the horizon of theseillegal practices- which multiplied with
ever more restrictive legislation - there emetged struggles of a
27t

Prison
strictly political kind; the possible overthrow of power was not
presentin all of them, far from it; but a good many were able to turn
themselvesto account in overall political struggles and sometimes
even to lead direcdy to them.
On the other hand, through the rejection of the law or other
regulations,it is easyenough to recognizethe strugglesagainstthose
who set them up in their own interests: people were no longer
fighting against the tax farmers, financiers, the king's agents, prevaricating magistratesor bad ministers- all the agents of injustice but against the law itself and the iustice whose task it was to apply
it; against local landowners who introduced new rights; against
employers who worked together, but forbade workers' coalitionsl
against entrepreneurswho introduced more machines,lower wages
and longer working hours, and made the factory regulations more
and more'strict. It was against the new rigime of landed property set up by a bourgeoisie that profited from the Revolution - that a
whole peasantillegality developed. This no doubt assumedits most
violent forms between Thermidor and the Consulate, but it did not
disappearthen; it was against the new system of the legal exploitation of labour that workers' illegalities at the beginning of the nineteenth century developed: from the most violent such as machinebreaking, or the most lasting such as the formation of associations,
to the most everyday, such as absenteeism,abandoning work,
vagabondage,pilfering raw materials, deception as to the quantity
and quality of the work completed. A whole series of illegalities
was inscribed in struggles in which those struggling knew that
they were confronting both the law and the class that had imposed it.
Lastly, although it is true that, during the eighteenth century,
criminality tended towards more specializedforms, inclining more
and more to the skilful theft, and became,to some extent, the practice of men on the fringes of society, isolated from a population that
was hostile to them - one sees,in the last years of the eighteenth
cenrury, the reconstitution of certain links or the establishment of
new relations; not, ascontemporariessaid, that the leadersof popular
agitation had been criminals, but becausethe new forms of law,
the rigours of the labour regulations, the demands either of the
state, or of the landowners, or of the employers, and the mosl
274

Illegalities and delinquency
detailed techniques of surveillance, increased the occasions of
offences,and threw to the other sideof the law many individuals, who,
in other conditions, would not have gone over to specialized
criminality; itis againstthebackground of the newlaws of property,
against the background, too, of unacceptableconscription that a
peasantillegality developedin the last years of the Revolution, with
a consequentincreasein violence, acts ofaggression, thefts, looting
'political
brigandage'; it was also
and even the greater forms of
againsta background oflegislation or very heavy regulations (concerning the livret, or service certificate, rents, hours, absencesfrom
work) that a workers'vagabondage developed that often crossed
the boundary into actual delinquency. A whole series of illegal
practices,which during the previous century had tended to remain
isolated from one another, now seemedto come together to form a
new threat.
There was a threefold diffusion of popular illegalities at the turn
of the century (quite apart from a quantitative extension that is
problematic and still uncalculated): their insertion in a general
political outlook; their explicit articulation on social struggles; a
communication between different forms and levels of ofiences.
These processesmay not have reached their full developmentl
certainly there did not develop at the beginning of the nineteenth
century a massivemovement of illegality that was both political and
social. But, in their emerging form and despite their dispersal,they
'great fear'
were sufficiently marked to serve as a support for the
of a people who were believed to be criminal and seditious as a
whole, for the myth of a barbaric, immoral'and outlaw classwhich,
from the empire to the July monarchy, haunted the discourse of
legislators,philanthropists and investigators into working-class life.
It is these processesthat are to be found behind a whole seriesof
afhrmations that are quite alien to the penal theory of the eighteenth
century: that crime is not a potentiality that interests or passions
have inscribed in the hearts of all men, but that it is almost exclusively committed by a certain social classl that criminals, who were
lonce to be met with in every social ilass, now emerged 'almost all
'nine
frorn the bottom rank of the social order' (Comte, 49)i that
tenths of mur{erers, thieves and idlers come from what we have
called the social base' (Lauvergne, y7); that it is not crime that
271

Prison
alienatesan individual from society, but that crime is itself due rather
to the fact that one is in society as an alien, that one belongs to that
'bastardized
race', as Target called it, to that 'class degraded by
misery whose vices stand like an invincible obstacleto the generous
intentions that wish to combat it' (Buri, 39r); that, this being the
case,it would be hypocritical or naive to believe that the law was
made for all in the name of all; that it would be more prudent to
recognize that it was made for the few and that it was brought to
bear upon others; that in principle it appliesto all citizens,but that
it is addressedprincipally to the most numerous and least enlightened classeslthat, unlike political and civil laws, their application
doesnot concerneverybodyequally (Rossi,I, 3z); that in the courts
society as a whole does not judge one of its members, but that a
social category with an interest in order judges anorher that is
dedicated to disorder: 'Visit the places where people are judged,
imprisoned or executed.. . One thing will strike you everywhere;
everywhere you seetwo quite distinct classesof men, one of which
always meets on the seatsof the accusersand judges, the other on
the benchesof the accused',which is explainedby the fact that the
latter, for lack of resourcesand education, do not know 'how to
remainwithin the limits of legal probity' (Lucas,II, 8z); so that the
languageof the law, which is supposedto be universal,is, in this
respect, inadequate;it must, if it is to be effective, be the discourse
of one class to another, which has neither the same ideas as it nor
even the samewords: 'How are we, with our prudish,contemptuous
languages,overloadedwith formality, to make ourselvesuhderstood
by those who have never heard anything but the crude, poor,
irregular, but lively, frank, picturesque dialect of the market, the
tavern and the fair. . . What language,what method should we use
when drawing up laws that will act effectively on the uneducated
minds of those lesscapableof resisting the temptationsof crimel'
(Rossi, I, n). Law and justice do not hesitateto proclaim their
necessaryclassdissymmetry.
If this is the case,the prison, apparently 'failing', does not miss
its target; on the contrary, it reachesit, in so far as it gives rise to
one particular form of illegality in the midst of orhers,which it is
able to isolate, to place in full light and to organize as a relatively
enclosed,but penetrable,milieu. It helpsto establishan open illegal276

IlLg"lities and delinquency
ity, irreducible at a certainlevel and secretlyuseful,at once refractory and docile;it isolates,outlines,brings out a form of illegality
that seemsto surnup symbolicallyall the others,but which makesit
possibleto leavein the shadethosethat one wishesto - or musttolerate.This form is, strictly speaking,delinquency.One should
not seein delinquencythe most intense,most harmful form of
illegality, the form that the penalapparatusmust try to eliminate
through imprisonmentbecauseof the danger it represents;it is
ratheran effectof penality(and of the penalityof detention)that
makes it possible to differentiate,accommodateand supervise
illegalities.No doubt delinquencyis a form of illegality; certainly
'carceral
it hasits roo$ in illegality; but it is an illegality that the
isolated,
system',with all its ramifications,hasinvested,segmented,
penetrated,
organized,enclosedin a definitemilieu,and to which it
has given an instmmental role in relation to the other illegalities.
In short, althoughthe juridical oppositionis betweenlegaliryand
illegal practice,the strategicoppositionis betweenillegalitiesand
delinquency.
For theobservationthatprisonfailsto eliminatecrime,oneshould
experhapssubstitutethe hypothesisthat prison has succeeded
tremelywell in producingdelinquency,a specifictyPe' a politically
or economicallylessdangerous- and, on occasion,usable- form
of illegality; in producingdelinquents,in an apparentlymarginal,
but in fact centrallysupervisedmilieu; in producingthe delinquent
of the prison,in the struggles
asa pathologizedsubject.The success
aroundthe law and illegalities,hasbeento specifya'delinquency'.
'delinquent'
We haveseenhow the carceralsystemsubstitutedthe
for the offender,and also superimposed
upon juridical practicea
whole horizon of possibleknowledge.Now this processthat constitutesdelinquencyas an object of knowledgeis one with the
political operation that dissociatesillegalitiesand isolatesdelinquencyfrom them.The prisonis thehingeof thesetwo mechanisms;
it enablesthemto reinforceoneanotherperpetually,to obiectifythe
delinquencybehindthdoffence,to solidifydelinquencyin themovehasthe prison beenthat, after a
ment of illegalities.So successful
centuryand a h4lfof'failures', the prisonstill exists,producingthe
same results, and there is the greatist reluctanceto dispense
with it.

Prison
The penality of detention seemsro fabricate- hence no doubt its
longevity - an enclosed,separaredand useful illegality. The circuit
of delinquency would seem to be not the sub-product of a prison
which, while punishing, does not succeedin correcting; it is rather
the direct e{fect of a penality which, in order to control illegal
practices,seemsto invest certain of them in a mechanismof 'punishment-reproduction', of which imprisonment is one of the main
parts. But why and how is the prison called upon to participate in
the fabrication of a delinquency that it is supposedto combatl
The establishment of a delinquency that constitutes something
like an enclosed illegality has in fact a number of advantages.To
begin with, it is possible to superviseit (by locating individuals,
infiltrating the group, organizing mutual informing): for the vague,
swarmingmassof a populationpractisingoccasionalillegality, which
is always likely to spread, or again for those loose bands of vagabonds, recruiting as they move from place to place,and according
to circumstances,from the unemployed, beggars, 'bad characters'
of all kinds, which sometimesreachsuch proportions - as we saw at
the end of the eighteenth century - as to form formidable forces for
looting and rioting, is substituted a relatively small and enclosed
group of individuals on whom a constantsurveillancemay be kept.
Moreover, it is possibleto divert this self-absorbeddelinquencyto
forms of illegality that are lessdangerous:maintainedby the pressure of controls on the fringes of society, reduced to precarious
conditionsof existence,lacking links with the population that would
be able to sustain it (as was once the casewith smugglers or certain
forms of bandits- cf. Hobsbawm), delinquentsinevitably fell back
on a localized criminality, limited in its power to attract popular
support, politically harmlessand economicallynegligible.Now this
concentrated,supervisedand disarmedillegality is directly useful.
It may be useful in relation to other illegalities: isolated from them,
turned inwards upon its own internal organization,dedicatedto a
violent criminality, of which the poorer classesare often the 6rst
victims, hemmed in on every side by the police, exposedto long
prison sentences,followed by a permanently 'specialized' life delinquency - this alien, dangerousand often hostile world obstructs
or at least maintains at a sufhciently low level everyday illegal
practices(petty thefts, minor acts of violence, routine acts of law278

Illegalities and delinquency
breaking); it prevents them from leading to broader, more obvious
forms, rather as though the exemplary effect once expected of the
spectacleof the scaffold was now sought not so much in the rigour
of the punishments, as in the visible, branded existence of delinquency itself: while differentiating itself from other popular illegalities, delinquency servesto keep them in check.
But delinquency has other direct uses.The example of colonization comes to mind. Yet it is not the most convincing example;
indeed, although the deportation of criminals was demanded on
several occasionsunder the Restoration, either by the Chamber of
Deputies or by the General Councils, this was essentiallyin order
to lighten the financial burdens imposed by the whole apparatusof
detention; and, despiteall the projects that were drawn up under the
July monarchy for delinquents, undisciplined soldiers, prostitutes
and orphans to take part in the colonization of Algeria, that colony
was formally excluded,by the law of t854, from becoming one of
the overseaspenal colonies; in fact, deportation to Guiana or later
to New Caledonia had no real economic importance, despite the
obligation imposed on the convicts to remain in the colony where
they had served their sentencefor a number ofyears equal to their
time ofdetention (in certain cases,they even had to spend the rest
of their lives there).la In fact, the use of delinquency as a milieu
that was both separateand manipulable took place above all on the
fringes of legality, that is to say, a sort of subordinate illegality was
also set up in the nineteenth century whose organization as delinquency, with all the surveillancethat this implies, provided a guarantee of docility. Delinquency, controlled illegality, is an agent for the
illegality of the dominant groups. The setting up of prostitution
networks in the nineteenth century is characteristicin this respect:l5
police checks and checks on the prostitutes' health, their regular
stay in prison, the large-scaleorganization of the maisonscloses,or
brothels, the strict hierarchy that was maintained in the prostitution
milieu, its control by delinquent-informers, all this made it possible
to canalizeand to recover by a whole series of intermediaries the
enornous prbfits from a sexual pleasurethat an ever-more insistent
everydaymoralizationcondemnedto semi-clandestinityandnaturally
made expensive; in setting up a price for pleasure, in creating ,a
profit from repressed sexuality and in collecting this profit, the
279

Prison
delinquent milieu was in complicity with a self-interestedpuritanism: an illicit fiscal agent operating over illegal practices.roArms
uafficking, the illegal sale of alcohol in prohibition countries, or
more recently drug trafficking show a similar functioning of this
'useful
delinquency': the existence of a legal prohibition creates
around it a field of illegal practices,which one managesto supervise,
while extracting from it an illicit profit through elements,themselves
illegal, but rendered manipulable by their organization in delinquency. This organization is an instrument for administering and
exploiting illegalities.
It is also an instrument for the illegality with which the very
exerciseof power surrounds itself. The political use of delinquentsas informers and agentsprovocateurs - was a fact well before the
nineteenth century.r? But, after the Revolution, this practice
acquired quite different dimensions: the infiltration of political
parties and workers' associations,the recruitment of thugs against
strikers and rioters, the organization of a sub-police - working
directly with the legal police and capableif necessaryof becoming a
sort of parallel army - a whole extra-legal functioning of power was
partly assured by the,mass of reserve labour constituted by the
delinquents: a clandestine police force and standby army at the
disposal of the state. It seems that, in France, it was around the
Revolution of 1848 and Louis Napoleon's seizure of power that
thesepracticesreachedtheir height (Man, EighteenthBrumaire . . .,
63-y). Delinquency, solidified by a penal system centred upon the
prison, thus representsa diversion of illegality for the illicit circuits
of profit and power of the dominant class.
The organization of an isolatedillegality, enclosedin delinquency,
would not have been possible without the development of police
supervision. General surveillanceof the population, 'silent, mysterious, unperceivedvigilance . . . it is the eye ofthe government ceaselessly open and watching without distinction over all citizens, yet
without subjecting them to any measureof coercion whatever. . . It
does not need to be written into the law' (Bonneville, 1847, Jg7-il.
Surveillanceof individuals, envisaged by the code of r8ro, of exconvicts and of all those who, having appearedbefore the courts on
serious charges,were legally presumed to representa new threat to
the peaceof society. But surveillance, too, of milieux and groups
z8o

Illegalities and delinquencY
regarded as dangerous by informers, almost all of whorn were
former delinquents, supervisedas such by the police: delinquency,
an object among others of police surveillance, is also one of its
privileged instruments. All these surveillances presupPose the
organization of a hierarchy, partly official, partly secret(in the Paris
'security
police, this was essentially the
service', which comprised,
'secret
'open
apan from its
agents'- inspectors and sergeants- its
agents' and informers, who were motivated by fear of punishment
or the prospect ofreward: cf. Fregier, I, l4z-8). They also PresuPpose the setting up of a documentary system, the heart of which
would be the location and identificarion of criminals: compulsory
description of the criminal combined with arrest warrants issuedby
the assizecourts, a description included in prison committal registers'
copies of the registers of assize courts and courts of summary
jurisdiction sent each month to the Ministries of Justice and of
General Police, the organization a little later at the Ministry of the
Interior of a criminal records ofice with an alphabeticalindex containing summariesof theseregisters,the usein about I833, according
'naturalists,
librarians, merchants,businessmen'of
to the method of
of
individual
a system
cardsor reports, which facilitated the integration of new data and, at the sametime, together with the name of the
individual under investigation, all the information that might concern him (Bonneville, 1844,921) - the appearanceof the card-index
and the constitution of the human sciencesare another invention
that historians have taken little note of). Delinquency, with the
secretagents.thatit procures, but also with the generalizedpolicing
that it authorizes, constitutes a means of perpetual surveillance of
the population: an apparatus that makes it possible to supervise,
through the delinquents themselves,the whole social field. Delinquency functions as a political observatory. In their rurn, the statisticians and the sociologistshave made use of it, long after the police.
But this surveillancehasbeenable to function only in conjunction
with the prison. Becausethe prison facilitates the supervision of
individuals when they are released,becauseit makes possible the
recruiting of informers and multiplies mutual denunciations,because
it brings offenders into contact with one another, it precipitatesthe
organization of a delinquent milieu, closed in upon itself, but easily
supervised:and all the results of non-rehabilitation (unemployment,
z8r

Prison
prohibitions on residence,enforced residences,probation) make it
all too easy for former prisoners to carry out the tasks assigned
to them. Prison and police form a twin mechanism;together they
assurein the whole field of illegalities the differentiation, isolation
and use of delinquency. In the illegalities, the police-prison system
segments a manipulable delinquency. This delinquency, with its
specificity, is a result of the system; but it also becomesa part and
an instrument of it. So that one should speakof an ensemblewhose
three terms (police-prison-delinquency) support one another and
form a circuit that is never interrupted. Police surveillanceprovides
the prison with ofienders, which the prison transforms into delinquents, the targets and auxiliaries of potice supervisions, which
regularly send back a certain number of them to prison.
There is no penal justice intended to prosecuteall illegal practices
which, to do so, would use the police as an auxiliary and prison as a
punitive instrument, and not leave in its wake the unassimilable
residueof 'delinquency'. One should regard this justice as an instrument for the differential supervision of illegalities. In relation to this
instrument, criminal justice plays the role of legal surety and principle of transmission.It is a relay in a generaleconomy of illegalities,
whose other elementsare (not below it, but besideit) the police, the
prison and delinquency. Police encroachment on justice and the
force ofinertia that the carceralinstitution opposesto justice are not
new, nor are they the result of a sclerosisor of a gradual shift in
power; it is a structural feature that characterizespunitive mechanisms in modern societies.The magistratescan say what they like;
penal justice, with all its theatrical apparatus,is intended to respond
to the daily demand of an apparatusof supervision half submerged
in the darkness in which police and delinquency are brought together. Judges are the scarcely resisting employees of this apparatus.r8 They assistasfar asthey can in the constitution ofdelinquency,
that is to say, in the differentiation of illegalities, in the supervision,
colonization and use of certain of these illegalities by the illegality
of the dominant class.
Two figures stand out as representativeof this process, which
developedin the first thirty or forty years ofthe nineteenth cenrury.
First, there was Vidocq (cf. his Mdmoires and Histoire de Vidocq
racontdepar lui-m6me). He was a man of the old illegalities, a Gil
z8z

Illegalitiesand delinquency
Blasof the other end of the cenrury,who soontook a turn for the
worse: disturbances,adventures,swindlings, of which he was
enlistments
usuallyhimselfthe victim, brawlsand duels;successive
anddesertions,
contactswith prostitution,gambling,pickpocketing
brigandage.
But thealmostmythicalimportance
andsoonlarge-scale
in the eyesof his contemporaries
wasbasednot on
that he assumed
past;it wasnot evenbasedon thefacfthat,
this,perhapsembellished
for the first time in history, a former inmate of a convict-ship,
redeemedor guite simply bought, becamea chief of police, but
rather on the fact that, in him, delinquencyvisibly assumedits
ambiguousstatusasan objectandinstrumentfor a policeapparatus
that worked both againstit and with it. Vidocq marksthe moment
when deliquency,detachedfrom otherillegalities,wasinvestedby
powerandturnedinsideout. It wasthenthat thedirect,institutional
coupling of police and delinquencytook place: the disturbing
of power.
momentwhencrirninalitybecameoneof the mechanisms
A figurehad hauntedearliertimes,that of the monstrousking, the
sourceof all justiceand yet besmirchedwith crime; anotherfear
now appeared,that of somedark, secretunderstandingbetween
thosewho enforcedthe law and thosewho violatedit. The Shakespearianagewhen sovereigntyconfrontedabominationin a single
characterhadgone;theeverydaymelodramaof policepowerandof
the complicitiesthat crime formedwith power wassoon to begin.
Opposite'Vidocgstood his contemporary,Lacenaire.His presof crime, is
ence,assuredfor ever in the paradiseof the aesthetes
surprisingenough:despiteall his good will, his neophyte'szealrhe
wasonly ableto commit,andeventhenwith a singularlackof skill,
of
no more than a few minor crimes;he wasso strongly suspected
beinga policespy that theadministrationhadto protecthim against
his fellow prisoners,who tried to kill him (the chargewasforrnally
societyof Louistakenup by Canler,r;), andit wasthe fashionable
Philippe'sParisthat gavehim, beforehis execution,a feastbeside
which many a later literary resurrectionhasbeenlittle more than
homage.His fameowednothingeitherto theextentof his
academic
crimesor to the art of their conceptionlit wastheir ineptitudethat
gavecausefor surprise.But it did owe a great dealto the visible
play, in what he did and what he said,betweenillegality and delinquency.Swindling, desertion,petty theft, imprisonment,the revival
283

Prison
of friendships made in prison, mutual blackmail, recidivism, up to
the last, failed attempt at murder - Lacenaire is the typical 'delinquent'. But he brought with him, at least potentially, a horizon of
illegalities that had, until quite recently, representeda threae this
ruined petty bourgeois, of good education, would, a generation
earlier,have beena revolutionary, a Jacobin, a regicide;rohad he been
a contemporary of Robespierre,his rejection of the law would have
taken a directly political form. Born in r8oo, at more or less the
same time as Stendhal's Julien Sorel, his character bears the trace
of these possibilities; but they took the form of theft, murder and
denunciation. All these potentialities became a delinquency of no
great moment: in this sense, Lacenaire is a reassuring character.
And if these potentialities reappear,it is in what he says about the
theory of crime. At the moment of his death, Lacenaire manifested
the triumph of delinquency over illegality, or rather the figure of an
illegality, on the one hand, dragged down into delinquency, and,
on the other, displacedtowards an aestheticsof crime, that is to say,
towards an art of the privileged classes.There is a symmetry between Lacenaire and Vidocq, who in the same period, made it
possibleto turn delinquencyin upon itself by constituting it as an
enclosed,observablemilieu and by displacing towards police techniques a whole delinquent practice that was becoming the licit
illegality of power. That the Parisian bourgeoisie should have
feasted Lacenaire, that his cell should have been open to famous
visitors, that he should have been showered with praise during the
last days of his life, he whose death his plebeian fellow prisoners had
demanded before his judges had done so, he who had done everything, in court, to bring his accomplice Frangois to the scaffold,
there was a reason for all this: what was being celebrated was the
symbolic figure of an illegality kept within the bounds of delinquency and transformed into discourse- that is to sayi made doubly
inoffensive; the bourgeoisie had invented for itselfa new pleasure,
which it has still far from outgrown. It should not be forgotten that
Lacenaire's celebrated death succeededin muffiing the echoes of
Fieschi's attempt on the life of Louis-Philippe; Fieschi, one of the
most recent of the regicides, representedthe converse figure of a
petty criminality leading to political violence. Nor should we forget
that it took place a few months before the departure of the last
284

Illegalities and delinquencY
chain-gang and the scandalousdemonstrations that accompaniedit.
These two festivals overlapped in history; and, indeed, Frangois,
Lacenaire'saccomplice,v/as one of the best-known charactersin the
chain-gang of r9 July.20The one extendedthe ancient rituals of the
public execution at the risk of reactivating popular illegalities around
the criminals. It was to be prohibited, for the criminal was no longer
to occupy any other space than that appropriate to delinquency.
The other inaugurated the theoretical play of an illegality of the
privileged; or rather it marked the moment when the political and
economic illegalities actually practised by the bourgeoisie were to
be duplicated in theoretical and aestheticrepresentation:the'Metaphysicsof crime', a term often associatedwith Lacenaire.The French
translation of De Quincey's Murder Consideredas One of the Fine
Arts was published in r849.
This production of delinquency and its investment by the penal
apparatusmust be taken for what they are: not results acguired once
and for all, but tactics that shift according to how closely they reach
their target. The split between delinquency and other illegalities, the
way in which it is turned back upon them, its colonization by the
dominant illegality - theseall appearclearly in the way in which the
police-prison system functions; yet they have always met with
resistancelthey have given rise to struggles and provoked reaction.
Erecting the barrier to separatedelinquents from all the lower strata
of the population from which they sprang and with which they
remained linked has been a difficult task, especially no doubt in
urban milieux.zl It has been a long and arduous undertaking. It has
involved the use of the generalprinciples of the'moralization'of the
poorer classesthat elsewherehas had such crucial importance both
from an economic and a political point of view (the acquisition of
'basic
what might be called a
legalism', which was indispensable
from the time when custom was replacedby the system of the code;
learning the elementary rules of property and thrift; training in
docility at work, in stability of residenceand of the family, etc.).
More specific methods were used to maintain the hostiliry of the
poorer classesto delinquents (the use of ex-convicts as informers,
police spies,strike-breakers or thugs). There has been a systematic
confusion between offencesagainst common law and those offences
281,

Prison
against the severe legislation concerning the livret (work record),
strikes, coalitions, associations,z2for which the workers demanded
political status. Workers' action was regularly accused of being
animated, if not manipulated, by mere criminals (cf., for example,
Monfalcon, l4z). Verdicts were often more severeagainst workers
than against thieves (cf. L'Atelier, October r84o, or La Fraternitd,
July-August 1847). The two categories of convict were mixed in
the prisons and preferential treatment given to common-law
offenders,while convicted journalists and politicians usually enjoyed
the right to separatereatment. In short, a whole tactic of confusion
aimed at maintaining a permanent state of conflict.
To this was added a patient attempt to impose a highly specific
grid on the common perception of delinquenrs: to present them as
close by, everywhere presentand everywhere to be Gared. This was
the function of thefait diuers, which invaded a part of the pressand
which began to have its own newspapers.2sThe criminalfait diters,
by its everyday redundancy, makesacceptablethe system ofjudicial
and police supervisions that partition society; it recounts from day
to day a sort of internal battle againstthe facelessenemy; in this war,
it constitutes the daily bulletin of alarm or victory. The crime novel,
which began to develop in the broadsheet and in mass-circulation
literature, assumedan apparently opposite role. Above all, its function was to show that the delinquent belonged to an entirely different
world, unrelated to familiar, everyday life. This strangenesswas first
that of the lower depths of society (Les Mystitres de Paris, Rocambole), then that of madness(especially in the latter half of the century) and lastly that of crime in high society (Arsdne Lupin). The
combination of thefait divers and the detective novel has produced
for the last hundred years or more an enormous mass of 'crime
stories' in which delinquency appearsboth as very close and quite
alien, a perpetual threat to everyday life, but extremely distant in its
origin and motives, both everyday and exotic in the milieu in which
it takes place. Through the importance attributed to it and the
surfeit of discourse surrounding it, a line is traced round it which,
while exalting it, sets it apart. In such a formidable delinquency,
coming from so aliena clime, what illegality could recognizeitselfl . . .
This multiple tactic had its effecr this is proved by the campaign
of the workers'newspapersagainstpenallabour;2aagainstthe tom286

Illegalities and delinquency
fort of the prisons' and for giving prisoners the hardest and most
dangerous work; against the excessiveinterest shown by philanthropists in the delinquents; againstthe literature that exaltscrimel25
it is also proved by the generalmistrust felt throughout the workers'
'At
the dawn of the
movement for former common-law convicts.
'surrounded
Michdle
Perrot,
by contempt,
twentieth centuryr'writes
unpopular
prison
finally
in
on
an
of
walls,
the
closed
the highest
(Perrot).
people'
Yet it certainly cannot be said that this tactic triumphed or that
it brought about a total break between the delinquentsand the lower
classes.The relations between the poorer classesand illegality, the
reciprocal position ofthe proletariat and the urban plebs has yet to
be studied. But one thing is certain: delinquency and repression
were regarded, in the workers' movements of the years l83o-5o,
as an important issue. There was no doubt hostility towards the
delinquents;but it was a battle around penality. The workers' newspapers often proposed a political analysis of criminality that contradicted term by term the description familiar to the philanthropists
(poverty - dissipation - laziness - drunkenness - vice - theft crime). They assignedthe origin of delinquency not to the individual criminal (he was merely the occasion or the first victim), but
'The man who kills you is not free not to kill you. It is
to sociery:
society or, to be more precise, bad social organization that is
responsible'(L'HumanitaLre, August r84r). This is so either because
society is incapable of providing its fundamental needs, or because
it destroys or effacesin him possibilities, aspirations or needs that
'Bad
education, unused aptitudes and forces,
later emerge in crime:
the intelligence and the heart crushed by forced labour at too tender
an age' (La Fraternitd, November r84y). But this criminality of need
or of repressionmasks,by the attention paid to it and the disapprobation surrounding it, another criminality that is sometimes its
causeand always its extension.This is the delinquency from above,
a scandalousexample, the source of misery and the principle of
'While
misery strews your streetswith corpses'
revolt for the poor.
and 6lls your prisons with thieves and murderers, where are the
swindlers of the fashionable worldl. . . The most corrupting
examples,the most revolting cynicism, the most shamelessrobbery.
. . . Are you not afraid that the poor man put into the dock for
287

Prison
snatching a piece of bread from a baker's stall will not, one day,
become so enraged that stone by stone he will demolish the Stock
Exchange,a wild den where the treasureof the stateand the fortune
of families are stolen with impunity?' (La Ruchepopular'ra,November r84z). But this delinquency of wealth is tolerated by the laws,
and, when it does find its way into the courts, it can depend upon
the indulgence of the judges and the discretion of the press.26Hence
the idea that criminal trials may become the occasion for a political
debate, that advantage should be taken of controversial trials or
proceedings instituted against workers to denounce the general
functioning of penal justice 'The courts are no longer as they once
were a place for the exhibition of the miseries and wounds of the
time, a kind of branding in which the sad victims of our socialdisorder are displayed side by side; it is an arena that echoeswith the
cry of combatants' (La Fraternitd, November r84r). Hence, too, the
idea that political prisoners, since they have, like delinquents, a
direct experience of the penal system, but, unlike them, are in a
position to be heard, have a duty to be the spokesmen of all prisoners; it is their task to enlighten 'the good bourgeois of France,
who has never known the penaltiesinflicted through the pompous
indictments of a public prosecutor' (Almanach populaire de Ia
France,1839,yo).
In this reappraisal of penal justice and of the frontier that it
carefully traces around delinquency, the tactic of what might be
'counter-fait
called the
diyers' is characteristic.What the workers'
newspapersdo is to reversethe use that was made of crimes or trials
in the newspapers which, like the Galette des tribunaux, 'gorge
themselveswith blood', 'feed on prison' and provide a daily'repertoire of melodrama' (Pauvre Jacques)rst year, no. f ). The counterfait divers systematically stressesthe facts of delinquency in the
bourgeoisie,showing that it is the classaffectedby 'physicaldegeneration' and 'moral decay'; for the accountsof crimes committed
by ordinary people it substitutesdescriptionsof the misery into
which their exploiters plunge them and who, literally, starve and
murder them;2?it points out in the criminal trials of workers what
shareof responsibilitymust be attributed to the employersand to
society as a whole. In short, a whole effort was being made to
reversethis monotonousdiscourseon crime, which sought both to
288

Illegalities and delinquency
isolate it as a monstrosity and to depict it as the work of the Poorest
class.
In the course of this anti-penal polemic, the Fourierists no doubt
went further than any of the others. They were perhaps the first to
elaboratea political theory which, at the sametime, placesa positive
'civilizavalue on crime. Although, in their view, crime is a result of
tion', it is also, and by that very fact, a weapon against it. It bears
within it a figure and a future. lThe social order dominated by
the fatality of its repressiveprinciple continues to kill through the
executioner or through the prisons those whose natural robustness
rejectsor disdainsits prescriptions, those who, too strong to remain
enclosedwithin its tight swaddling-clothes, break from them and
tear them to pieces,men who do not wish to remain children' (Za
Phalange, ro January 1837). There is not, therefore, a criminal
nature, but a play of forces which, according to the class to which
individuals belongrzswill lead them to power or to prison: if born
poor, today's magistrateswould no doubt be in the convict-ships;
'would
be presiding
and the convicts, if they had been well born,
justice'
r December
(La
Phalange,
and
dispensing
in the courts
'a
fortunate
manifests
of
crime
existence
1838). At bottom, the
much as
not
so
seen
nature';
it
should
be
irrepressibility of human
'outburst
an
is
reviving'
as
an
energy
that
or
a
disease,
a weakness
of protest in the name of human individualiry', which no doubt
'Without crime, which
accountsfor its strangepower of fascination.
awakens in us a mass of torpid feelings and half distinguished
passions,we would remain still longer in disorder, in weakness'
lt may be, therefore, that crime
(La Phalange, ro January r\).
constitutes a political instrument that could Prove as precious for
the liberation of our society as it has been for the emancipation of
the Negroes; indeed, will such an emancipation take place without
'Poison,
fire-raising and sometimeseven revolt are evidence of
itl
the terrible miseries of the social condition' (La Phalange, to
'the most unfortunate
January rs37). And what of the prisoners,
and most oppressed part of mankind'i La Phalange sometimes
shared the contemporary aestheticof crime, but in a very different
cause.
Hence a useof fait dhrersthat was intended not only to turn the
reproach of immorality back upon the adversary, but to reveal the
28g

Prison
play of opposing forces. La Phalange analysespenal affairs as a
confrontation coded by 'civilization', the great crimes not as
monstrosities,but asthe fatal return and revolt of what is repressedrso
the minor illegalities not as the necessarymargins of society, but as
a rumbling from the midst of the banle-field.
After Vidocq and Lacenaire,a third charactermust be introduced.
He made only a short appearance;his notoriety lasted hardly more
than a day. He was merely the passingfigure of minor illegalities: a
child of thirteen, without home or family, charged with vagabondage and whom a two-year sentencehad no doubt long placed in the
circuits of delinquency. He would certainly have passedwithout
trace, had he not opposedto the discourseof the law that made him
delinquent (in the name of the disciplines, even more than in the
terms of the code) the discourseof an illegality that remained resistant to thesecoercionsand which revealedindiscipline in a systematically ambiguous manner as the disordered order of society and as the
affirmation of inalienable rights. All the illegalities that the court
defined.asoffencesthe accusedreformulated as the affirmation of a
living force: the lack of a home as vagabondage,the lack of a rnaster
asindependence,the lack ofwork as freedom, the lack of a time-table
as the fullness of days and nights. This confrontation of illegality
with the discipline-penality-delinquency system was perceived by
contemporariesor rather by the iournalist who happenedto be there
as the comic effect of the criminal law at grips with the petty details
of indiscipline. And it was true: the affair itself and the verdict that
followed representedthe heart of the problem of legal punishment
in the nineteenth century. The irony with which the judge tried to
envelop indiscipline in the majesty of the law and the insolence
with which the accusedreinscribed indiscipline among the fundamental rights representfor penality an exemplary scene.
This, no doubt, is the value of the account published in the
GaTettedestibunaux for August r84o: 'The judge: One must sleep
at home. - B6asse:Have I got a homei - You live in perpetualvagabondage. - I work to earn my living. - What is your station in
lifet - My station: to begin with, I'm thirry-six at least;I don't work
for anybody. I've worked for myself for a long time now. I have my
day station and my night station. In the day, for instance,I hand out
leaflets free of charge to all the passers-by;I run after the stage290

Illegalities and delinquency
coacheswhen they arrive and carry luggage for the passengerslI
turn cart-wheels on the avenue de Neuilly; at night there are the
shows; I open coach doors, I sell pass-out tickets; I've plenty to do.
- It would be better for you to be put into a good house as an
apprenticeand learn a trade. - Oh, a good house, an apprenticeship,
it's too much trouble. And anyway the bourgeois , . . always
grumbling, no freedom. - Does not your father wish to reclaim youl
-Haven't got no father. - And your motherl - No mother neither,
no parents,no friends, free and independent.' Hearing his sentence
'pulled
an ugly face, then,
of two years in a reformatory, B6asse
years, that's never
his
good
humour,
remarked:
"Two
recovering
months.
Let's
off,
then."'
more than twenty-four
be
It was this scenethat La Phalange took up. And the importance
that the newspaper gave it, the extremely slow, careful analysis,
shows that the Fourierists saw in such an everyday affair a play of
'civilization', reprefundamental forces. On the one hand, that of
'living
legality, the spirit and letter of the law'.
sentedby the judge,
It had its own system of coercion, which seemedto be the code,
but which in fact was discipline. There had to be a place, a location,
'One
sleepsat home, said the iudge, because
a compulsory insertion:
in fact, for him, everything must have a home, some dwelling, however magnificent or mean; his task is not to provide one, but to
force every individual to live in one.' Moreover, one must have a
station in life, a recognizable identity, an individuality 6xed once
'What is your stationi This question is the simplest
and for all:
expressionof the establishedorder in society; such vagabondageis
repugnant to it, disturbs itl one must have a stable,continuous longterm station, thoughts of the future, of a securefurure, in order to
reassureit against all attacks.' In short, one should have a master,
be caught up and situated within a hierarchy; one exists only when
'Who
6xed in definite relationsof domination:
do you work withl
That is to say, since you are not a master, you must be a servant,
whatever your stationl it is not a question of your satisfactorinessas
an individual; it is a question of order to be maintained.' Confronted
with discipline on the face of the law, there is illegality, which puts
itself forward as a right; it is indiscipline, rather than the criminal
offence, that causes the rupture. An indiscipline of language:
'indicate a violent
incorrect grammar and the tone of the replies
29r

Prison
split between the accusedand society, which, through the judge,
addresseshim in correct terms'. An indiscipline that is the indiscipline of native, immediate liberty: 'He is well aware rhat the apprentice, the worker is a slave and that slavery is sad. . . This liberty,
this need of movement that possesseshim, he is well aware that he
would no longer enjoy it in a life of ordinary onder. . . He prefers
liberry; what does he care if others see it as disorderl It is liberty,
that is to say, the most spontaneousdevelopment of his individuality, a wild development and, consequently, brutal and limited, but a
natural, instinctive development.' Indiscipline in family relationsl
it does not matter whether this lost child was abandoned or freed
himself voluntarily, for 'he would have been unable to bear the
slavery of education either at his parents' or with strangers'. And
through all theseminute disciplines it is ultimately'civilization' as a
whole that is rejected and 'wildness' that emerges:'It is work, it is
laziness,it is thoughtlessness,it is debauchery:it is everything except
order; the difference in occupations and debauchesaside, it is the
life of the savage,living from day to day and with no tomorrow'
(La Phalange, 15 August r84o).
No doubt the analysesof La Phalaflge cannot be regarded as
representativeofthe discussionsthat took placein the workers' press
at this time on crime and penality. Nevertheless,they are situated in
the context of this polemic. The lessonsof La Phalange were not
quite wasted. They found an echo when, in the second half of the
nineteenth century, taking the penal apparatus as their point of
attack, the anarchists posed the political problem of delinquenry;
when they thought to recognize in it the most militant rejection of
the law; when they tried not so much to heroize the revolt of the
delinquentsasto disentangledelinquencyfrom the bourgeois legality
and illegality that had colonized it; when they wished to re-establish
or constitutethe political unity of popular illegalities.

292

t. The carceral

Were I to fix the dateof completionof the carceralsystem,I would
choosenot rSro and the penalcode,nor even 1844,when the law
I might
layingdown theprincipleof cellularinternmentwaspassed;
not even choose1838,when books on prison reform by Charles
Lucas,Moreau-Christophe
and Faucherwerepublished.The dateI
would choosewould be zz Januaryr84o, the date of the official
opening of Mettray. Or better still, perhaps,that glorious day,
unremarkedand unrecorded,when a child in Mettrayremarkedas
he lay dying: 'What a pity I left the colony so soon' (Ducp6tiaux,
r8yz, 383).This markedthe deathof the first penitentiarysaint.
Many of the blessedno doubt went to join him, if the former
inmatesof the penalcoloniesare to be believedwhen, in singing
the praisesof the new punitivepoliciesof the body, they remarked:
'We preferredthe blows,but the cell suitsus better.'
Why Mettrayl Becauseit is the disciplinaryform at its most
extreme,the model in which are concentratedall the coercive
'cloister,prison,
technologies
of behaviour.In it were to be found
groups,into which
school,regiment'.The small,highly hierarchized
five models:that
the inmatesweredivided,followedsimultaneously
'brothers'and
'family'
of
(each
of the family
group wasa
composed
'elder
by
two
brothers');that of the army (eachfamily, commanded
had
a
second
each
of
which
a head,wasdivided into two sections,
in command;each inmate had a number and was taught basic
military exercisesl
inspectionevery day, an
therewas a cleanliness
inspectionof clothing everyweekla roll-call wastakenthreetimes
a day); that of the workshop,with supervisorsand foremen,who
wereresponsible
for the regularityof the work and for the apprenticeshipof the youngerinmates;that of the school(an hour or an
hour anda halfoflessonseveryday; the teachingwasgiven by the
29J

Prison
instructor and by the deputy-heads);Iastly, the iudicial model (each
'justice'
day
was meted out in the parlour: 'The least act of disobedienceis punished and the best way ofavoiding serious offences
is to punish the most minor offencesvery severely:at Mettray, a useless word is punishable'; the principal punishment inflicted was
confinementto one'scell; for'isolation is the bestmeansof acting on
the moral nature of children; it is there above all that the voice of
religion, even ifit has never spoken to their hearts,recoversall its
emotional power' - Ducp!tiaux, r8yz, 377); the entire parapenal
institution, which is createdin order not to be a prison, culminates
in the cell, on the walls of which are written in black letters:'God
seesyou.'
This superimpositionof different models makes it possible to
indicate, in its specificfeatures,the function of 'training'. The chiefs
and their deputies at Mettray had to be not exactly judges, or
teachers,or foremen, or non-commissioned ofFcers, or 'parents',
but something of all these things in a quite specific mode of intervention. They were in a sensetechnicians of behaviour: engineers
of conduct, orthopaedistsof individuality. Their task was to produce
bodies that were both docile and capable; they supervised the nine
or ten working hours of every day (whether in a workshop or in
the fields); they directed the orderly movements of groups of inmates, physical exercises,military exercises,rising in the morning,
going to bed at night, walks to the accompanimentof bugle and
whistle; they taught gymnastics;r they checked cleanliness,supervised bathing. Training was accompaniedby permanent observation; a body of knowledge was being constantlybuilt up from the
everyday behaviour of the inmates; it was organizedasan instrument
'On
of perpetualassessment:
entering the colony, the child is subjectedto a sort of interrogation as to his origins, the position of his
family, the offence for which he was brought before the courts and
all the other offences that make up his short and often very sad
existence.This information is written down on a board on which
everything concerningeachinmate is noted in turn, his stay at the
colony and the place to which he is sent when he leaves' (Ducpetiaux, r85r, 6r). The modelling of the body producesa knowledge
of the individual, the apprenticeshipof the techniquesinducesmodes
of behaviourand the acquisitionof skills is inextricablylinked with
294

The carceral
the establishment of power relations; strong, skilled agricultural
workers are produced; in this very work, provided it is technically
supervised, submissive subjects are produced and a dependable
body of knowledge built up about them. This disciplinary technique
'soul'
to be known
exercisedupon the body had a double effect: a
and a subiection to be maintained. One result vindicated this work of
training: in r848, at a moment when'the fever of revolution fired the
imagination of all, when the schools at Angers, La Fldche, Alfort,
even the boarding schools, rose up in rebellion, the inmates of
Mettray were calmer than ever' (Ferrus).
Where Mettray was especially exemplary was in the specificity
that it recognized in this operation of training. It was related to
other forms of supervision, on which it was based:medicine, general
education, religious direction. But it cannot not be identified absolutely with them. Nor with administration in the strict sense.Heads
'ftrmilies', monitors and foremen, had to live in
or deputy-headsof
closeproximity to the inmatesl their clothes were'almost as humble'
as those of the inmates themselves;they practically never left their
side, observing them day and night; they constituted among them
a network of permanent observation. And, in order to train them
themselves,a specializedschool had been organized in the colony.
The essentialelement of its programme was to subject the future
cadresto the sameapprenticeshipsand to the samecoercions as the
'subjected pupils to the discipline
as
inmates themselves:they were
that, later, as instructors, they would themselvesimpose'. They were
taught the art of power relations. It was the first training college in
'penitentiary'
pure discipline: the
was not simply a project that
sought its justificationin'humanity' or its foundationsin a'science',
but a technique that was learnt, transmitted and which obeyed
general norms. The practice that normalized by compulsion the
conduct of the undisciplined or dangerous could, in turn, by
'normalized'. The
technical elaboration and rational reflection, be
'discipline'
disciplinary technique became a
which also had its
school.
It so happensthat historians of the human sciencesdate the birth
of scientific psychology at this time: during these same years, it
seems,Weber was manipulating his little compassfor the measurement of sensations. What took place at Mettray (and in other

29t

Prison
European countries sooner or later) was obviously of a quite different order. It was the emergenceor rather the institutional specification, the baptism as it were, of a new type of supervision - both
knowledge and power - over individuals who resisteddisciplinary
normalization. And yet, in the formation and growth of psychology,
the appearanceof these professionals of discipline, normality and
subiection surely marks the beginning of a new stage.It will be said
that the guantitative assessmentofsensorial responsescould at least
derive authority from the prestige of the emerging science of
physiology and that for this alone it deserves to feature in the
history of the sciences.But the supervision of normality was firmly
encasedin a medicine or a psychiatry that provided it with a sort
'scientificiry';
of
it was supported by a judicial apparatus which,
directly or indirectly, gave it legal justification. Thus, in the shelter
of these two considerableprotectors, and, indeed, acting as a link
between them, or a place of exchange, a carefully worked out
technique for the supervision of norms has continued to develop
right up to the present day. The specific, institutional supports of
these methods have proliferated since the founding of the small
school at Mettray; their apparatuseshave increasedin quantiry and
scope;their auxiliary serviceshave increased,with hospitals,schools,
public administrations and private enterprisesl their agents have
proliferated in number, in power, in technical qualification; the
techniciansof indiscipline have founded a family. In the normalization of the power of normalization, in the arrangementof a powerknowledge over individuals, Mettray and its school marked a new
era.
But why choose this moment as the point of emergenceof the
formation of an art of punishing that is still more or less our ownl
Precisely because this choice is somewhat 'unjust'. Because it
'end'
situatesthe
of the processin the lower reachesof criminal law.
BecauseMettray was a prison, but not entirely; a prison in that it
contained young delinquents condemned by the courts; and yet
something else,too, becauseit also contained minors who had been
charged, but acquitted under article 66 of the code, and boarders
held, as in the eighteenth century, as an alternative to paternal
correction. Mettray, a punitive model, is at the limit of strict
296

The carceral
penality. It was the most famous of a whole series of institutions
which, well beyond the frontiers of criminal law, constituted what
one might call the carceral archipelago.
Yet the generalprinciples, the great codesand subsequentlegisla'outside the
tion were quite clear on the matter: no imprisonment
law', no detention that had not been decided by a qualified iudicial
institution, no more of those arbitrary and yet widespread confinements. Yet the very principle of extra-penal incarceration was in
fact never abandoned. (A whole study remains to be done of the
debates that took place during the Revolution concerning family
courts, paternal correction and the right ofparents to lock up their
children.) And, if the apparatusof the great classicalform of confinement was partly (and only partly) dismantled, it was very soon
reactivated,rearranged,developed in certain directions. But what is
still more important is that it was homogenized, through the mediation of the prison, on the one hand with legal punishments and, on
the other, with disciplinary mechanisms. The frontiers between
confinement, judicial punishment and institutions of discipline,
which were already blurred in the classicalage,tended to disappear
and to constitute a great.qlrceral continuum that diffused penitentiary techniques into the most innocent disciplines, transmitting
disciplinary norms into the very heart of the penal system and
placing over the slightest illegality, the smallestirregularity, deviation or anomaly, the threat of delinquency. A subtle, graduated
carceralnet, with compact institutions, but also separateand diffused
methods, assumed responsibility for the arbitrary, widespread,
badly integrated confinement of the classicalage.
I shall not attempt here to reconstitute the whole network that
formed first the immediate surroundings of the prison, then spread
farther and fanher outrvards. However, a few referencesand dates
should give some idea of the breadth and precociry of the phenomenon.
There were agricultural sections in the maisonscentales (the 6rst
exampleof which was Gaillon in r 824,followed later by Fontevrault,
Les Douaires, Le Boulard); there were colonies for poor, abandoned
vagrant children (Petit-Bourg in r84o, Ostwald in r84z); there were
almshousesfor young female offenderswho 'recoiled before the idea
of entering a life of disorder', for 'poor innocent girls whose
297

Prison
mothers' immorality has exposed to precocious perversity', or for
poor girls found on the doorstepsof hospitalsand lodging houses.
There were penal colonies envisagedby the law of r85o: minors,
acquitted or condemned, were to be sent to these colonies and
'brought
up in common, under srict discipline, and trained in
agricultural work and in the principal industries related to itl' later,
they were to be joined by minors sentencedto hard labour for life
'vicious
and
and insubordinatewards of the Public Assistance'(on
all theseinstitutions,cf. Gaillac, gg-roil. And, moving still farther
away from penality in the strict sense,the carceralcircles widen and
the form of the prison slowly diminishes and finally disappears
altogether: the institutions for abandoned or indigent children, the
orphanages(like Neuhof or Mesnil-Firmin), the establishmentsfor
apprentices(like the Bethldem de Reims or the Maison de Nancy);
still farther away the factory-convents, such as La Sauvagdre,
Tarare and Jujurieu (where the girl workers enteredabout the age of
thirteen, lived confined for years and were allowed out only under
surveillance, received instead of wages pledged payment, which
could be increasedby bonuses for zeal and good behaviour, which
they could use only on leaving). And then, still farther, there was a
whole seriesof mechanismsthat did not adopt the 'compact' prison
model, but used some of the carceral methods: charitable societies,
moral improvement associations,organizations that handed out
assistanceand also practised surveillance, workers' estates and
lodging houses* the most primitive of which still bear the all too
visible marks of the penitentiary system.2 And, lastly, this great
carceralnetwork reachesall the disciplinary mechanismsthat function throughout society.
We have seen that, in penal justice, the prison transformed the
punitive procedure into a penitentiary technique; the carceralarchipelago transported this technique from the penal institution to the
entire social body. With severalimportant results.
r. This vast mechanismestablisheda slow, continuous, imperceptiblegradation that made it possibleto passnaturally from disorder to offence and back from a transgressionof the law to a slight
departure from a rule, an average,a demand, a norm. In the classical
period, despite a certain common reference to offence in generalrg
the order of the crime, the order of sin and the order of bad conduct
298

The carceral
remained separatein so far as they related to seParatecriteria and
authorities (court, penitence, confinement). Incarceration with its
mechanisms of surveillance and punishment functioned, on the
contrary, according to a principle of relative continuity. The continuity of the institutions themselves, which were linked to one
another (public assistancewith the orphanage, the reformitory, the
penitentiary, the disciplinary battalion, the prison; the school with
the charitable societS the workshop, the almshouse, the penitentiary convent; the workers' estatewith the hospital and the prison).
A continuiry of the punitive criteria and mechanisms,which on the
basis of a mere deviation gradually strengthened the rules and
increasedttre punishment. A continuous gradation of the established,
specializedand competent authorities (in the order of knowledge
and in the order of power) which, without resort to arbitrariness,
but strictly according to the regulations, by means of observation
and assessmenthierarchized, differentiated, judged, punished and
moved gradually from the correction of irregularities to the punish'carceral'
ment of crime. The
with its many diffuse or comPact
forms, its institutions of supervision or constraint, of discreet surveillance and insistent coercion, assured the communication of
punishments according to quality and guantityl it connected in
series or disposed according to subtle divisions the minor and the
serious penalties, the mild and the strict forms of treatment, bad
marks and light sentences.You will end up in the convict-ship, the
slightest indiscipline seemsto say; and the harshestof prisons says
to the prisoners condemned to lifs I shall note the slightest irregularity in your conduct. The generality of the punitive function that
'ideological'
technique of
the eighteenth century sought in the
representationsand signs now had as its supPort the extension, the
material framework, complex, dispersed,but coherent, of the various
carceral mechanisms.As a result, a certain significant generality
moved betweenthe leastirregularity and the greatestcrimel it was no
longer the offence, the attack on the common interest, it was the
departure from the norm, the anomaly; it was this that haunted
the school, the court, the asylum or the prison. It generalizedin
the sphereof meaningthe function that the carceralgeneralizedin the
sphere of tactics. Replacing the adversary of the sovereign, the
social enemy was Eansformed into a deviant, who brought with him

299

Prison
the multiple danger of disorder, crime and madness.The carceral
network linked, through innumerable relations, the two long,
multiple seriesof the punitive and the abnormal.
z. The carceral, with its far-reaching networks, allows the recruitment of major 'delinquents'. It organizeswhat might be called
'disciplinary
careers' in which, through various exclusions and
rejections,a whole processis set in motion. In the classicalperiod,
there openedup in the confinesor intersticesofsociety the confused,
'outlaw'
tolerant and dangerousdomain of the
or at least of that
which eluded the direct hold of power: an uncertain spacethat was
for criminality a training ground and a region of refuge; there
poverty, unemployment, pursued innocence, cunning, the struggle
againstthe powerful, the refusal of obligations and laws, and organized crime all came together as chance and fortune would dictate;
it was the domain of advenrure that Gil Blas, Sheppardor Mandrin,
each in his own way, inhabited. Through the play of disciplinary
differentiations and divisions, the nineteenth century constructed
rigorous channelswhich, within the system, inculcated docility and
produced delinquency by the samemechanisms.There was a sort of
'training',
disciplinary
continuous and compelling, that had something of the pedagogical curriculum and something of the professional network. Careersemerged from it, as secure,as predictable,
as those ofpublic life: assistanceassociations,residential apprenticeships, penal colonies, disciplinary battalions, prisons, hospitals,
almshouses.These networks were already well mapped out at the
beginning of the nineteenth century: 'Our benevolent establishments present an admirably coordinated whole by means of which
the indigent does not remain a moment without help from the cradle
to the grave. Follow the course of the unfortunate man: you will
seehim born among foundlings; from there he passesto the nursery,
then to an orphanage;at the age of six he goes off to primary school
and later to adult schools. If he cannot work, he is placed on the list
of the charity officesof his district, and if he falls ill he may choose
between rwelve hospitals.
Lastly, when the poor Parisian
reachesthe end of his career, seven almshousesawait his age and
often their salubrious r6gime has prolonged his uselessdays well
beyond those of the rich man' (Moreau de Jonnds, quoted in
Touquet).

300

The carceral
The carceral network does not cast the unassimilableinto a confused hell; there is no outside. It takes back with one hand what it
seemsto exclude with the other. It saveseverything, including what
it punishes. It is unwilling to waste even what it has decided to
disqualify. In this panoptic society of which incarceration is the
omnipresent armature, the delinquent is not outside the law; he is,
from the very outset, in the law, at the very heart of the law, or at
least in the midst of those mechanismsthat transfer the individual
imperceptibly from discipline to the law, from deviation to ofience.
Although it is true that prison punishes delinquency, delinquency
is for the most part produced in and by an incarceration which,
'
ultimately, prison perpetuatesin its turn. The prison is merely the
natural consequence,no more than a higher degree, of that hierarchy laid down step by step. The delinquent is an institutional
product. It is no use being surprised, therefore, that in a considerable proportion of casesthe biography of convicts passesthrough
all thesemechanismsand establishments,whose purpose, it is widely
believed, is to lead away from prison. That one should find in them
'charwhat one might call the index of an irrepressibly delinquent
acter': the prisoner condemned to hard labourwas meticulously produced by a childhood spent in a reformatory, according to the lines
of force of the generalizedcarceralsystem. Conversely, the lyricism
'outlaw',
the
of marginality may find inspiration in the image of the
great social nomad, who prowls on the confines of a docile, frightened order. But it is not on the fringes ofsociety and through successive exiles that criminality is born, but by means of ever more
closely placed insertions, under ever more insistent surveillance,by
an accumulation of disciplinary coercion. In short, the carceral
archipelago assures,in the depths of the social body, the formation
of delinquencyon the basisof subtleillegalities, the overlapping of the
latter by the former and the establishmentof a specifiedcriminality.
3. But perhaps the most important elfect of the carceral system
and of its extension well beyond legal imprisonment is that it succeeds in making the power to punish natural and legitimate, in
lowering at least the threshold of tolerance to penality. It tends to
effacewhat may be exorbitant in the exerciseof punishment. It does
this by playing the two registers in which it is deployed - the legal
register ofjustice and the extraJegal register ofdiscipline - against

30r

Prison
one another. In effect, the great continuity of the carceral system
throughout the law and its sentencesgives a sort of legal sanction
to the disciplinary mechanisms, to the decisions and judgements
that they enforce. Throughout this network, which comprises so
many'regional' institutions,relativelyautonomousand independent,
is transmitted, with the 'prison-form', the model of justice itself.
The regulations of the disciplinary establishmentsmay reproduce
the law, the punishments imitate the verdicts and penalties, the
surveillance repeat the police model; and, above all these multiple
establishments,the prison, which in relation to them is a pure form,
unadulteratedand unmitigated, gives them a sort of official sanction.
The carceral, with its long gradation stretching from the convictship or imprisonmentwith hard labour to diffuse,slight limitations,
communicatesa type of power that the law validates and that justice
uses as its favourite weapon. How could the disciplines and the
power that functions in them appear arbitrary, when they merely
operatethe mechanismsof justice itself, even with a view to mitigating their intensityl When, by generalizing its effects and transmitting it to every level, it makesit possible to avoid its full rigouri
Carceral continuity and the fusion of the prison-form make it
possible to legalize, or in any caseto legitimate disciplinary power,
which thus avoids any element of excessor abuseit may entail.
But, conversely, the carceral pyramid gives to the power to
inflict legal punishment a context in which it appearsto be free of all
excessand all violence. In the subtle gradation ofthe apparatusesof
discipline and of the successive'embeddings' that they involve, the
prison does not at all represent the unleashing ofa different kind of
power, but simply an additional degreein the intensity of a mechanism that has continued to operate since the earliest forms of legal
punishment. Between the latest institution of 'rehabilitation', whire
one is taken in order to avoid prison, and the prison where one is
sent after a definableoffence,the differenceis (and must be) scarcely
perceptible. There is a strict economy that has the effect of rendering as discreet as possible the singular power to punish. There is
nothing in it now that recalls the former excessof sovereign power
when it revenged its authority on the tortured body of those about
to be executed.Prison continues, on those who are entrusted to it,
a work begun elsewhere, which the whole of society pursues on
3o2

The carceral
each individual through innumerable mechanismsof discipline. By
means of a carceral continuum, the authority that sentencesinfiltrates all those other authorities that supervise,transform, correct,
improve. It might even be said that nothing really distinguishes
'dangerous'
character of the
them any more except the singularly
delinquents, the gravity of their departures from normal behaviour
and the necessarysolemnity of the ritual. But, in its function, the
power to punish is not essentially different from that of curing or
educating. It receivesfrom them, and from their lesser,smaller task,
a sanction from below; but one that is no less important for that,
since it is the sanction of technique and rationality. The carceral
'naturalizes'the
legal power to punish, as it'legalizes' the technical
power to discipline. In thus homogenizing them, effacing what may
be violent in one and arbitrary in the other, attenuating the effectsof
revolt that they may both arouse,thus depriving excessin either of
any purpose, circulating the same calculated, mechanical and discreet methods from one to the other, the carceral makes it possible
'economy'
of power whose formula the
to carry out that great
eighteenth century had sought, when the problem of the accumulation and useful administration of men first emerged
By operating at every level of the social body and by mingling
ceaselessly
the art ofrectifying and the right to punish, the universality of the carceral lowers the level from which it becomes natural
and acceptableto be punished. The question is often posed as to
how, before and after the Revolution, a new foundation was given
to the right to punish. And no doubt the answer is to be found in
the theory of the contract. But it is perhaps more important to ask
the reversequestion: how were people made to accept the power to
punish, or quite simply, when punished, tolerate being so. The
theory of the contract can only answer this question by the fiction
of a iuridical subiect giving to oihers the power to exerciseover him
the right that he himself ppssessesover them. It is highly probable
that the great carceralcontinuum, which provides a communication
between the power of discipline and the power of the law, and
extends without interruption from the smallest coercions to the
longest penal detention, constituted the technical and real, immediately material counterpart of that chimerical granting of the right to
punish.

30J

Prison .
a. With this new economy of power, the carceralsystem, which
is its basic instrument, permitted the emergenceof a new form of
'law':
a mixture of legaliry and nature, prescription and constitution,
the norm. This had a whole seriesof effects:the internal dislocation
of the judicial power or at least of its functioning; an increasing
difficulty in judging, as if one were ashamed to pass sentence; a
furious desire on the part of the judges to judge, assess,diagnose,
recognize the normal and abnormal and claim the honour of curing
or rehabilitating. In view of this, it is uselessto believe in the good
or bad consciencesof judges, or even of their unconscious. Their
'appetite
immense
for medicine' which is constantly manifested from their appeal to psychiatric experts, to their attention to the
chatter of criminology - expressesthe maior fact that the power
'denatured';
they exercisehasbeen
that it is at a certain level governed
by laws; that at another, more fundamental level it functions as a
normative power; it is the economy of power that they exercise,
and not that of their scruples or their humanism, that makes them
pass'therapeutic'sentencesand recommend'rehabilitating'periods
of imprisonment. But, conversely, if the judges accept ever more
reluctantly to condemn for the sake of condemning, the activity of
judging has increasedprecisely to the extent that the normalizing
power has spread.Borne along by the omnipresenceof the mechanisms of discipline, basing itself on all the carceralappararuses,it has
becomeone of the major functions of our society. The judges of
normality are present everywhere. We are in the society of the
'social
teacher-judge, the doctor-judge, the educator-judge, the
worker'-judge; it is on them that the universal reign of the normative
is based;and eachindividual, wherever he may find himself, subiects
to it his body, his gestures,his behaviour,his aptitudes,his achievements. The carceralnetwork, in its compact or disseminatedforms,
with its systemsof insertion,distribution, surveillance,observation,
hasbeenthe greatestsupport, in modern society,of the normalizing
Power.
y. The carceral texture of society assuresboth the real capture
of the body and its perpetual observation; it is, by its very nature,
the apparatusof punishment that conforms most completely to the
new economy of power and the instrument for the formation of
knowledge that this very economy needs.Its panoptic functioning

30{

The carceral
enablesit to play this double role. By virtue of its methods of fixing,
dividing, recording, it has been one of the simplest, crudest, also
most concrete, but perhaps most indispensableconditions for the
development of this immenseactivity of examination that has objectified human behaviour. If, after the age of inquisitorial' iustice, we
'examinatory' justice,
have entered the age of
if, in an even more
general way, the method of examination has been able to spread so
widely throughout society, and to give rise in part to the sciences
of man, one of the great instruments for this hasbeenthe multiplicity
and close overlapping of the various mechanismsof incarceration.
I am not saying that the human sciencesemerged from the prison.
But, if they have been able to be formed and to produce so many
profound changes in the episteme, it is becausethey have been
conveyed by a specificand new modality of power: a certain policy
of the body, a certain way of rendering the group of rnen docile and
useful. This policy required the involvement of definite relations of
knowledge in relations of power; it called for a technique of overlapping subiection and objectification; it brought with it new procedures of individualization. The carceral network constituted one
of the armaturesof this power-knowledge that has made the human
scienceshistorically possible. Knowable man (soul, individuality,
consciousness,conduct, whatever it is called) is the object-effect
of this analytical investment, of this domination-observation.
6. This no doubt explains the extreme solidiry of the prison, that
slight invention that was neverthelessdecried from the outs!t. If it
had been no more than an instmment of reiection or repression in
the service of a state apparanrs, it would have been easier to alter its
more overt forms or to find a more acceptablesubstitute for it. But,
rooted as it was in mechanismsand strategies of power, it could
meet any attempt to transform it with a great force of inertia. One
fact is characteristic:when it is a question ofaltering the system of
imprisonment, opposition does not come from the iudicial institutions alonel resistanceis to be found not in the prison as penal sanction, but in the prison with all its determinations, links and extrajudicial resultsl in the prison as the relay in a general network of
disciplinesand surveillances;in the prison as it functions in a panoptic r6gime. This does not mean that it cannot be altered, nor that it
is onceand for all indispensableto our kind of society. One may, on

30t

Prison
the contrary, site the two processeswhich, in the very continuity of
the processesthat make the prisqn function, are capableofexercising
considerable restraint on its use and of transforming its internal
functioning. And no doubt theseprocesseshave already begun to a
large degree.The first is that which reducesthe utility (or increases
its inconveniences)of a delinquency accommodatedas a specific
illegality, locked up and supervised; thus the growth of great
national or internationalillegalitiesdirectly linked to the political
and economicapparatuses(financial illegalities, information services,
arms and drugs trafficking, property speculation) makesit clear that
the somewhat rustic and conspicuouswork force of delinquency is
proving ineffective; or again, on a smaller scale, as soon as the
economic levy on sexual pleasureis carried out more efficiendy by
the saleof contraceptives,or obliquely through publications,films
or shows, the archaic hierarchy of prostitution loses much of its
former usefulness.The secondprocessis the growth of the disciplinary networks, the multiplication of their exchangeswith the
penal apparatus,the ever more important powers that are given
them, the ever more massive transferenceto them of iudicial functionsl now, as medicine,psychology, education,public assistance,
'social
work' assumean ever greater share of the powers of supervision and assessment,
the penal apparatuswill be able, in turn, to
become medicalized,psychologized,educationalized;and by the
same token that turning-point representedby the prison becomes
lessuseful when, through the gap between its penitentiary discourse
and its effect of consolidating delinquency, it articulates the penal
power and the disciplinarypower. In the midst of all thesemechanisms of normalization,which are becoming ever more rigorous in
their application,the specificityof the prison and its role as link are
losing something of their purpose
If there is an overall political issuearound the prison, it is not
thereforewhether it is to be corrective or not; whether the judges,
the psychiatristsor the sociologistsare to exercisemore power in it
than the administratorsor supervisors;it is not even whether we
should have prison or somethingother than prison. At present,the
problem lies rather in the steeprise in the use of thesemechanisms
of normalizationand the wide-ranging powers which, through the
proliferation of new disciplines,they bring with them.
3e,6

The carceral
'Moralists,
In 1836, a correspondent wrote to La Phalange:
philosophers, legislators,flatterers of civilization, this is the plan of
your Paris, neatly ordered and arranged, here is the improved plan
in which all like things are gathered together. At the centre, and
within a first enclosure: hospitals for all diseases,almshouse' for
all types of poverty, madhouses,prisons, convict-prisons for men,
women and children. Around the first enclosure, barracks, courtrooms, police stations, housesfor prison warders, scafiolds, houses
for the executioner and his assistants.At the four corners, the
Chamber of Deputies, the Chamber of Peers,the Institute and the
Royal Palace. Outside, there are the various services that supply
the central enclosure, commerce, with its swindlers and its bankruptcies; industry and its furious struggles; the press, with its
sophisms; the gambling dens; prostitution, the people dying of
hunger or wallowing in debauchery, always ready to lend an ear
to the voice of the Genius of Revolutions; the heartlessrich. . .
Lastly the ruthless war of all against all' (La Phalange, to August
r836).
I shall stop with this anonymous text. We are now far away from
the country of tortures, dotted with wheels, gibbets, gallows,
pillories; we are far, too, from that dream of' the reformers, less
than 6fty years before: the city of punishmentsin which a thousand
small theatreswould have provided an endlessmulticoloured representation of justice in which the punishments,medculously produced on decorativescaffolds,would have constituted the permanent
festival of the penal code. The carceral city, with its imaginary
'geo-politics', is governed by quite different principles. The extract
fuom La Phalangereminds us of some of the more important ones:
that at the centre of this city, and as if to hold it in place, there is,
'centre
of power', not a network of forces, but a multiple
not the
network of diverse elements - walls, space,institution, rules, discourse;that the model ofthe carceralcity is not, therefore, the body
of the king, with the powers that emanatefrom it, nor the contractual meeting of wills from which a body that was both individual
and collectivewas born, but a strategicdistribution of elementsof
different natures and levels. That the prison is not the daughter of
laws, codesor the judicial apparatus;that it is not subordinatedto
the court and the docile or clumsv instrument of the sentencesthat

307

Prison
it hands out and of the results that it would like to achieve;that it is
the court that is external and subordinate to the prison. That in the
central position that it occupies,it is not alone, but linked to a whole
'carceral'
seriesof
mechanismswhich seem distinct enough - since
they are intended to alleviate pain, to cure, to comfort - but which
all tend, like the prison, to exercisea power of normalization. That
thesemechanismsare applied not to transgressionsagainsta 'central'
law, but to the apparatusof production - 'commerce' and 'industry'
- to a whole multiplicity of illegalities, in all their diversity of nature
and origin, their specific role in profit and the different ways in
which they are dealt with by the punitive mechanisms.And that
ultimately what presidesover all thesemechanismsis not the unitary
functioning of an apparatus or an institution, but the necessity of
combat and the rules of strategy. That, consequently,the notions of
institutions of repression,rejection,exclusion,marginalization,are
not adequateto describe,at the very centre ofthe carceralcity, the
formation of the insidious leniencies,unavowable petty cruelties,
small acts of cunning, calculated methods, techniques, 'sciences'
that permit the fabrication of the disciplinary individual. In this
central and centralizedhumanity, the effect and instrument of complex power relations, bodies and forces subiected by multiple
mechanisms of incarceration', obiects for discourses that are in
themselveselementsfor this strategy, we musr hear the distant roar
of battle.
At this point I end a book that must serve as a historical background to various studies of the power of normalization and the
formation of knowledge in modern society.

308

Notes

PART ONE TORTURE

t The bodyof the condemned
l The public executionof traitors describedby William Blackstone,
Commcntarieson the Lat's of England, vol. 4, 17669, 89. Since the
French translationwas intended to bring out the humanenessof
English legislation,in contrastwith the old ordinanceof ry6o, the
Frenchtranslatoraddsthe following note: 'In this form of execution,
which is so terri$ing to see,theguilty mandoesnot sufer much pain,
or for long.'
z In any case,I could give no notion by references
or quotationswhat
this book owesto Gilles Deleuzeand the work he is undertakingwith
F6lix Guattari. I should also have quoted a number of pagesfrom
R. Castell's Psychanalysme
and say how much I am indebted to
PierreNora.
3 I shall study the birth of the prison only in the French penalsystem.
Differencesin historicaldevelopmentsand institutionswould makea
detailedcomparativeexaminationtoo burdensomeand any attemPtto
describethe phenomenonas a whole too schematic.
z The spectacleof the scafold
r The name given to two fortressesin old Paris, the Grand and the
Petit Chitelet. The first, demolishedin r8oz, was situated on the
right bank of the Seine.It was the seatof the criminal iurisdictionof
the viscounty and provostry of Paris.The second,on the left bank,
nearthe H6tel-Dieu, servedas a prison [Tr.J.
z In the cataloguesof iudicial proofs, the confessionappearsin about
the thirteenthor fourteenthcentury. Bernardof Pavia doesnot refer
to it, but it is mbntionedby Hostiemis.Crater'sdefinitionis characteristic:'Aut legitine conyictusaut sponteconfessus.'

tq

Notes

In medieval law, the confession was valid only when made by an
adult and before the adversary. Cf. L!vy.
1 The Gagettetribunauxr 6 July fi77, reports, from a Gloucester news'atrocious
paper, the
and disgusting' conduct of an executioner who
after hanging a condemned man'took the corpse by the shoulders,
violently turned it round and struck it several times saying: "Are you
dead enough nowl" then, turning towards the crowd, laughing and
ieering, he made several indecent remarks'.
4 Argenson, z4r. Cf. also Barbier, 4tt. One of the first episodes of this
affair was very typical of popular agitation concerning penal justice in
the eighteenth cenrury. The lieutenant-general of police, Berryer, had
'libertine
seized
children without confession'; the guards agreed to
hand them back to their parents 'only when given money'; it was said
that the children were intended to provide for the king's pleasure.
The crowd, having discovered an informer, killed him 'with an
inhumanity carried to the farthest excess'and 'dragged him after his
death, a rope around his neck, to M. Berryer's door'. Now, this
informer was a thief who would have been broken on the wheel with
his accomplice Raffiat, had he not agreed to act as an informerl he was
greatly appreciated by the police on account of his knowledge of all
the intricacies of the plot; and he was 'highly regarded in his new
trade'. We have an example here that is interesting on a number of
counts: a movement of revolt triggered off by a relatively new means
of repression, which was not penal justice, but the police; a caseof that
technical collaboration between delinquents and police, which was to
become normal from the eighteenth century onwardsl a riot in which
people took it upon themselves ro torture a condemned man who had
unjustly escapedthe scaffold.
; Those whom R, Mandrou calls the rwo great ones: Cartouche and
Mandrin, to whom one should add Guilleri (Mandrou, r rz). In England, Jonathan Wild, Jack Sheppard and Claude Duval played a somewhat similar role.
6 This title is to be found not only in the Bibliothdque de Troyes, but
also in the Bibliothdque de Normandie (cf. Helot).
'In
order to sarisfy this need for strong
7 Cf., for example, Lacretelle:
emotion, in order to deepen the impression of a great example, one
allows these terrible stories to circulate. The poets of the people take
them up and spread their fame to every part of the land. One day a
family hears at its door the story in song of the crime and execution
ofits sons' (Lacretelle, ro6).

3ro

Notes

PART TVO

PUNISHMENT

punishment
r Gencrali1ed
r Mogensen,gz6.The author shows that in Auge crimesof violence
werefour timeslessnumerouson the eveof the Revolutionthanat the
end of the reign of Louis XIV. Generallyspeaking,the work directed
by PierreChaunuon criminality in Normandyshowsthe samerisein
fraud at the expenseof violence.Cf. articlesby B. BouteletrJ. C.
G6got and V. Boucheronin the Annalesde Nortnandieof ry62, 1966
and r97r. For Paris,cf. Petrovitch.The samephenomenon,it seems,
took placein England:cf. Hibbert, 7z andTobias, 77ff.
z Le Roy-Ladurie, 1973.Cf. also Farge who confirms this tendency:
betweenr75oand r7tt, t per centofthose convictedfor stealingfood
'The
weresentto the galleys,but r; per centbetween1771and r79o:
values
to a
.
The
useful
as
time
on.
.
went
courtsbecamemore severe
society that wished to be ordered and respecful of property were
under threat' (Farge, rjo-42).
'excessive
power' and of its baddistributionin the
3 On this criticismof
iudicial apparatus,cf. in particular Dupaty, 1788, Lacretelle and
Target.
a Cf. N. Bergasseon the judicial power: lDeprived of any kind of
activity againstthe political r6gimeof the Stateand having no influenceon thewills that cometogetherto form that r!gimeor to maintain
it, it musthaveat its disposal,in order to protectall individualsand all
rights, sucha force that, all-powerfulin defendingand assistingthat
r6gime,it should becomeabsolutelynil as soon as its destinationis
changedin any attemptto useit to oppress'(Bergasse,rr-rz).
were
; Rousseau,28. It should be noted that theseideasof Rousseau's
usedin the ConstituentAssemblyby certaindeputieswho wished to
maintaina systemof very strict penalties.And, curiouslyenough,the
principlesof the SocialContractcould be used to support the old
'The procorespondenceof atrocity betweencrime and punishment.
tection due to citizensrequiresthat penaltiesbe measuredaccording
to theaFocity of thecrimesand not sacriFce,in the nameof humanity,
from
humanityitselfl (Mouginsde Roquefort,who quotesthis passage
the SocialContract:cf. Mougins,637).
6 Duport, Archiws parletnentaires,
X, 744. One might also cite in
support the different competitionsproposedat the end of the eigh'How is the mildteenthcenturyby learnedsocietiesand academies:
nessof theseinvestigationsand penaltiesto be reconciledwith the
, certaintiesof a prompt andexemplarypunishment,so that civil society
JI I

Notes
finds the greatestpossiblesecurityfor liberty and humaniryl' (Economic Socieryof Beme, ry77). Mant respondedwith his Plan de
Ligislation timinelle. 'What are the meansof alleviating the rigour of
the penallawsin Francewithout damageto public saferyt'(Acaddmie
de Chilons-sur-Marne,r78o; the winnerswereBrissotand Bernardi);
'doestheextreme
severityof the lawstendto diminishthe numberand
enormiry of crimesin a depravednationl' (Acad!miede Marseille,
17861,
the winner was Eymar).
7 G. Target, Observationssur Ieprojet du CodepCnal,in Locr!r 7-8. It
is to be found in an invertedform in Kant.
8 'Society does not see in the punishmentsit inflicts the barbarous
pleasureof making a human being suffer; it seesit as a necessary
precautionto preventsimilar crimes,to protectsocietyfrom the evils
with which murder threatensit' (Barnave,9).
'If
9 Beccaria,26. Cf. also Brissot: pardon is eguitable,the law is bad;
when legislationis good, pardonsare only crimes againstthe law'
(Brissot,uoo).
ro Mably, y7. Cf. also Vattel: 'It is not so much the atrocity of the
penaltiesas the exactitudewith which they arecarriedout that keeps
everybodywithin his dury' (Mably, 163).
r r Contrary to what Carnot or Helie and Chauveausay,recidivismwas
very clearlypunishedin a numberof laws underthe Ancien Rdgime.
The ordinanceof r14g declaresthat the malefactorwho repeatshis
crime is an 'execrable,infamousbeing, eminently perniciousto the
commonweahh';recidivismfor blasphemy,theft, vagabondage,
etc.,
were subjectto specialpenalties.
rz Le Peletier, t2r-2. The following year, Bellart made what may be
regardedas the 6rst defenceof a uinc passionel.This was the Gras
affair. Cf. Annalesdu barreaumoderne,r84r[llr 34.
z The gentleway in punishment
r Le Peletierde Saint-Fargeau.
The authorswho abandonedthe death
penaltyenvisagedsomedefinitepenalties:Brissot,u9-3o.Dufriche de
Yalaze,344:perpetualimprisonmentfor thosewho havebeenjudged
'irremediably
wicked'.
z Masson,r39. Yet the objectionmadeagainstpenallabour was that it
implied a recourseto violence(Le Peletier)or that it representeda
profanationof the saced characterof work (Duport). RabaudSaintEtiennegot the term 'forced labour'adoptedin contra-distinctionto
'free labour
that belongsexclusivelyto free men' (Architu Parlamenrarra.r,XXVI, Trolf).
3r2

Notes
3 Pan of this code was translatedin the introduction to the French
translationof Colquhoun,r8o7,l, 84.
4 This explains the numerous prison regulations concerning the exactions of the warders,the security of the premisesand the inability of
prisoners to communicateamong themselves.For example, the
iudgementof the Dijon Perlementof zr Septembert7o6. Cf. also
Serpillon,6ot-47.
y This is repeatedexactlyin the declarationof 4 March 1724onrecidivist
A boy, who
thievesor that of 18July t7z4 concerningvagabondage.
was too young to go to the galleys,remainedin a prison until he was
old enough to be sent there, sometimesto serve the whole of his
sentence.Cf. Crimeet crimirclitC enFrante sousI'Ancien R4gime,266tr.
6 Phalaris,tyrant of the Greek town of Agrigentum in Sicily, reigned
about ;6o B.c..Heis said to haveroastedmen alive in a brazenbull.
His nameis usedhereto typr& tyrants in general[Tr.].
'Tiers Etat', quotedin Desjardin,qsq.Cf. Goubertand Denis,
7 Briey,
zo3. One also finds in the cahiersdemandsfor the maintenanceof
housesof detentionthat familiesmight use.
8 Cf. Thorsten Sellin, Piorcering in Penologjr, 1944, which gives an
exhaustivestudy of the Rasphuisandthe Spinhuisof Amsterdam'One
may leaveto one side another'model', often cited in the eighteenth
century. This is the one proposedby Mabillon inthe RCflexionssur les
prisonsdesordresreligieux,republishedin 1845.It seemsthat this work
was exhumedin the nineteenthcentury at a time when the Catholics
were disputing with the Protestantsthe placethey had taken up in the
philanthropicmovementand in certainadministrativebodies.Mabillon's work, which seemsto have remainedrelatively unknown and
uninfluential,setsout to show that 'the first thought of the American
penitentiarysystem'is'a quitemonasticandFrenchthought,whatever
one might say by way of giving it a Genevanor Pennsylvanian
origin'(L. Faucher).
9 Vilan XIV, 64; this memoir,which is boundup with the foundationof
the prisonat Ghent,remainedunpublisheduntil r84r. The frequency
of the penalty of banishmentemphasizedstill further the relations
betweencrime and vagabondage.In r77r, the Statesof Flanders
remarkedthat 'penaltiesof banishmentimposedon beggarsremained
ineffectual,in view of the fact that the Statessend to one another
subiectsthat they find perniciousat home. As a result, a beggar,
chasedin this way from placeto place,will finally get himselfhanged,
whereas,if he had beengiven the habit of work, he would not have
embarkedon his evil path'(Stoobant,zz8).

3rt

Notes

lo The Quakers certainly also knew the Rasphuis and Spinhuis of
Amsterdam. Cf. Sellin, ro9-ro. In any case,'WalnutStreet Prison was
a continuation of the Almshouse opened in ry67 and of the penal
legislation that the Quakers had wished to impose despite the English
administration.
rr On the disorders causedby this law, cf. Rush, t-9 and Vaux,4y. It
should be noted that in the report by J.t. Siegel,nhich had inspired
the Rasphuis of Amsterdam, ir was envisaged that penalties would not
be proclaimed publicly, that prisoners would be brought into the
prison at night, that warders would swear not to reveal their identity
and that no visits would be permitted (Sellin, z7-8).
rz B. Rush, who was one of the inspectors,notes after a visit to Walnut
'Moral
Street:
cares: preaching, reading of good books, cleanlinessof
clothes and rooms, baths; one does not raise one's voice, little wine,
as little tobacco as possible, little obsceneor profane conversation.
Constantwork: the gardenstaken care of; it is beautiful: r,zoo head of
cabbage'(in Teeters, rgjj, jo).
I3 Rush, 14. This idea of an apparatusfor transforming human beings
is already to be found in Hanway's project for a 'reformatory': 'The
idea of a hospital and that of a malefactorare incompatible; but let us
try to make the prison an authendc and effective reformatory, instead
of it being like the others a school of vice' (Hanway, 5z).
r4 Cf. the criticism made by Rush of punitive spectacles,in particular
those imagined by Dufriche du Valaz!(Rush, y-9).
PART THREE DISCIPLINE

t Docile bodies
r I shall choose examples from military, medical, educational and
industrial institutions. Other examples might have been taken from
colonization, slavery and child rearing,
z Cf. what La M!therie wrote after a visit to Le Creusot: 'The buildings
for so 6ne an establishment and so large a quantity of different work
should cover a sufficient area, so that there will be no confusion among
the workers during working time' (La Mdtherie, 66).
3 J.-B. de la Salle, Conduitedesicoleschrdiennes,B.N. Ms. r1719, 248-9.
A little earlier Batencour proposed that classroomsshould be divided
into three parts: 'The most honourable for those who are learning
Latin. . . It should be stressed that there are as many places at the
tables as there will be writers, in order to avoid the confusion usually
causedby the lazy.' In another, those who are learning to read: a bench

]r4

Notes
'so that vermin will not be passed
for the rich anda benchfor the poor
'When their ability has beeo
on'. A third sectionfor newcomers:
given
(M.I.D.B., y6-7).
will
be
a
place'
recognized,
they
The successof the Prussiantroops can only be attributed.to the
'excellence
of their disciplineand their exerciselthe choiceofexercise
is not thereforea matterofindifference;in Prussiathe subiecthasbeen
studied fclr forry years with unremitting application' (Saxe, II,
249).
exercise:'. . . 9: Handson the knees.This commandis conWriting
5
veyedby one ring on the bell; to: handson the table,headup; rr:
cleanthe slates:everyonecleanshis slatewith a limlesaliva,or better
still with a pieceof rag; rz: show the slates;r3: monitors, inspect.
and then those of their
They inspeccthe slateswith their assistants
inspectthoseof their own benchand everyown bench.The assistants
one returnsto his own place.'
6 This mixture appearsclearly in certainclassesof the apprenticeship
contract:the masteris obligedto give his pupil - in exchangefor his
moneyandhis labour- all his knowledge,without keepingany secret
from him; otherwise,he is liable to a fine. Cf., for example,Grosrenaud,62.
at the
the creationof military academies
7 F. de la Noue recommended
end of the sixteenthcentury,suggestingthat oneshouldleam in them
'how to handlehorses,to practisewith the dagger,with and without
shield,to fence,to perform on horseback,to iump; if swimmingand
wrestlingwere added,it would be to the good, for all this makesthe
personrobustand more subtle'(Noue, I8r-z).
8 Through the schoolsat Lidge,Devenport,Zwolle, Wesel;and thanks
alsoto JeanSturm and his memorandumof r538for the organization
of a gymnasiun at Strasburg. Cf. Bulletin de Ia socidtdd'histoire du
XXV, 4gg-1,oj.
protestantisme,
It should be noted that the relationsbetweenthe army, religious
'decury',the unit of
organizationandeducationarevery complex.The
the Roman army, is to be found in Benedictinemonasteries,as the
unit of work and no doubt of supervision.The Brothersof the Common Life bomowedit and adaptedit to their own educationorganization: the pupils were groupedin.tens.It was this unit that the Jesuits
took up in the scenographyof their schools,thus reintroducinga
military model.But the decurywas replacedin turn by an evenmore
military schema,with ranks,columns,lines,
9 Guibert, r8. In fact, this very old problem cameinto the forefront
oncemore in the eighteenthcentury, for the economicand technical

3rt

Notes
reasonsthat we are about to see;and the'prejudice'in questionhad
beendiscussed
very oftenby othersbesidesGuiberthimself(followers
of Folard, Pirch, Mesnil-Durand).
ro In the sensein which this tern wasusedafter 1759.
r r The movementthat brought the rifle into widespreaduse may be
roughly datedfrom the battle ofSteinkirk, 1699.
'The
rz On this importanceof geometry,seeJ. de Beausobre:
scienceof
war is essentiallygeometrical.. . The arrangementof a battalion and
a squadronon a whole front and at so much height is alonethe effect
ofan as yet unknown, but profound geometry'(Beausobre,3o7).
ry Journalpour I'instructiondlimentaire,April 1816.Cf. Tronchot, who
hascalculatedthat pupilsmust havebeengiven over 2oocommandsa
day (without counting exceptionalorden); for the morning alone
twenty-six commandscommunicatedby the voice, twenty-threeby
signs,thirty-sevenby rings of the bell, and twenty-four by whistle,
which meansa blow on the whistle or a ring on the bell every three
minutes.
z The meansof correcttaining

)
r RCglement
Fr. trans.,Arsenal,MS. 4o67,fo.
pourl'kfanterieprussiennc,
t44.For olderplansseePraissac,z7-8 andMontgommeryrTT.Forthe
new plans,cf. Benetonde Morange,Histoire de k guerre,t74r,6r-4
andDissertations
sur les Tenteslcf. also the many regulationssuchas
the Instructionsur le seryicedesrlglementsde Cavaleriedanslescamps,
zg lune q11.
z Arch. nat, MM 66G-9.leremy Benthamrecountsthat it was while
visiting the Ecole Militaire that his brother first had the idea of the
Panopticon.
3 Demia, z7-9. One might note a phenomenonof the samekind in the
organizationof schools;for a longtime'prefects' were,independently
of the teachers,
entrustedwith themoralresponsibilityfor smallgroups
of pupils. After ry62, above all, one seesthe appearance
of a new
rype of supervision,which was more administrativeand more integrated into the hierarchy; supervisors,maitresde quartier, mattres
subatternes.
Cf. Dupont-Ferrier,z;4 and 476.
3 Panopticism
r Archives militairesde Vincennes,A rryl6 9r sc. Pi!ce.This regulation is broadly similar to a whole seri$ of othersthat datefrom the
sameperiod and earlier.

t16

Notes
z In the Postscriptto the Panopticon,r7gr, Benthamaddsdark inspection galleriespainted in black around the inspector'slodge, each
making it possibleto observetwo storeysof cells.
3 In his first versionof the Panopticon,Benthamhad also imaginedan
acousticsurveillance,operatedby meansof pipes leading from the
cells to the central tower. In the Postscripthe abandonedthe idea,
perhapsbecausehe could not introduceinto it the principle of dissymmetryand preventthe prisonersfrom hearingthe inspectoraswell
asthe inspectorhearingthem. Juliustried to developa systemofdissymmetricallistening(Julius, r8).
4 Imagining this continuousflow of visitors enteringthe centraltower
by an undergroundpassage
and then observingthe circularlandscape
of the Panopticon,was Benthamawareof the Panoramasthat Barker
was constructingat exactly the sameperiod (the first seemsto have
dated from 1787)and in which the visitors, occupying the central
place,saw unfolding around them a landscape,
a city or a battle.The
visitors occupiedexactlythe placeof the sovereigngaze.
y In the secondhalf of the eighteenthcentury, it was often suggested
that the army shouldbe usedfor the surveillanceand generalpartitioning of the population.The army, as yet to undergodisciplinein the
seventeenthcentury, was regardedas a force capableof instilling it.
Cf,, for example,Servan,Le Soldatcituyen,r78o.
6 Arsenal,MS. zy6y. Under this number,one also finds regulationsfor
chariry associations
of the seventeenth
and eighteenthcenturies.
7 Le Maire in a memorandumwritten at the requestof Sartine,in
answerto sixteenquestionsposedby JosephII on the Parisianpolice.
This memorandumwas publishedby Gazierin 1879.
PART FOUR PRISON

t Completeand eustereinstitutions
l The play betweenthe two 'natures'of

the prisonstill continues.A few
daysago [summer ry74f theheadof staterecalledthe'principle' that
detentionought to be no morethana'deprivationof liberty'- the pure
essence
of imprisonment,freedof the reality of prison;and addedthat
the prison could be justified only by its'corrective'or rehabilitating
effects.
r Treilhard, 8-9. The same theme is often to be found in the years
immediatelyprior to this: 'The penalty of detentionpronouncedby
.the law hasaboveall the obiectofcorrecting individuals,that is to say,
ofmaking thembetter,ofpreparing themby trialsofshorter or longer
t17

Notes

3

4
y

6

7

duration, to take up their place once more in society without abusing
it. . . The surest ways of making individuals better are work and
education.' Education consists not only in reading and arithmetic, but
also in reconciling the prisoners with 'ideas of order, morality, respect
for themselves and for others' (Beugnot, prefect of Seine-Inftrieure,
order issued Frimaire, Year X). In the reports that Chaptal demanded
from the General Councils of the dipartements, over a dozen asked for
prisons in which the inmates could be made to work.
The most important were no doubt those proposed by Lucas, MarquetWasselot, Faucher, Bonneville, and a little later by Ferrus. It should
be noted that most of them were not philanthropists, criticizing the
ciuceral institution from the outside, but were bound up, in one way or
another, with the administration of the prisons. They were official
technicians.
In Germany, Julius directed the Jahrbiicher fir Stafs-und Besserungs
Anstalten.
Although these newspapers were above all organs of defence on the
part of those in prison for debt and had on several occasions dissociated themselves from delinquents as such, one 6nds the statement that
'the
columns of Pauvre Jacgues are not devoted to an exclusive
speciality. The terrible law of constraint by body and its disastrous
application will not be the only target of the journalist prisoner. . .
Pauvre Jacgues will draw the attention of its readers to places of
reclusion and detention, prisons and almshouses;it will not keep silent
on placeswhere the guilty man is handed over to torture when the law
condemns him only to work . . .' (Pauvre Jacques, Ist year, no. 7).
Similarly, the Galette de Sainte-Pdlagie campaigned for a penitentiary
system whose aim would be'the amelioration of the species',any other
being'the expressionofa still barbaroussociety'(zl March r831).
The discussion that began in France about r 81o was still continuing in
rSyo; Charles Lucas, the advocate of Auburn, was the inspiration
behind the order of r 819 on the running of the maisonscentrales(work
in common and absolute silence). The wave of revolt that followed
and perhaps the general agitation in the country in the years $42-3
resulted in the adoption in 1844 of the Pennsylvanian r6gime of
absolute isolation, advocated by Demetz, Blouet and Tocqueville. But
the second penitentiary congress in 1847 opted against this method.
'Every
'is
man', said Fox,
illuminated by the divine light and I have
seen it shine through every man.' It was in the spirit of the Quakers
and of Walnut Street that the prisons of Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh and
Cherry Hill were organized from r8zo.

3r8

Notes
8 Abb6 Petigny, Allocution adressdeau.x prisotniers, d l'occasion &
l'inauguration desbdtimentscellulairesde la prison de Versailles. Cf.,
a few yearslater, in The Countof M onteCristo, a v*y clearly Christological version of resurrection after incarceration;in this caseprison
teachesnot docility to the law, but the power, acquired through a
secret knowledge, to dispensejustice beyond the iniustice of the
magisffates.
g G. A. Real.Beforethis, severalinstructionsfrom the Ministry of the
Interior had stressedthe need for providing work for Prisoners:t
Fructidor Year VI, 3 MessidorYear VIII, 8 Pluvi6seand z8 Vent6se
Year IX, TBrumaireYearX. Immediatelyafterthe codesof r8o8 and
r8ro, one still 6nds new instructionsr20 October r8tt, 8 December
importance
r8rel or againthe long orderof 1816:'Itis ofthe greatest
to keep prisonersoccupiedas much as possible.One must instil in
them a desireto work, distinguishingbetweenthe fate of thosewho
are occupiedand that of prisonerswho wish to remainidle. The 6rst
will be better fed and have more comfortablebedsthan the second.'
Melunand Clairvaux!/ere very soonorganizedinto greatworkshops.
'preparatory
ro Bonneville, 184616. Bonneville proposedmeasuresof
'africtive
additions'or an extensionof imprisonliberty', but also of
'the penalprescription,fixed approximately
ment if it was shownthat
accordingto the probabledegreeof the prisoner'sobduracywas not
engughto producethe eflectexpectedofit'. This extensionwasnot to
exceedone eighth of the original penalty;preparatoryliberty could
begin after three quartersof the sentencehad been sewed (TraitC des
z5r ff).
diversesinstitutions compldmentaires,
rr ln Galette des tibunaux. Cf. also Marquet-Wasselot,1832,74-;.
Lucasnotes that minor offenders'are generallyrecruitedarnongthe
'the majoriry of thosesentencedto hard
urban populations'and that
labour comefrom the agriculturalpopulations'(Lucas,lr 46-5o),
r z 'If onetreatsof the administrativequestionby abstractingthe question
ofbuildings, one runs the risk ofdrawing up principlesthat arebased
on no reality; whereas,with a sufficientknowledgeof administrative
needs,an architectmay accepta particular systemof imprisonment
that theory may'havedismissedas Utopian' (Blouet, r).
13 'The English reveal their genius for mechanicsin everything they
do . . . and they want their buildingsto function asa machinesubiect
to the action of a singlemotor' (Baltard, r8).
at
r4 Oneshouldstudyhow the practiceof biographybecamewidespread
aboutthe sametime asthe constitutionof the individualdelinquentin
thepunitivemechanisms:
the biographyor autobiographyof prisoners

3r9

Notes

in Appert; the drawing up of biographical files on the psychiatric
model; the use of biography in the defence of accused persons. On
the last point one might compare the great justificatory memoirs of
the late eighteenth century written for the three men condemned to the
wheel, or for Jeanne Salmon - and the defences of criminals in the
period of Louis Philippe. Chaix d'Est-Ange pleaded for La Roncidre:
'If
long before the crime, long before the charge is laid, you can
scrutinize the defendant's life, penetrate into his heart, find its most
hidden corners, lay bare all his thoughts, his entire soul . . .' (Discours
et plaidoyers, III, 166).
z lllegalities and delin1uency
r Revue de Paris, T June 1836. This part of the spectacle,in 1836, was
no longer public; only a few privileged spectators were admitted to it.
The account ofthe riveting ofthe convicts'chains to be found in the
Revue de Pazs corresponds exactly - to the point even of using the
same words - with tirat of the Dernier jour d'un condamni, 1829.
z The Galette des tribunaux regul4rly published these lists and these
'criminal'
notices. From the following description people would be
able to recognize Delacollonge: 'Old cloth trousers over a pair of
boots, a peakedcap ofthe samestuffand a grey overall. . , A coat of
blue stufl' (6 June r836). Later, it was decidedto disguiseDelacollonge
in order to protect him from the violence of the crowd. The GaTette
des tribunaux immediately described the disguise: 'striped rrousers,
blue linen overalls, a straw hat' (zo July).
'Feel
all those heads. . .
3 Revuede Paris"June 1836.Cf. Claude Gueux:
each of these fallen men has below him his own besrial type. . . Here
is the lynx, here the cat, here the monkey, here the vulture, here the
hyena.'
4 Retue de Parisr T June 1836. According to the Gaqettedes tibunaux,
Thorez, who commanded the chain-gang of 19 July, wished to
remove theseornaments: 'It is not fitting that, as you go to the convictship to expiate your crimes, you should push effrontery so far as to
decorate your hair, as if you were going to your wedding.'
7 Revue de Parisr T June 1816. On this date, the chain-gang had been
.shortened in order to prevent this merry-go-round and soldiers had
been commanded to maintain order up to the departure of the chaingang. The convicts' Sabbath is described in the Dernier jour d'un
condamne:'Societywas represented thereby the gaolers and the horrified and curious bystanders. The criminal defined the intentions of
society and made of this horrible punishment a family festival.'

J20

Notes
6 A song of the samekind is quoted by the GaTeuedes tribunaux of
'Marseillalse'.The
ro April 1836.It was sung to the tune of the
war: 'What do
social
of
the
patrioticwar songclearlybecamethe song
thesestupid peoplewant of us, do they cometo insult us in our misfortunel They stareat us calmly. Our butchersdo not horrifr them.'
'have striven to glori$ the crimes of
7 There is a classof writers who
give them the leadingroles
malefactors,
certainexceptionallyskilled
and exposethe agentsof authority to their sallies,their jeersand their
ill-disguised mockery. Whoever hasseena performanceof Aubergedes
Adrets or RobertMacaire. a drama celebratedamong the people, will
recognizewithout difficulty the corectnessof my observations.It is
the triumph, the apotheosis,of audacityand crime. Honest folk and
the forcesofpublic orderareridiculedfrom beginningto end'(Fregier,
II, r87-8).
8 GaTette
&s tiSunaux,z1 July 1837.On 9 August, theGalettereported
that the carriage had overturned on the outskirts of Guingamp:
'helped their guardiansto
insteadof mutinying, the prisoners,
Put
their commonvehiclebackon its wheels'.Yet on 1o October,it noted
an escapeat valence.
to L'Atelier, October 1844 by a worker imprisoned
9 Text addressed
It wasableto note this protestat a
for ioining a workers' association.
time when the samenewspaperwas waging a campaigoagainstcompetitionfrom penallabour.The sameissuecarrieda letterfrom another
worker on the samesubiect. Cf. also La FraternitC,March 1842,
rst year,oo, ro.
ro Gaptte destrihunaurr SDecember1829.Cf. alsoGalettedestribunaux,
19 July 1839;the Ruchepopulaire,August r84o;La Fraurnitd, luly'
August 1847.
rr This campaignwasvery vigorousbeforeand afterthe passingof new
regulationsfor the maisonscentralesin 1839.The regulationswere
severe(silence,abolition of wine and tobacco,reductionin food) and
they were followed by revolts. On 3 October r84o, Le Moniteur
wrote: 'It was scandalousto seeprisonersgorging themselvesvrith
wine, meat, game, delicaciesof all kinds and treating prison as a
convenienthostelry where they could procureall the comforts that
the stateof liberty often refusedthem.'
rr, In r8e6,many of the GeneralCouncilsdemandedthat deportationbe
substituted for constant and ineffective incarceration. In 1842, the
General Council of the Hautes-Alpesdemandedthat the prisons
become 'ruly expiatory'; those of Dr6me, Eure-et-Loir, Nilvre,
madesimilar demands.
Rh6neand Seine-et-Oise

32r

Notes

r1 According to an investigation carried our in r839 among the directors
of the makons centrales,The director of the maisoncentraleof Embrun
'The
remarked:
excessivecomfort in the prisons probably contributes
a great deal to the terrible increasein the number of recidivists.' While
the director at Eysses remarked: 'The present r6gime is not severe
enough, and if one thing is certain it is that for many of rhe inmates
prison has its attractions and that they find in prison depraved pleasures
that are entirely to their liking.' The director at Limoges: 'The
present rdgime of the maisonscentraleswhich, for the recidivists, are in
fact little more than boarding houses, is in no way repressive' (Cf.
Moreau-Christophe, r84o, 86). Compare these remarks with declarations made,in July 1974,by the leadersofthe union ofprison workers
concerning the effectsof liberalization in prisons.
14 On the problem of deportation, cf. Barb!-Marbois and the discussion
between Blosseville and La Pilorgerie (on the subject of Botany Bay).
Bur!, Marengo and L. de Carn6, among others, drew up plans for the
colonization of Algeria with delinquents.
I y One of the first episodeswas the organization under police supervision
of the maisons de tolerance(1821), which went well beyond the provisions ofthe law of 14 July r79r, concerning surveillancein brothels.
Cf. on this subiect the manuscripts collected by the Prefecture of
police (zo-26). In particular, the following circular from the Prefect of
police, dated 14 June r823,:'The establishmentof houses of prostitution ought naturally to be regarded wirh displeasureby any man who
is concerned with public morality; I am not surprised that the Commissioners of police oppose to the utmost of their powers the establishment of houses in their various quarters. . . The police believed
that they had done much towards public order if they had succeeded
in enclosing prostitution within tolerated houses over which its action
may be constant and uniform and which would not be able to escape
surveillance.'
16 The book by Parent-Duchatelet on Prostitution d Paris, 1816, may be
read as evidence of this link, encouraged by the police and penal
institutions, between the delinquent milieu and prosriturion. The case
of the Italian Ma6a transplanted to the United States and used both to
extract illicit profits and for political ends is a fine example of the
colonization of an illegality of popular origin.
r7 On this role of delinquentsfor police and especiallypolitical surveillance, cf. the memorandum written by Lemaire: 'Informers'are people
'expect
who
indulgence for themselves'; they are usually'bad subiects
who expose others who are worse still. Furthermore, it is enough for

t22

Notes
someoneto have his narhein the police registerfor him never to be
lost sight of.'
of lawyersto participatingin this functioning,'there
18 Of the resistance
is abundantevidencefrom as early as the Restoration(which proves
In particularthe liquidation
that it is in no way a recentphenomenon).
or rather the re-utilization of the Napoleonicpolice posed certain
problems.But the difficultiescontinued.Cf. Belleyme's6rst speech
after his appointmentin 1825,in which he sought to difierentiate
waysareopento us. . . Brought
himselffrom his predecessors:'Legal
up in the schoolof law, educatedin the schoolof so worthy a magisffature. . . we arethe auxiliariesof justice. . .' (Belleyme);seealsothe
very interestingpamphletby Mol!ne,De la libertd.
r9 For contemporaryviews of Lacenaire,seethe dossierdrawn up by
M. Lebailly in his edition of Lacenaire'sMdmoires,1968,297-7o4.
zo The circle of the years1835-6:Fieschi,who servedthe penalrycommon to parricidesand regicides,was one of the reasonswhy Rividret
the parricide,was condemnedto deathdespitea memorandumwhose
astonishingcharacterwas no doubt mufled by the brilliance of
Lacenaire,of his trial, and of his writings, which were,published
thanks to the head of the Sfiret!(censoredto someextent), at the
beginningof fi36, somemonthsbeforehis accompliceFrangoiswas
to provide,with the chain-gangof Brest,one of the last great circus
the circle of
showsof crime.A circle of iilegalitiesand delinquencies,
discourseof crime and on crime.
z,r At theend of the eighteenthcenturyColquhoungavesomeideaof the
difficulty of the taskfor a city like London (Colquhoun,27-gt 2gt-4).
zz 'No other classis subjectedto a surveillanceofthis kind; it is exercised
almostin the sameway as that of releasedprisonerslit seemsto place
the workers in the categorythat we now call the dangerousclassof
society' (L'Atelier, tth year,no. 6, March 1845).
z1 Apart from the Galette desribunaux and the Courrier destrihunaux,
theJournal desconcierges.
z4 Cf, L'Atelier, J:une1844, petition to the Chambre de Paris that
'unhealthyand dangerouswork'; in
prisonersshould be madeto do
April r84y, the newspapersquoted a casein Brittany where a large
number of military convicts died of fever while working on canalbuilding.Why werethe prisonersnot working with mercuryor whitelead in November r84;l . . . Cf. also the Ddmouatiepolitiqueof the
years1844-5.
z5 In L'Atelier, of November 1841,there was an attack againstthe
they showedthe delinquentsin too good a
Mystires deParis because

t23

Norcs
light, stressingtheir picturesqueness,
their vocabulary,and because
therewas too much emphasison the fatal characterof a proclivity to
crime. In La Ruchepopulaire similar attackson the theatre are to be
found.
Cf, In La Ruchepopulaire(December1839)Vingard replied to an
articleby Balzacpublishedin Le SiCcle.
Balzachad said that a charge
of theftwasto bemadewith prudenceanddiscretionwhenit concerned
a rich man whose slightestdishonestyimmediatelybecameknown:
'Say,Monsieur,
with your handon your conscience,
whetherthe contrary doesnot occur every day whether,with a greatfortune and an
elevatedrank in society,one does not find a thousandsolutions,a
thousandmeansto hush up someunfortunateafair.'
In La Fraternrrl,March 1847,there is a discussionof the Drouillard
afair and referenceis made to thefts in the naval administrationat
Rochefort.In June 1847,therewas an articleon the Boulmy trial and
on the Cubidre-Pellaprataffair; and, in July-August 1847,on the
Benier-Lagrange.-Jussieu
affair, which involved misappropriationof
publicfunds.
'Licensedprostitution,direct materialtheft, house-breaking,
murder,
brigandagefor the lower classes;while skilful spoliation, indirect,
re6ned theft, clever exploitationof human cattle, carefully planned
andbrilliantly executedbetrayals,transcendent
piecesofsharp practice
in short, all the truly elegantvicesand lucrativecrimeswhich the law
is far too polite to interrupt remainthe monopoly of the upperclasses'
(r December1838).
Cf., for example,what La Phalangesaidof Delacollongeor of Elirabide on r August 1836and z Octoberr84o.

t The carceral
I

'Anything that helpsto tire the body helpsto expelbad thoughts;
so
careis takenthat gamesconsistof violent exercise.At night, they fall
asleepthe momentthey touch the pillow' (Ducp6tiaux,t854r 371-Q.
Cf,, for example,thefollowing descriptionofworkers' accommodation
built at Lille in the mid-nineteenthcentury: 'Cleanlinessis the order
of the day. It is the heart of the regulations.There are a number of
severeprovisionsagainstnoise,drunkenness,disordersof all kinds.
A seriousoffencebrings expulsion.Brought back to regularhabitsof
order and economy,the workers no longer desertthe workshopson
Mondays.. . The childrenare better supervisedand are no longer a
causeofscandal.. . Prizesare given for the upkeepof the dwellings,

324

Notes
for good behaviour, for signs ofdevodon and eachyear theseprizes
are competed for by a large number of competitors' (Houzd de
l'Aulnay, I3-rt).
3 Crime was explicitly defined by certain iurists such as Muyart de
Vouglans,1767,ro8 and r78or3, or Rousseaudde la Combe, r-2.

tz,

Bibliography

Aguet, J. P., Les Grives sousIa monarchiedeJuillet, 1914.
Agulhon, M,, La uiety socialeen Provence, t97o.
Almanach populaire de la France, L', 1819.
Amboise, Projet de rCglementpour l'acilrie /', Archives nationales, f. rz,
r3or.
Anchel, R., Crimes et chdtimentsau XVIIIe siicle, t97g.
Annales du barreau moderne,III, 1823.
Archives natlonales,MM 6y8, 1o March r7;8 and MM 666, rt September
176).
Archives militaires de Vincennes,A r,516 9r sc.
ArcAiues parlementaires, XIL XXVI, LXKI.
Argenson, Marquis d', Journal et mdmoires,VI, r8y9-67 edn.
Arids, P., L'Enfant et lafamille, 196o.
Atelier, Z', October r84o; March r84z; October I84z; November 1841;
June r844; March r84y.
Aylies, 5., Du systime pdnitentiaire, t817.
Ayraul t, P,, L' O r dr e, fo r mali t d et instr uction j udiciair e.
Baltard, L., Architectonographiedesprisons, 1829.
Barbd-Marbois, F. de, Rapport sur I'itat dcsprisons du Cabados, deI'Eure,
la Manche et Ia Seine Infdrieure, 1823.
Barbier, E.-1.-F., Journal, IY, ed. fi 47-16.
'Discours
Barnave, A.,
A la Constituante', Archives parlementaires,

XXVIII,6July ry9r.
Batencourt, J. de, Instruction m!thodiquepour I'dcoleparoissiale, ft69.
Beaumont, E, de and Tocqueville, A. de, Note sur Ie syst\mepdnitentiaire,
I 8 1r .
Le Systime pdnitentiaire aux Etats-[.Inis, ed. I84y.
Beausobre, l. de, Commentairesur les difensesdcs placesrll, ry57.
Beccaria, C. de, Traitd des dilits et despeines, 1764, ed. fi56.
Belleyme, M. de, Histoire de l'adntinistration.

326

Bibliography
Beneton de Morange, E, C., Dissertations sur les Tentes, t771Histoire de la guerre, r74r.
Bentham, 1., IVorks, ed. Bowring, IV, 1843.
Berc6, Y.-M., Croquantset nu-pieds, 1974.
BCrenger, A., Rapport d I'AcadJmie des sciencesmorales, June 1836.
Bergasse, N., Rapport d.la Constituanta sur Ie pouvoir iudiciaire, 1789.
Bernard, Samuel, Rapport du 3o octobre t8 t6 d la socidtdde l'enseignement
mutuel.
Bexon, S., Codede streti publique, part z, r8o7.
Bigot PrdameneurF ., Rapport au conseilginCral deIa socidtddesprisons, rSrgBlackstone, W., Commentaies on the Laws of England, vol. 4, r7(fr-9.
Blouet, lrbel, Projet dc prisons cellulaires, 1841.
Bonneville, A., De la rdcidive, 1844.
Des libdrations prdparatoires, 1846.
Des institutions compl4mentaires du systemepCnitencier, t847.
Boucher d'Argis, !t, Observationssur les lois ciminelles, r78r.
Cahier d'un magistrat, 1789.
Boussanelle, L. de, Le Bon Militaire, r77o.
Bradford, W., An inquiry how far the punishment of death is necessary in
Pennsllvania, 1793.
Brant6me, Mdmoires. La vie dcs hommes illustresrll, ed. ryzz.
Brissot, J.P., Thiorie des lois criminellesrl, r78r.
Bruneau, lt., Observationset maimes sur les matiires criminelles, t7t1.
Bulletin de la socidtl d'histoire du protestantisme,XXY.
Bur!, E., De la misire des classeslaborieusesen Angletete et en Francerll,
r84o.
Buxton, Thomas Fowell, Parliamentary Debate, I8I9, XXXIX.
Canguilhem, G., Le Normal et le Pathologique, ed. 1966.
Canler, P. L. A., Mdmoires, ed. 1968.
Cariou, P., Les lddalitds casuistiques(unpublished thesis).
Chabroud, C., Archives parlementeires, XXVI.
Chassaigne,M., La Lieutenancegdndraledepolice, 19o6.
Chassande,B. de, ConsuetudoBurgundi, 1128.
Chaunu, P., Annales de Normandie,
Choiseul, Mdmoire expositif, B.N. MS. 8129.
Colquhoun, P., Treatise on the Police of the Metropolis, 1797,
Comte, C., Traitd de ldgislation, 1831.
Coquille, G., Coutumedu Nivernais, ed, ft46.
Corre, A., Documentsde criminologie rdtrospectite, t891.
Documcntspour servir dl'histoire dela torturejudiciaire en Bretagne, 1896-

,27

Bibliography
Cournol, G., Consid{rations
d'intCr&public surlc droit d'crploito lesmines,
r79o,Arch. nat. A XIIIlr.
. Crimeet criminalitl enFrancesousI'AncienR{gimc, r97r (various authors).
Daisy, Le roJ/ctunedc Fretue, ry45,
Damhoud0re,J. de, Pratiqucjudiciaire ds causcs
ciilcs, t172.
Daniou, 8., Dcsprisons,r8zr.
Dauphin, Y., Rechetches
sur l'industric textile qt Anjou, r9r3.
Dautricourt, P., La CrimkalitC et la rfiprcsion au Parlqnent de Flan&c,
r72r-t7go, tgrz.
DecazeEE.,'Rapport au roi sur lesprisons',Lc Monitcurr rl April r8r9.
Delamare,N., TraitC depolice, r7o1.
Deleuze,Gilles and Guattari, F!lix, Anti-Oedipc, rg7z.
Demia, C., Rdglementpour hs lcoles& la ville de Lyon, t7r6.
Ddpdts de la Guerre,3689.
Des Essarts,T, N., Dictiornaire rniverscl depolicc, 1787.
Desiardin, A., Les CahiersdesEtau gCnlrauxct la justicccrimiwlle, fi83.
Ducatel, fn*ruction pour Ia construction&s maisonsd'artt, t84t.
Ducp6tiaux,E., De Ia rlforme p4nitentiairerlll, fi77.
Des coloniesagricoles,r81t.
De la cotditionphTsiqueet moralcdesjeunesouvicrs, II, r8y4.
Du sXrstdme
deI'emprisowtement
ccllulaire, rly7.
Dufau,'DiscoursA la Constituante',
Arch.parl.rXXYI.
Dufriche de Valaz6,C. E., Des his pCnalcs,1784.
Duhamel, L., Les Exdcutionscapitalesd Avignon au XVIIII si2cle,r8go.
Dupaty, C., MCmoirejustifuatif pour les troishommescondamnlsd,le roue,
1786.
Lettres sur Ie procldurecrimitulle, 1788.
Dupont-Ferrie, Du colhgede Clermontau lyle Louis-lc-Grodrl,
Duport, A., 'DiscoursI la Constituante',22 Decemberr78g,Arch.perl.,
X and XXI.
Duras, L., articleappearinginLe Progressifandquotedby La Phalange,
r December1838.
Durkheim, E., 'Deux lois de l'6volution p!nale',Annte sociologiquelY,
r899-r9oo.
EncyclopCdie,
articles on 'supplice' and 'Manufacture'.
Esmein,A., Histoie de la procddurecimirulle en Francc, 1882.
Farge, A., Le Vol d'alimentsd Paris au XYIII/
Faucher,L., De Ia rCformedes prisons,1878.

328

silcle, ry74.

Bibliography
Ferridre,C., Dictiornairedepratiquerll, ry4o.
Ferrus, G., Desprisonniers,t87o.
Festy, O., Les Dilits ruraux et hur rlpression sousIa RCvolutionet le
Consulat,1916.
Fielding, Henry, The Causesof thelate increasein Roblers, rTTrrin Vorks,
X, ed. 1784.
Filangieri, G., La Sciencede la lCgislationrlV, 1786(Fr. trans.).
Fleury, Joly de, B.N. FondsJoly de Fleury, 258.
Fraterniti, Za, Novemberr84I; February r84z; March r84z; November
r84y; March r847;July-August r847.
Fregier, H. A., Les Classesdangereus*,r84o.
Fresnel, R., Considirationssurles maisonsde refuge, t9zg.
Funck-BrentanorF,, Cataloguedesmanuscritsdela biblioth)quedeI'Arsenel,

Ix.

r97r.
Gaillac,H., Les Maisonsde correction,
Gasparin,A. E. de, Rapport au ministre de I'IntCrieur sur la r4formedes
prisons, 1837.
GaTetted'Amsterdanz,r Aptil, t717.
GaTettedestrihutuuxrS Decemberfizy'1o August 1832;Io April 1836;
6 June1836;zo July fi36;6 April 1837;r; June $17; z3 July $37;
9 August t837;t9 July 1839;August r84o.
Gerspach,E., La Manufacnre desGohlins, r8gz.
Goubert, P., and Denis, M., Les Frangaisont Ia parole, 1964.
Grellet-Wammy,Menuel desprisonsrll, 1839.
Grdgory, G. de, Projet dc CodepCnaluniversal, t832.
tcso7.
ouviCred Besangon,
Grosrenaud,F., La Corporation
Guerry, F. and DeleulerD., Le Corpsproductif, ry73.
Guibert, J. A. de, 'Discours pr!liminaire', Essaig&dral dt t*tigue, l,
r772.
Hanway,J., The D&ru of Police,1777.
B.N. MS.668e-87,1778.
Hardy,5.P., Mes /or'szrs,
Harou-Romain, N. P., Project dcpCnitencier,r84o.
Helot, R., La Bibliothhquebleueen Normandiel 1928.
Hibbert, C., The Rootsof Evil, 1966.
Hobsbawm,E. J,, Bandits, 1969.
Houz6 de l'Aulnay, A,., Des logcmentsouvriersd Lille, 1863.
Humanitaire,Z', August r84r.
fnstructionpar I'exercisedc I'infanterie, 14May q54.

329

Bibliography
fnstruction sur le seryice des riglements de Cavalerie dans les camps, zgJune
17t).
Joly de Maizeroy, P., Thdorie de Ia guerre, t777.
Jousse, D., Traiti de la justice criminelle, ry7r.
Jucquiot, J,, Le CIubfrangais de la midaille,4th term, rg7o.
Juillard, M,, Brigandage et contrebandeen haute Auvergne au XVIIIe
siicle, 1937.
Julius, N. H., Legonssur lesprisons, I, r81l (Fr. trans.).
Kantorowitz, 8., The King's Two Bodies, r91g,
Kropotkin, P., Memoirs of a Revolutionist, ed. t9o6.
Lacenaire, Mlmoires, ed. 1968.
'Discours
Lachdze,
A la Constituante', 3 June rygt, Arch. parl., XXVI.
Lacretelle, P. L. de, Discours sur les prijugds despeincs infamantes, 1784.
La Mdtherie, C. de,Journal dephysique, XXX, 1787.
La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, G. de, Des prisons de Philadelphie, 1796.
La Salle, J.-B: de, Conduitedesicoles chrdtiennes,B.N. MS. rr759.
Traitd sur les obligations desfrCres des dcoleschrdtiennes,ed. 1781.
Laulau, R., L'Ecole militaire de Peris, rg1o.
Lauvergne, H., Les Forgats, r84r.
Lawrence, 1., A History of Capital Punishm:ent,rg3,z.
L6on, A., La Rdyolutionfrangaise et I'iducation technique,1968.
Le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau,Arch. parl.,XXY\
3 June 179r.
Le Roy-Ladurie, E., Contrepoint, rg7),
'L'histoire
immobile', Annales, May-lune ry7 4.
Le Trosne, G., Mdmoires sur les vagabonds,1764.
Vues sur Ia justice timinelle, ry77.
L6vy, J. P., La Hierarchie despreuves dans le droit sayail du Moyen Age,
r919.
Linguet, 5., Nicessitd d'une riforme dansI'administration de lajustice, ry64.
Locr6, La Ldgislation de la France, XXIX.
Loisel, G., Histoire des minageriesrll, tgrz.
Loyseau, C., Cinq livres du droit des offces, ed, fir1.
Lucas, C., De la rdforme des prisons, 1896.
Mably, G. de, De Ia ldgislation, Oeuvrescompl\tesrIX, 1789.
Mandrou, R., De la cuhurepopulaire aux XVIIe et XVIII, siCcles,1964.
Marat, J.-P., Plan de ldgislation criminelle, ry8o.
Marchegay, P., Archives d'Anjour II, rE;o.

3to

Bibliography

Marquet-Wasselot, J. J., La Ville du refuge, 1832.
L'Ethnographie desprisons, r84r.
Marx, Karl, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, ed. 1954.
Capital, vol. I, ed. I97o.
Masson, L., La Rdtolution pdnale en t Jg t, 1899.
Meir, G. Codina, Aux sourcesde la pidagogie desJdsuites, t968.
M.I.D.B. (Batencourt),./zstruction mdthodiquepour l'dcoleparoissiale,t669. ,
Mittermaier, K. 1., Traitd de Ia preuve, 1848 (Fr. trans.).
Mogensen, N. W., Aspects de la sociitd augercnneaux XVIIe et XVIIIa
silcles, r97r.
Moline, A, de, De I'humaniti des lois criminelles, r87o.
Monfalcon, J,8., Hisnire des insurrectionsd Lyon, 1834.
Montgommery r l. de, La Milice fraagaise, ed. fi76.
Moreau-Christophe, L., De Ia mortaliti et de Ia folie dans le rigine
pinitentiaire, 1819.
Poldmiquei pdnitentiah es, r84o'Discours
i la Constituante', Arch. parl
Mougins de Roquefort, J. J.,

xxu.

Muyart de Vouglans, P.F,, Iwtituts au droit criminel, 1717.
Rifutation du Traitd des dilits et despeines, 1767.
Les lois criminelles en France, r78o.
Nantes, Archives municipales de, F.F. rz4.
Navereau, h., Le Logement et ks ustensilesdes gens de guerre de t+sg d.
t789, t924.
Nicolas, Si la torture est un moyen d verifer les crimes, 1682.
Noue, F. dela, Discours politiques et militaires, 1614.
Ollyffe, G., An Essay to Prevent Capital Crimes, 273t.
Oppenheim, .Riglementprovisoirepour lafabrique de M.5.,I8o9, in Hayem,
1., Mimoires et documentspour revenir d I'histoire du commerce,r9tr.
'Ordonnace du rer
ianvier ry66, pour r6gler l'exercise de l'infanterie'.
Parfouru, P., Mimoires de la .sociitCarchiologique d'Ille-et-Vilaina, XXV,
r896.
Pastoret, C. E. de, Des lois pdnales, t79o.
Pauvre Jacquer, rst year, no. J.
Perrot, Michdle, Dilinquance et systime pinitentiaire de France au XilF
srCcle(unpublished).
'Discours
) la Constituante', Arch. parl., XXV[.
Petion de Villeneuve, J.,
P.,
Crime
et
Petrovitch,
criminalitd en France XVIII-XI/IIII
si4cles, rg7r.

t3r

Bibliography
Phalange,Za, r August 1816; ro August 1836; ro January fi17; r
December1838;ry August r84o;z October r84o.
Pictet de Rochemont,C., Jounal de Gedwr y January1788.
Piices originaleset procCdures
du procis fait 'i Robert-FrangoisDamiens,
III, ryg.
Poullain du Parc, L. M., Principesdu droit frangais selon lescoutumzsdc
Bretagne,XI, ry67-7t,
Praissac,Les Discoursmilitaires, 1623.
Radzinovitz,L., Tle EnglislzCriminalLaw,lI, ry16.
R!al,A., Atch. parl., ze #rie, LXXII, r Decemberr83r.
Real, G. A., Motifs du Coded'instructioncriminelle, r8o&.
RegistredesdCliherations
du bureaudeI'H6tel-Dieu.
'Rdglement
de ry4g pour I'infanterieprussienne',Arsenal,MS. 4o76.
Rdmusat,C. F. M. de,Arch.parl.,LXXII, r Decemberr83r.
Revuede Parisr T June 1836.
Richet,D., La Francemodemc,1974.
Risi, P., Observationssur lesmati\rcs dejurisprudentecriminelle, ry68.
Rochemonteix,C. de, Un colligeau XVIIe siicterIII, 1889.
Rossi,P., TraitCde droitpinal, IIl, 1829.
Rousseau,
J.-J., SocialContract,ed. r9r3 (Eng. trans.).
Rousseaud
de la Combe,G., TraitCdesmatiAresciminelles,r74r.
Ruchepopulaire,LarDecernber1839;August r84o;November 1842.
Rusche,G. and Kirchheimer,O., PunishmmtandSocialStuctures,rgtg.
Rush, 8., An Enquiry into theEfects of Public PunishmentsuponCrimkals
and uponSociety,1787.
Saint-Edme(E. Bourg), DictionnairedepitnlitdrlV, r8ry.
Saint-Hilaire, E. Geoffroy, Notionssynthitiqueset histoiquesdephilosoplie
naturelle, 1818.
'Saint-Maur,Rdglementde la fabrique
de', B.N. MS. Coll. Delamare,
ManufacturesIII.
Saxe,Mardchalde,Les Rdveries,1716.
Seigneuxde Correvon, G,, Essai sur l'usage,I'abus et les inconttCnients
de
Ia torture,t768.
Seligman,8., La JusticesousIa Rivolutionrl, tclir.
Sellin,Thorsten,Pioneeringin Penology,1944.
Serpillon,F,, Codecrimincl,IlI, ry67.
Servan,J., Le Soldatcitoyen,r78o.
Servan,1.M., Discourssurl'administationdela justicecriminelle,ry67.
Snyders,G., La Pidagogieen Franceaux XVII/ et XI/IIII si2cles,ry61.
t32

Bibliography
Soulatges,l. 4., Traitd descrimesrl, t762.
Stoobant,L.,in Annalesdela SrcidtCd'histoiredc Gand,III, 1898.
SyedishDisciplke, The,London, 163z(anon.).
aiaxEtats gCnlraux, r78g.
Target, G., L'Esprit descahiersprCsentds
Tatou, R. (ed,.), L'Enseigncmentet la difusion des scienrcsau XVIIIt,
r964.
Teeters,N. K., Zf,e Cradleof the Penitentiary,tg71.
They werein Prison, 1977.
Tobias,J., CrimeandIndustrialSociety,1967.
Tort, Michel,Q.1., rg74.
pauvres, 1846.
Touquet, H. du, De Ia conditiondesclasses
Treilhard, J.8., Motifs du coded'instructioncrimiwlle, r8o8.
Tronchot, R, R., L'Enseignementmutuel en France, I (unpublished
thesis).
Turnbull, J., Visite d la prison de Philadelphie,r7g7 (Fr. trans.).
'Congrls pdnitentiairede Bruxelles',in Aanalesde Ie
Van Meenen,P.,
Chaitd, 1847.
Vattel, E. de,Le Droit desgens,1768.
Vaux, Roberts,Notices,1826.
Vermeil, F. M., .Essciszr lesrdformesdfaire dansnotrelCgislationcriminelh,
r78r.
Vidocg, F.-E,, Historie de Vidocgracontlepar tui-mdme.
Mimoires.
Vilan XIV, Mdmoire sur lis moyensde corri7erles malfaiteurs, t771.
Walhausen,1,1., L'Art militairepour I'infanterie,1611.
Zevaes,A. L., DamiensIe rCgicide,
ry37.

t3,

THE ORDER OF THINGS
An Archaeology of the Human Sciences
With vast erudition, Foucault cuts acrossdisciplinesand reachesback
into the seventeenrhcentury to tracethe great riit that separatesclassical
systemsof knowledge from their modern counterparts.
Philosophy/ H istory / o-67 9-71715- 4
THE BIRTH OF THE CLINIC
An Archaeology of Medical Perception
ln The Birth of the Chnic, Foucault shows how our definition of pure
scienceis shapedby socialand culrural attitudes.
Philosophy/H istory/ o-679-75y4-6
M A D N E S SA N D C I V I L I Z A T I O N
A History of Insaniy in the Age of Reason
Madness and Civiliptioa examines the archaeology of madness in the
'West
from 1500to 1800.
History'/ Psychology / o-67 9-7zt ro-x
THE HISTORY OF SEXUALITY,VOLUME r
An Introduction
The dazzling,iconoclasticexplorationofmodern sexualhistory that has
become required reading for studenrsof philosophy, psychology, and
culrural history.
PhilosoPhY,/o-679-7 z 469-9
THE HISTORY OF SEXUALITY,VOLUME II
The Use of Pleasure
Foucault'sbrilliant sequelto Volume I analyzesthe way sexuality was
perceivedin ancientGreeceand discusses
why sexualexperiencebecame
a moral issuein the West.
Philosophy/o -679-7 1r zz- t
T H E H I S T O R Y O F S E X U A L I T Y .V O L U M E I I I
The Care ofthe Se(
The third and final volume of ivichel Foucaulr's widely acclaimed
examinationof "the experienceof sexualityin Westernsociety."
History/ Psychology/ o- 19 4-74t r 5- z
Available at your local bookstore,or call toll-free to order:
r -8oo-791-2665(credit cards only).

