“Ryan Holiday is one of his generation’s finest thinkers, and this book is his best
yet.”
—STEVEN PRESSFIELD, author of The War of Art

“The comedian Bill Hicks said the world was tainted with fevered egos. In Ego
Is the Enemy, Ryan Holiday writes us all a prescription: humility. This book is
packed with stories and quotes that will help you get out of your own way.
Whether you’re starting out or starting over, you’ll find something to steal here.”
—AUSTIN KLEON, author of Steal Like an Artist

“This is a book I want every athlete, aspiring leader, entrepreneur, thinker, and
doer to read. Ryan Holiday is one of the most promising young writers of his
generation.”
—GEORGE RAVELING, Hall of Fame Basketball coach and Nike’s Director of International Basketball

“I see the toxic vanity of ego at play every day and it never ceases to amaze me
how often it wrecks promising creative endeavors. Read this book before it
wrecks you or the projects and people you love. Consider it as urgently as you
do a proper workout regimen and eating right. Ryan’s insights are priceless.”
—MARC ECKO, founder of Ecko Unltd and Complex

“I don’t have many rules in life, but one I never break is: If Ryan Holiday writes
a book, I read it as soon as I can get my hands on it.”
—BRIAN KOPPELMAN, screenwriter and director of Rounders, Ocean’s Thirteen, and Billions

“In his new book Ryan Holiday attacks the greatest obstacle to mastery and true
success in life—our insatiable ego. In an inspiring yet practical way, he teaches
us how to manage and tame this beast within us so that we can focus on what
really matters—producing the best work possible.”
—ROBERT GREENE, author of Mastery

“We’re often told that to achieve success, we need confidence. With refreshing
candor, Ryan Holiday challenges that assumption, highlighting how we can earn
confidence by pursuing something bigger than our own success.”
—ADAM GRANT, author of Originals and Give and Take

“Once again Ryan Holiday has laid down the gauntlet for readers willing to
challenge themselves with the tough questions of our time. Every reader will
find truths that are pertinent to each of our lives. Ego can be the enemy if we are

unarmed with the cautionary insights of history, scripture, and philosophy. As
was said to St. Augustine more than a thousand years ago, ‘Pick it up and read’;
for to not do so is to allow the enemy to bring despair.”
—DR. DREW PINSKY, host of HLN’s Dr. Drew On Call and Loveline

“In this day and age where everyone seeks instant gratification, the idea of
success is skewed—many believing the road to their goals is a linear path. As a
former professional athlete I can tell you that the road is anything but linear. In
fact, it is one that consists of twists, turns, and ups and downs—it requires you to
put your head down and put in the work. Ryan Holiday hits the nail on the head
with this book, reminding us that the real success is in the journey and learning
process. I only wish I had had this gem as a reference during my playing days.”
—LORI LINDSEY, former U.S. Women’s National Team soccer player

“Philosophy has gotten a bad rap, but Ryan Holiday is restoring it to its rightful
place in our lives. This book—packed with unforgettable stories, strategies, and
lessons—is perfect for anyone who strives to do and accomplish. It’s no
exaggeration to say that, after finishing it, you’ll never open your laptop and sit
down to work the same way again.”
—JIMMY SONI, Former Managing Editor of The Huffington Post and author of Rome’s Last Citizen

“I would like to rip out every page and use them as wallpaper so I could be
reminded constantly of the humility and work it takes to truly succeed. In the
margins of my copy, I have scrawled the same message over and over—‘preGold.’ Reading this inspiring book brought me back to the humility and work
ethic it took to win the Olympics.”
—CHANDRA CRAWFORD, Olympic Gold Medalist

“What a valuable book for those in positions of authority! It has made me a
better judge.”
—THE HONORABLE FREDERIC BLOCK, U.S. District Judge and author of Disrobed

ALSO BY RYAN HOLIDAY

Growth Hacker Marketing: A Primer on the Future of PR, Marketing, and
Advertising
Trust Me, I’m Lying: Confessions of a Media Manipulator
The Obstacle Is the Way: The Timeless Art of Turning Trials into Triumph

PORTFOLIO / PENGUIN
An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014
penguin.com
Copyright © 2016 by Ryan Holiday
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech,
and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying
with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without
permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books for every reader.
ISBN 9781591847816 (hardcover)
ISBN 9780698192157 (ebook)
Version_1

Do not believe that he who seeks to comfort you lives untroubled
among the simple and quiet words that sometimes do you good. His
life has much difficulty and sadness and remains far behind yours.
Were it otherwise he would never have been able to find those
words.
—RAINER MARIA RILKE

CONTENTS

Praise for Ryan Holiday
Also by Ryan Holiday
Title Page
Copyright
Epigraph
The Painful Prologue
INTRODUCTION

PART I. ASPIRE
TALK, TALK, TALK
TO BE OR TO DO?
BECOME A STUDENT
DON’T BE PASSIONATE
FOLLOW THE CANVAS STRATEGY
RESTRAIN YOURSELF
GET OUT OF YOUR OWN HEAD
THE DANGER OF EARLY PRIDE
WORK, WORK, WORK
FOR EVERYTHING THAT COMES NEXT, EGO IS THE ENEMY . . .

PART II. SUCCESS
ALWAYS STAY A STUDENT
DON’T TELL YOURSELF A STORY

WHAT’S IMPORTANT TO YOU?
ENTITLEMENT, CONTROL, AND PARANOIA
MANAGING YOURSELF
BEWARE THE DISEASE OF ME
MEDITATE ON THE IMMENSITY
MAINTAIN YOUR SOBRIETY
FOR WHAT OFTEN COMES NEXT, EGO IS THE ENEMY . . .

PART III. FAILURE
ALIVE TIME OR DEAD TIME?
THE EFFORT IS ENOUGH
FIGHT CLUB MOMENTS
DRAW THE LINE
MAINTAIN YOUR OWN SCORECARD
ALWAYS LOVE
FOR EVERYTHING THAT COMES NEXT, EGO IS THE ENEMY . . .
EPILOGUE
What Should You Read Next?
Selected Bibliography
Acknowledgments

THE PAINFUL PROLOGUE

T

his is not a book about me. But since this is a book about ego, I’m going to
address a question that I’d be a hypocrite not to have thought about.
Who the hell am I to write it?
My story is not particularly important for the lessons that follow, but I want to
tell it briefly here at the beginning in order to provide some context. For I have
experienced ego at each of its stages in my short life: Aspiration. Success.
Failure. And back again and back again.
When I was nineteen years old, sensing some astounding and life-changing
opportunities, I dropped out of college. Mentors vied for my attention, groomed
me as their protégé. Seen as going places, I was the kid. Success came quickly.
After I became the youngest executive at a Beverly Hills talent management
agency, I helped sign and work with a number of huge rock bands. I advised on
books that went on to sell millions of copies and invent their own literary genres.
Around the time I turned twenty-one, I came on as a strategist for American
Apparel, then one of the hottest fashion brands in the world. Soon, I was the
director of marketing.
By twenty-five, I had published my first book—which was an immediate and
controversial best seller—with my face prominently on the cover. A studio
optioned the rights to create a television show about my life. In the next few
years, I accumulated many of the trappings of success—influence, a platform,
press, resources, money, even a little notoriety. Later, I built a successful
company on the back of those assets, where I worked with well-known, wellpaying clients and did the kind of work that got me invited to speak at
conferences and fancy events.
With success comes the temptation to tell oneself a story, to round off the
edges, to cut out your lucky breaks and add a certain mythology to it all. You
know, that arcing narrative of Herculean struggle for greatness against all odds:
sleeping on the floor, being disowned by my parents, suffering for my ambition.

It’s a type of storytelling in which eventually your talent becomes your identity
and your accomplishments become your worth.
But a story like this is never honest or helpful. In my retelling to you just
now, I left a lot out. Conveniently omitted were the stresses and temptations; the
stomach-turning drops and the mistakes—all the mistakes—were left on the
cutting-room floor in favor of the highlight reel. They are the times I would
rather not discuss: A public evisceration by someone I looked up to, which so
crushed me at the time that I was later taken to the emergency room. The day I
lost my nerve, walked into my boss’s office, and told him I couldn’t cut it and
was going back to school—and meant it. The ephemeral nature of bestsellerdom, and how short it actually was (a week). The book signing that one
person showed up at. The company I founded tearing itself to pieces and having
to rebuild it. Twice. These are just some of the moments that get nicely edited
out.
This fuller picture itself is still only a fraction of a life, but at least it hits more
of the important notes—at least the important ones for this book: ambition,
achievement, and adversity.
I’m not someone who believes in epiphanies. There is no one moment that
changes a person. There are many. During a period of about six months in 2014,
it seemed those moments were all happening in succession.
First, American Apparel—where I did much of my best work—teetered on
the edge of bankruptcy, hundreds of millions of dollars in debt, a shell of its
former self. Its founder, who I had deeply admired since I was a young man, was
unceremoniously fired by his own handpicked board of directors, and down to
sleeping on a friend’s couch. Then the talent agency where I made my bones was
in similar shape, sued peremptorily by clients to whom it owed a lot of money.
Another mentor of mine seemingly unraveled around the same time, taking our
relationship with him.
These were the people I had shaped my life around. The people I looked up to
and trained under. Their stability—financially, emotionally, psychologically—
was not just something I took for granted, it was central to my existence and
self-worth. And yet, there they were, imploding right in front of me, one after
another.
The wheels were coming off, or so it felt. To go from wanting to be like
someone your whole life to realizing you never want to be like him is a kind of
whiplash that you can’t prepare for.

Nor was I exempt from this dissolution myself. Just when I could least afford
it, problems I had neglected in my own life began to emerge.
Despite my successes, I found myself back in the city I started in, stressed
and overworked, having handed much of my hard-earned freedom away because
I couldn’t say no to money and the thrill of a good crisis. I was wound so tight
that the slightest disruption sent me into a sputtering, inconsolable rage. My
work, which had always come easy, became labored. My faith in myself and
other people collapsed. My quality of life did too.
I remember arriving at my house one day, after weeks on the road, and having
an intense panic attack because the Wi-Fi wasn’t working—If I don’t send these
e-mails. If I don’t send these e-mails. If I don’t send these e-mails. If I don’t send
these e-mails . . .
You think you’re doing what you’re supposed to. Society rewards you for it.
But then you watch your future wife walk out the door because you aren’t the
person you used to be.
How does something like this happen? Can you really go from feeling like
you’re standing on the shoulders of giants one day, and then the next you’re
prying yourself out of the rubble of multiple implosions, trying to pick up the
pieces from the ruins?
One benefit, however, was that it forced me to come to terms with the fact
that I was a workaholic. Not in an “Oh, he just works too much” kind of way, or
in the “Just relax and play it off” sense, but more, “If he doesn’t start going to
meetings and get clean, he will die an early death.” I realized that the same drive
and compulsion that had made me successful so early came with a price—as it
had for so many others. It wasn’t so much the amount of work but the outsized
role it had taken in my sense of self. I was trapped so terribly inside my own
head that I was a prisoner to my own thoughts. The result was a sort of treadmill
of pain and frustration, and I needed to figure out why—unless I wanted to break
in an equally tragic fashion.
For a long time, as a researcher and writer, I have studied history and
business. Like anything that involves people, seen over a long enough timeline
universal issues begin to emerge. These are the topics I had long been fascinated
with. Foremost among them was ego.
I was not unfamiliar with ego and its effects. In fact, I had been researching
this book for nearly a year before the events I have just recounted for you. But
my painful experiences in this period brought the notions I was studying into
focus in ways that I could never have previously understood.

It allowed me to see the ill effects of ego played out not just in myself, or
across the pages of history, but in friends and clients and colleagues, some at the
highest levels of many industries. Ego has cost the people I admire hundreds of
millions of dollars, and like Sisyphus, rolled them back from their goals just as
they’ve achieved them. I have now at least peeked over that precipice myself.
A few months after my own realization, I had the phrase “EGO IS THE
ENEMY” tattooed on my right forearm. Where the words came from I don’t
know, probably from a book I read long, long ago, but they were immediately a
source of great solace and direction. On my left arm, of similarly muddled
attribution, it says: “THE OBSTACLE IS THE WAY.” It’s these two phrases that
I look at now, every single day, and use them to guide the decisions in my life. I
can’t help but see them when I swim, when I meditate, when I write, when I get
out of the shower in the morning, and both prepare me—admonish me—to
choose the right course in essentially any situation I might face.
I wrote this book not because I have attained some wisdom I feel qualified to
preach, but because it’s the book I wish existed at critical turning points in my
own life. When I, like everyone else, was called to answer the most critical
questions a person can ask themselves in life: Who do I want to be? And: What
path will I take? (Quod vitae sectabor iter.)
And because I’ve found these questions to be timeless and universal, except
for this note, I have tried to rely on philosophy and historical examples in this
book instead of my personal life.
While the history books are filled with tales of obsessive, visionary geniuses
who remade the world in their image with sheer, almost irrational force, I’ve
found that if you go looking you’ll find that history is also made by individuals
who fought their egos at every turn, who eschewed the spotlight, and who put
their higher goals above their desire for recognition. Engaging with and retelling
these stories has been my method of learning and absorbing them.
Like my other books, this one is deeply influenced by Stoic philosophy and
indeed all the great classical thinkers. I borrow heavily from them all in my
writing just as I have leaned on them my entire life. If there is anything that
helps you in this book, it will be because of them and not me.
The orator Demosthenes once said that virtue begins with understanding and
is fulfilled by courage. We must begin by seeing ourselves and the world in a
new way for the first time. Then we must fight to be different and fight to stay
different—that’s the hard part. I’m not saying you should repress or crush every

ounce of ego in your life—or that doing so is even possible. These are just
reminders, moral stories to encourage our better impulses.
In Aristotle’s famous Ethics, he uses the analogy of a warped piece of wood
to describe human nature. In order to eliminate warping or curvature, a skilled
woodworker slowly applies pressure in the opposite direction—essentially,
bending it straight. Of course, a couple of thousand years later Kant snorted,
“Out of the crooked timber of humanity, nothing can be made straight.” We
might not ever be straight, but we can strive for straighter.
It’s always nice to be made to feel special or empowered or inspired. But
that’s not the aim of this book. Instead, I have tried to arrange these pages so that
you might end in the same place I did when I finished writing it: that is, you will
think less of yourself. I hope you will be less invested in the story you tell about
your own specialness, and as a result, you will be liberated to accomplish the
world-changing work you’ve set out to achieve.

INTRODUCTION

The first principle is that you must not fool yourself—and you are the easiest person to fool.
—RICHARD FEYNMAN

M

aybe you’re young and brimming with ambition. Maybe you’re young and
you’re struggling. Maybe you’ve made that first couple million, signed
your first deal, been selected to some elite group, or maybe you’re already
accomplished enough to last a lifetime. Maybe you’re stunned to find out how
empty it is at the top. Maybe you’re charged with leading others through a crisis.
Maybe you just got fired. Maybe you just hit rock bottom.
Wherever you are, whatever you’re doing, your worst enemy already lives
inside you: your ego.
“Not me,” you think. “No one would ever call me an egomaniac.” Perhaps
you’ve always thought of yourself as a pretty balanced person. But for people
with ambitions, talents, drives, and potential to fulfill, ego comes with the
territory. Precisely what makes us so promising as thinkers, doers, creatives, and
entrepreneurs, what drives us to the top of those fields, makes us vulnerable to
this darker side of the psyche.
Now this is not a book about ego in the Freudian sense. Freud was fond of
explaining the ego by way of analogy—our ego was the rider on a horse, with
our unconscious drives representing the animal while the ego tried to direct
them. Modern psychologists, on the other hand, use the word “egotist” to refer to
someone dangerously focused on themselves and with disregard for anyone else.
All these definitions are true enough but of little value outside a clinical setting.
The ego we see most commonly goes by a more casual definition: an
unhealthy belief in our own importance. Arrogance. Self-centered ambition.
That’s the definition this book will use. It’s that petulant child inside every
person, the one that chooses getting his or her way over anything or anyone else.
The need to be better than, more than, recognized for, far past any reasonable

utility—that’s ego. It’s the sense of superiority and certainty that exceeds the
bounds of confidence and talent.
It’s when the notion of ourselves and the world grows so inflated that it
begins to distort the reality that surrounds us. When, as the football coach Bill
Walsh explained, “self-confidence becomes arrogance, assertiveness becomes
obstinacy, and self-assurance becomes reckless abandon.” This is the ego, as the
writer Cyril Connolly warned, that “sucks us down like the law of gravity.”
In this way, ego is the enemy of what you want and of what you have: Of
mastering a craft. Of real creative insight. Of working well with others. Of
building loyalty and support. Of longevity. Of repeating and retaining your
success. It repulses advantages and opportunities. It’s a magnet for enemies and
errors. It is Scylla and Charybdis.
Most of us aren’t “egomaniacs,” but ego is there at the root of almost every
conceivable problem and obstacle, from why we can’t win to why we need to
win all the time and at the expense of others. From why we don’t have what we
want to why having what we want doesn’t seem to make us feel any better.
We don’t usually see it this way. We think something else is to blame for our
problems (most often, other people). We are, as the poet Lucretius put it a few
thousand years ago, the proverbial “sick man ignorant of the cause of his
malady.” Especially for successful people who can’t see what ego prevents them
from doing because all they can see is what they’ve already done.
With every ambition and goal we have—big or small—ego is there
undermining us on the very journey we’ve put everything into pursuing.
The pioneering CEO Harold Geneen compared egoism to alcoholism: “The
egotist does not stumble about, knocking things off his desk. He does not
stammer or drool. No, instead, he becomes more and more arrogant, and some
people, not knowing what is underneath such an attitude, mistake his arrogance
for a sense of power and self-confidence.” You could say they start to mistake
that about themselves too, not realizing the disease they’ve contracted or that
they’re killing themselves with it.
If ego is the voice that tells us we’re better than we really are, we can say ego
inhibits true success by preventing a direct and honest connection to the world
around us. One of the early members of Alcoholics Anonymous defined ego as
“a conscious separation from.” From what? Everything.
The ways this separation manifests itself negatively are immense: We can’t
work with other people if we’ve put up walls. We can’t improve the world if we
don’t understand it or ourselves. We can’t take or receive feedback if we are

incapable of or uninterested in hearing from outside sources. We can’t recognize
opportunities—or create them—if instead of seeing what is in front of us, we
live inside our own fantasy. Without an accurate accounting of our own abilities
compared to others, what we have is not confidence but delusion. How are we
supposed to reach, motivate, or lead other people if we can’t relate to their needs
—because we’ve lost touch with our own?
The performance artist Marina Abramović puts it directly: “If you start
believing in your greatness, it is the death of your creativity.”
Just one thing keeps ego around—comfort. Pursuing great work—whether it
is in sports or art or business—is often terrifying. Ego soothes that fear. It’s a
salve to that insecurity. Replacing the rational and aware parts of our psyche
with bluster and self-absorption, ego tells us what we want to hear, when we
want to hear it.
But it is a short-term fix with a long-term consequence.
EGO WAS ALWAYS THERE. NOW IT’S EMBOLDENED.

Now more than ever, our culture fans the flames of ego. It’s never been easier to
talk, to puff ourselves up. We can brag about our goals to millions of our fans
and followers—things only rock stars and cult leaders used to have. We can
follow and interact with our idols on Twitter, we can read books and sites and
watch TED Talks, drink from a fire hose of inspiration and validation like never
before (there’s an app for that). We can name ourselves CEO of our exists-onlyon-paper company. We can announce big news on social media and let the
congratulations roll in. We can publish articles about ourselves in outlets that
used to be sources of objective journalism.
Some of us do this more than others. But it’s only a matter of degree.
Besides the changes in technology, we’re told to believe in our uniqueness
above all else. We’re told to think big, live big, to be memorable and “dare
greatly.” We think that success requires a bold vision or some sweeping plan—
after all, that’s what the founders of this company or that championship team
supposedly had. (But did they? Did they really?) We see risk-taking swagger and
successful people in the media, and eager for our own successes, try to reverse
engineer the right attitude, the right pose.
We intuit a causal relationship that isn’t there. We assume the symptoms of
success are the same as success itself—and in our naiveté, confuse the byproduct with the cause.

Sure, ego has worked for some. Many of history’s most famous men and
women were notoriously egotistical. But so were many of its greatest failures.
Far more of them, in fact. But here we are with a culture that urges us to roll the
dice. To make the gamble, ignoring the stakes.
WHEREVER YOU ARE, EGO IS TOO.

At any given time in life, people find themselves at one of three stages. We’re
aspiring to something—trying to make a dent in the universe. We have achieved
success—perhaps a little, perhaps a lot. Or we have failed—recently or
continually. Most of us are in these stages in a fluid sense—we’re aspiring until
we succeed, we succeed until we fail or until we aspire to more, and after we fail
we can begin to aspire or succeed again.
Ego is the enemy every step along this way. In a sense, ego is the enemy of
building, of maintaining, and of recovering. When things come fast and easy,
this might be fine. But in times of change, of difficulty . . .
And therefore, the three parts that this book is organized into: Aspire.
Success. Failure.
The aim of that structure is simple: to help you suppress ego early before bad
habits take hold, to replace the temptations of ego with humility and discipline
when we experience success, and to cultivate strength and fortitude so that when
fate turns against you, you’re not wrecked by failure. In short, it will help us be:
Humble in our aspirations
Gracious in our success
Resilient in our failures
This is not to say that you’re not unique and that you don’t have something
amazing to contribute in your short time on this planet. This is not to say that
there is not room to push past creative boundaries, to invent, to feel inspired, or
to aim for truly ambitious change and innovation. On the contrary, in order to
properly do these things and take these risks we need balance. As the Quaker
William Penn observed, “Buildings that lie so exposed to the weather need a
good foundation.”
SO, WHAT NOW?

This book you hold in your hands is written around one optimistic assumption:
Your ego is not some power you’re forced to satiate at every turn. It can be
managed. It can be directed.
In this book, we’ll look at individuals like William Tecumseh Sherman,
Katharine Graham, Jackie Robinson, Eleanor Roosevelt, Bill Walsh, Benjamin
Franklin, Belisarius, Angela Merkel, and George C. Marshall. Could they have
accomplished what they accomplished—saving faltering companies, advancing
the art of war, integrating baseball, revolutionizing football offense, standing up
to tyranny, bravely bearing misfortune—if ego had left them ungrounded and
self-absorbed? It was their sense of reality and awareness—one that the author
and strategist Robert Greene once said we must take to like a spider in its web—
that was at the core of their great art, great writing, great design, great business,
great marketing, and great leadership.
What we find when we study these individuals is that they were grounded,
circumspect, and unflinchingly real. Not that any of them were wholly without
ego. But they knew how to suppress it, channel it, subsume it when it counted.
They were great yet humble.
Wait, but so-and-so had a huge ego and was successful. But what about Steve
Jobs? What about Kanye West?
We can seek to rationalize the worst behavior by pointing to outliers. But no
one is truly successful because they are delusional, self-absorbed, or
disconnected. Even if these traits are correlated or associated with certain wellknown individuals, so are a few others: addiction, abuse (of themselves and
others), depression, mania. In fact, what we see when we study these people is
that they did their best work in the moments when they fought back against these
impulses, disorders, and flaws. Only when free of ego and baggage can anyone
perform to their utmost.
For this reason, we’re also going to look at individuals like Howard Hughes,
the Persian king Xerxes, John DeLorean, Alexander the Great, and at the many
cautionary tales of others who lost their grip on reality and in the process made it
clear what a gamble ego can be. We’ll look at the costly lessons they learned and
the price they paid in misery and self-destruction. We’ll look at how often even
the most successful people vacillate between humility and ego and the problems
this causes.
When we remove ego, we’re left with what is real. What replaces ego is
humility, yes—but rock-hard humility and confidence. Whereas ego is artificial,
this type of confidence can hold weight. Ego is stolen. Confidence is earned. Ego

is self-anointed, its swagger is artifice. One is girding yourself, the other
gaslighting. It’s the difference between potent and poisonous.
As you’ll see in the pages that follow, that self-confidence took an
unassuming and underestimated general and turned him into America’s foremost
warrior and strategist during the Civil War. Ego took a different general from the
heights of power and influence after that same war and drove him to destitution
and ignominy. One took a quiet, sober German scientist and made her not just a
new kind of leader but a force for peace. The other took two different but equally
brilliant and bold engineering minds of the twentieth century and built them up
in a whirlwind of hype and celebrity before dashing their hopes against the rocks
of failure, bankruptcy, scandal, and insanity. One guided one of the worst teams
in NFL history to the Super Bowl in three seasons, and then on to be one of most
dominant dynasties in the game. Meanwhile, countless other coaches,
politicians, entrepreneurs, and writers have overcome similar odds—only to
succumb to the more inevitable probability of handing the top spot right back to
someone else.
Some learn humility. Some choose ego. Some are prepared for the
vicissitudes of fate, both positive and negative. Others are not. Which will you
choose? Who will you be?
You’ve picked up this book because you sense that you’ll need to answer this
question eventually, consciously or not.
Well, here we are. Let’s get to it.

ASPIRE
Here, we are setting out to do something. We have a goal, a calling, a new beginning. Every great
journey begins here—yet far too many of us never reach our intended destination. Ego more often
than not is the culprit. We build ourselves up with fantastical stories, we pretend we have it all
figured out, we let our star burn bright and hot only to fizzle out, and we have no idea why. These are
symptoms of ego, for which humility and reality are the cure.

He is a bold surgeon, they say, whose hand does not tremble when he performs an operation
upon his own person; and he is often equally bold who does not hesitate to pull off the
mysterious veil of self-delusion, which covers from his view the deformities of his own
conduct.
—ADAM SMITH

S

ometime around the year 374 B.C., Isocrates, one of the most well-known
teachers and rhetoricians in Athens, wrote a letter to a young man named
Demonicus. Isocrates had been a friend of the boy’s recently deceased father and
wanted to pass on to him some advice on how to follow his father’s example.
The advice ranged from practical to moral—all communicated in what
Isocrates described as “noble maxims.” They were, as he put it, “precepts for the
years to come.”
Like many of us, Demonicus was ambitious, which is why Isocrates wrote
him, because the path of ambition can be dangerous. Isocrates began by
informing the young man that “no adornment so becomes you as modesty,
justice, and self-control; for these are the virtues by which, as all men are agreed,
the character of the young is held in restraint.” “Practice self-control,” he said,
warning Demonicus not to fall under the sway of “temper, pleasure, and pain.”
And “abhor flatterers as you would deceivers; for both, if trusted, injure those
who trust them.”
He wanted him to “Be affable in your relations with those who approach you,
and never haughty; for the pride of the arrogant even slaves can hardly endure”
and “Be slow in deliberation, but be prompt to carry out your resolves” and that
the “best thing which we have in ourselves is good judgment.” Constantly train
your intellect, he told him, “for the greatest thing in the smallest compass is a
sound mind in a human body.”
Some of this advice might sound familiar. Because it made its way over the
next two thousand years to William Shakespeare, who often warned about ego
run amok. In fact, in Hamlet, using this very letter as his model, Shakespeare
puts Isocrates’ words in the mouth of his character Polonius in a speech to his
son, Laertes. The speech, if you happen to have heard it, wraps up with this little
verse.

This above all: to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!
As it happened, Shakespeare’s words also made their way to a young United
States military officer named William Tecumseh Sherman, who would go on to
become perhaps this country’s greatest general and strategic thinker. He may
never have heard of Isocrates, but he loved the play and often quoted this very
speech.
Like Demonicus’, Sherman’s father died when he was very young. Like
Demonicus, he was taken under the wing of a wise, older man, in this case
Thomas Ewing, a soon-to-be U.S. senator and friend of Sherman’s father, who
adopted the young boy and raised him as his own.
What’s interesting about Sherman is that despite his connected father, almost
no one would have predicted much more than regional accomplishments—least
of all that he would one day need to take the unprecedented step of refusing the
presidency of the United States. Unlike a Napoleon, who bursts upon the scene
from nowhere and disappears in failure just as quickly, Sherman’s ascent was a
slow and gradual one.
He spent his early years at West Point, and then in the army. For his first few
years in service, Sherman traversed nearly the entire United States on horseback,
slowly learning with each posting. As the rumblings of Civil War broke out,
Sherman made his way east to volunteer his services and he was shortly put to
use at the Battle of Bull Run, a rather disastrous Union defeat. Benefiting from a
dire shortage of leadership, Sherman was promoted to brigadier general and was
summoned to meet with President Lincoln and his top military adviser. On
several occasions, Sherman freely strategized and planned with the president, but
at the end of his trip, he made one strange request; he’d accept his new
promotion only with the assurance that he’d not have to assume superior
command. Would Lincoln give him his word on that? With every other general
asking for as much rank and power as possible, Lincoln happily agreed.
At this point in time, Sherman felt more comfortable as a number two. He felt
he had an honest appreciation for his own abilities and that this role best suited
him. Imagine that—an ambitious person turning down a chance to advance in
responsibilities because he actually wanted to be ready for them. Is that really so
crazy?

Not that Sherman was always the perfect model of restraint and order. Early
in the war, tasked with defending the state of Kentucky with insufficient troops,
his mania and tendency to doubt himself combined in a wicked way. Ranting and
raving about being undersupplied, unable to get out of his own head, paranoid
about enemy movements, he broke form and spoke injudiciously to several
newspaper reporters. In the ensuing controversy, he was temporarily recalled
from his command. It took weeks of rest for him to recover. It was one of a few
nearly catastrophic moments in his otherwise steadily ascendant career.
It was after this brief stumble—having learned from it—that Sherman truly
made his mark. For instance, during the siege at Fort Donelson, Sherman
technically held a senior rank to General Ulysses S. Grant. While the rest of
Lincoln’s generals fought amongst themselves for personal power and
recognition, Sherman waived his rank, choosing to cheerfully support and
reinforce Grant instead of issuing orders. This is your show, Sherman told him in
a note accompanying a shipment of supplies; call upon me for any assistance I
can provide. Together, they won one of the Union’s first victories in the war.
Building on his successes, Sherman began to advocate for his famous march
to the sea—a strategically bold and audacious plan, not born out of some
creative genius but rather relying on the exact topography he had scouted and
studied as a young officer in what had then seemed like a pointless backwater
outpost.
Where Sherman had once been cautious, he was now confident. But unlike so
many others who possess great ambition, he earned this opinion. As he carved a
path from Chattanooga to Atlanta and then Atlanta to the sea, he avoided
traditional battle after traditional battle. Any student of military history can see
how the exact same invasion, driven by ego instead of a strong sense of purpose,
would have had a far different ending.
His realism allowed him to see a path through the South that others thought
impossible. His entire theory of maneuver warfare rested on deliberately
avoiding frontal assaults or shows of strength in the form of pitched battles, and
ignoring criticism designed to bait a reaction. He paid no notice and stuck to his
plan.
By the end of the war, Sherman was one of the most famous men in America,
and yet he sought no public office, had no taste for politics, and wished simply to
do his job and then eventually retire. Dismissing the incessant praise and
attention endemic to such success, he wrote as a warning to his friend Grant, “Be

natural and yourself and this glittering flattery will be as the passing breeze of
the sea on a warm summer day.”
One of Sherman’s biographers summarized the man and his unique
accomplishments in a remarkable passage. It is why he serves as our model in
this phase of our ascent.
Among men who rise to fame and leadership two types are recognizable—
those who are born with a belief in themselves and those in whom it is a
slow growth dependent on actual achievement. To the men of the last type
their own success is a constant surprise, and its fruits the more delicious,
yet to be tested cautiously with a haunting sense of doubt whether it is not
all a dream. In that doubt lies true modesty, not the sham of insincere selfdepreciation but the modesty of “moderation,” in the Greek sense. It is
poise, not pose.
One must ask: if your belief in yourself is not dependent on actual
achievement, then what is it dependent on? The answer, too often when we are
just setting out, is nothing. Ego. And this is why we so often see precipitous rises
followed by calamitous falls.
So which type of person will you be?
Like all of us, Sherman had to balance talent and ambition and intensity,
especially when he was young. His victory in this struggle was largely why he
was able to manage the life-altering success that eventually came his way.
This probably all sounds strange. Where Isocrates and Shakespeare wished us
to be self-contained, self-motivated, and ruled by principle, most of us have been
trained to do the opposite. Our cultural values almost try to make us dependent
on validation, entitled, and ruled by our emotions. For a generation, parents and
teachers have focused on building up everyone’s self-esteem. From there, the
themes of our gurus and public figures have been almost exclusively aimed at
inspiring, encouraging, and assuring us that we can do whatever we set our
minds to.
In reality, this makes us weak. Yes, you, with all your talent and promise as a
boy wonder or a girl-who’s-going-places. We take it for granted that you have
promise. It’s why you’ve landed in the prestigious university you now attend,
why you’ve secured the funding you have for your business, why you’ve been
hired or promoted, why whatever opportunity you now have has fallen into your
lap. As Irving Berlin put it, “Talent is only the starting point.” The question is:

Will you be able to make the most of it? Or will you be your own worst enemy?
Will you snuff out the flame that is just getting going?
What we see in Sherman was a man deeply tied and connected to reality. He
was a man who came from nothing and accomplished great things, without ever
feeling that he was in someway entitled to the honors he received. In fact, he
regularly and consistently deferred to others and was more than happy to
contribute to a winning team, even if it meant less credit or fame for himself. It’s
sad to think that generations of young boys learned about Pickett’s glorious
cavalry charge, a Confederate charge that failed, but the model of Sherman as a
quiet, unglamorous realist is forgotten, or worse, vilified.
One might say that the ability to evaluate one’s own ability is the most
important skill of all. Without it, improvement is impossible. And certainly ego
makes it difficult every step of the way. It is certainly more pleasurable to focus
on our talents and strengths, but where does that get us? Arrogance and selfabsorption inhibit growth. So does fantasy and “vision.”
In this phase, you must practice seeing yourself with a little distance,
cultivating the ability to get out of your own head. Detachment is a sort of
natural ego antidote. It’s easy to be emotionally invested and infatuated with
your own work. Any and every narcissist can do that. What is rare is not raw
talent, skill, or even confidence, but humility, diligence, and self-awareness.
For your work to have truth in it, it must come from truth. If you want to be
more than a flash in the pan, you must be prepared to focus on the long term.
We will learn that though we think big, we must act and live small in order to
accomplish what we seek. Because we will be action and education focused, and
forgo validation and status, our ambition will not be grandiose but iterative—one
foot in front of the other, learning and growing and putting in the time.
With their aggression, intensity, self-absorption, and endless self-promotion,
our competitors don’t realize how they jeopardize their own efforts (to say
nothing of their sanity). We will challenge the myth of the self-assured genius
for whom doubt and introspection is foreign, as well as challenge the myth of
pained, tortured artist who must sacrifice his health for his work. Where they are
both divorced from reality and divorced from other people, we will be deeply
connected, aware, and learning from all of it.
Facts are better than dreams, as Churchill put it.
Although we share with many others a vision for greatness, we understand
that our path toward it is very different from theirs. Following Sherman and

Isocrates, we understand that ego is our enemy on that journey, so that when we
do achieve our success, it will not sink us but make us stronger.

TALK, TALK, TALK

Those who know do not speak.
Those who speak do not know.
—LAO TZU

I

n his famous 1934 campaign for the governorship of California, the author
and activist Upton Sinclair took an unusual step. Before the election, he
published a short book titled I, Governor of California and How I Ended
Poverty, in which he outlined, in the past tense, the brilliant policies he had
enacted as governor . . . the office he had not yet won.
It was an untraditional move from an untraditional campaign, intended to
leverage Sinclair’s best asset—as an author, he knew he could communicate with
the public in a way that others couldn’t. Now, Sinclair’s campaign was always a
long shot and hardly in good shape when they published the book. But observers
at the time noticed immediately the effect it had—not on the voters, but on
Sinclair himself. As Carey McWilliams later wrote about his friend’s
gubernatorial bid as it went south, “Upton not only realized that he would be
defeated but seemed somehow to have lost interest in the campaign. In that vivid
imagination of his, he had already acted out the part of ‘I, Governor of
California,’ . . . so why bother to enact it in real life?”
The book was a best seller, the campaign a failure. Sinclair lost by something
like a quarter of a million votes (a margin of more than 10 percentage points); he
was utterly decimated in what was probably the first modern election. It’s clear
what happened: his talk got out ahead of his campaign and the will to bridge the
gap collapsed. Most politicians don’t write books like that, but they get ahead of
themselves just the same.
It’s a temptation that exists for everyone—for talk and hype to replace action.
The empty text box: “What’s on your mind?” Facebook asks. “Compose a
new tweet,” Twitter beckons. Tumblr. LinkedIn. Our inbox, our iPhones, the
comments section on the bottom of the article you just read.

Blank spaces, begging to be filled in with thoughts, with photos, with stories.
With what we’re going to do, with what things should or could be like, what we
hope will happen. Technology, asking you, prodding you, soliciting talk.
Almost universally, the kind of performance we give on social media is
positive. It’s more “Let me tell you how well things are going. Look how great I
am.” It’s rarely the truth: “I’m scared. I’m struggling. I don’t know.”
At the beginning of any path, we’re excited and nervous. So we seek to
comfort ourselves externally instead of inwardly. There’s a weak side to each of
us, that—like a trade union—isn’t exactly malicious but at the end of the day
still wants get as much public credit and attention as it can for doing the least.
That side we call ego.
The writer and former Gawker blogger Emily Gould—a real-life Hannah
Horvath if there ever was one—realized this during her two-year struggle to get
a novel published. Though she had a six-figure book deal, she was stuck. Why?
She was too busy “spending a lot of time on the Internet,” that’s why.
In fact, I can’t really remember anything else I did in 2010. I tumbld, I
tweeted, and I scrolled. This didn’t earn me any money but it felt like
work. I justified my habits to myself in various ways. I was building my
brand. Blogging was a creative act—even “curating” by reblogging
someone else’s post was a creative act, if you squinted. It was also the only
creative thing I was doing.
In other words, she did what a lot of us do when we’re scared or
overwhelmed by a project: she did everything but focus on it. The actual novel
she was supposed to be working on stalled completely. For a year.
It was easier to talk about writing, to do the exciting things related to art and
creativity and literature, than to commit the act itself. She’s not the only one.
Someone recently published a book called Working On My Novel, filled with
social media posts from writers who are clearly not working on their novels.
Writing, like so many creative acts, is hard. Sitting there, staring, mad at
yourself, mad at the material because it doesn’t seem good enough and you don’t
seem good enough. In fact, many valuable endeavors we undertake are painfully
difficult, whether it’s coding a new startup or mastering a craft. But talking,
talking is always easy.
We seem to think that silence is a sign of weakness. That being ignored is
tantamount to death (and for the ego, this is true). So we talk, talk, talk as though

our life depends on it.
In actuality, silence is strength—particularly early on in any journey. As the
philosopher (and as it happens, a hater of newspapers and their chatter)
Kierkegaard warned, “Mere gossip anticipates real talk, and to express what is
still in thought weakens action by forestalling it.”
And that’s what is so insidious about talk. Anyone can talk about himself or
herself. Even a child knows how to gossip and chatter. Most people are decent at
hype and sales. So what is scarce and rare? Silence. The ability to deliberately
keep yourself out of the conversation and subsist without its validation. Silence
is the respite of the confident and the strong.
Sherman had a good rule he tried to observe. “Never give reasons for you
what think or do until you must. Maybe, after a while, a better reason will pop
into your head.” The baseball and football great Bo Jackson decided he had two
things he wanted to accomplish as an athlete at Auburn: he would win the
Heisman Trophy and be taken first in the NFL draft. Do you know who he told?
Nobody but his girlfriend.
Strategic flexibility is not the only benefit of silence while others chatter. It is
also psychology. The poet Hesiod had this in mind when he said, “A man’s best
treasure is a thrifty tongue.”
Talk depletes us. Talking and doing fight for the same resources. Research
shows that while goal visualization is important, after a certain point our mind
begins to confuse it with actual progress. The same goes for verbalization. Even
talking aloud to ourselves while we work through difficult problems has been
shown to significantly decrease insight and breakthroughs. After spending so
much time thinking, explaining, and talking about a task, we start to feel that
we’ve gotten closer to achieving it. Or worse, when things get tough, we feel we
can toss the whole project aside because we’ve given it our best try, although of
course we haven’t.
The more difficult the task, the more uncertain the outcome, the more costly
talk will be and the farther we run from actual accountability. It’s sapped us of
the energy desperately needed to conquer what Steven Pressfield calls the
“Resistance”—the hurdle that stands between us and creative expression.
Success requires a full 100 percent of our effort, and talk flitters part of that
effort away before we can use it.
A lot of us succumb to this temptation—particularly when we feel
overwhelmed or stressed or have a lot of work to do. In our building phase,
resistance will be a constant source of discomfort. Talking—listening to

ourselves talk, performing for an audience—is almost like therapy. I just spent
four hours talking about this. Doesn’t that count for something? The answer is
no.
Doing great work is a struggle. It’s draining, it’s demoralizing, it’s frightening
—not always, but it can feel that way when we’re deep in the middle of it. We
talk to fill the void and the uncertainty. “Void,” Marlon Brando, a quiet actor if
there ever was one, once said, “is terrifying to most people.” It is almost as if we
are assaulted by silence or confronted by it, particularly if we’ve allowed our ego
to lie to us over the years. Which is so damaging for one reason: the greatest
work and art comes from wrestling with the void, facing it instead of scrambling
to make it go away. The question is, when faced with your particular challenge—
whether it is researching in a new field, starting a business, producing a film,
securing a mentor, advancing an important cause—do you seek the respite of
talk or do you face the struggle head-on?
Think about it: a voice of a generation doesn’t call itself that. In fact, when
you think about it, you realize just how little these voices seem to talk. It’s a
song, it’s a speech, it’s a book—the volume of work may be light, but what’s
inside it is concentrated and impactful.
They work quietly in the corner. They turn their inner turmoil into product—
and eventually to stillness. They ignore the impulse to seek recognition before
they act. They don’t talk much. Or mind the feeling that others, out there in
public and enjoying the limelight, are somehow getting the better end of the
deal. (They are not.) They’re too busy working to do anything else. When they
do talk—it’s earned.
The only relationship between work and chatter is that one kills the other.
Let the others slap each other on the back while you’re back in the lab or the
gym or pounding the pavement. Plug that hole—that one, right in the middle of
your face—that can drain you of your vital life force. Watch what happens.
Watch how much better you get.

TO BE OR TO DO?

In this formative period, the soul is unsoiled by warfare with the world. It lies, like a block of
pure, uncut Parian marble, ready to be fashioned into—what?
—ORISON SWETT MARDEN

O

ne of the most influential strategists and practitioners in modern warfare is
someone most people have never heard of. His name was John Boyd.
He was a truly great fighter pilot, but an even better teacher and thinker. After
flying in Korea, he became the lead instructor at the elite Fighter Weapons
School at Nellis Air Force Base. He was known as “Forty-Second Boyd”—
meaning that he could defeat any opponent, from any position, in less than forty
seconds. A few years later he was quietly summoned to the Pentagon, where his
real work began.
In one sense, the fact that the average person might not have heard of John
Boyd is not unexpected. He never published any books and he wrote only one
academic paper. Only a few videos of him survive and he was rarely, if ever,
quoted in the media. Despite nearly thirty years of impeccable service, Boyd
wasn’t promoted above the rank of colonel.
On the other hand, his theories transformed maneuver warfare in almost every
branch of the armed forces, not just in his own lifetime but even more so after.
The F-15 and F-16 fighter jets, which reinvented modern military aircraft, were
his pet projects. His primary influence was as an adviser; through legendary
briefings he taught and instructed nearly every major military thinker in a
generation. His input on the war plans for Operation Desert Shield came in a
series of direct meetings with the secretary of defense, not through public or
official policy input. His primary means of effecting change was through the
collection of pupils he mentored, protected, taught, and inspired.
There are no military bases named after him. No battleships. He retired
assuming that he’d be forgotten, and without much more than a small apartment

and a pension to his name. He almost certainly had more enemies than friends.
This unusual path—What if it were deliberate? What if it made him more
influential? How crazy would that be?
In fact, Boyd was simply living the exact lesson he tried to teach each
promising young acolyte who came under his wing, who he sensed had the
potential to be something—to be something different. The rising stars he taught
probably have a lot in common with us.
The speech Boyd gave to a protégé in 1973 makes this clear. Sensing what he
knew to be a critical inflection point in the life of the young officer, Boyd called
him in for a meeting. Like many high achievers, the soldier was insecure and
impressionable. He wanted to be promoted, and he wanted to do well. He was a
leaf that could be blown in any direction and Boyd knew it. So he heard a speech
that day that Boyd would give again and again, until it became a tradition and a
rite of passage for a generation of transformative military leaders.
“Tiger, one day you will come to a fork in the road,” Boyd said to him. “And
you’re going to have to make a decision about which direction you want to go.”
Using his hands to illustrate, Boyd marked off these two directions. “If you go
that way you can be somebody. You will have to make compromises and you
will have to turn your back on your friends. But you will be a member of the
club and you will get promoted and you will get good assignments.” Then Boyd
paused, to make the alternative clear. “Or,” he said, “you can go that way and
you can do something—something for your country and for your Air Force and
for yourself. If you decide you want to do something, you may not get promoted
and you may not get the good assignments and you certainly will not be a
favorite of your superiors. But you won’t have to compromise yourself. You will
be true to your friends and to yourself. And your work might make a difference.
To be somebody or to do something. In life there is often a roll call. That’s when
you will have to make a decision.”
And then Boyd concluded with words that would guide that young man and
many of his peers for the rest of their lives. “To be or to do? Which way will you
go?”
Whatever we seek to do in life, reality soon intrudes on our youthful idealism.
This reality comes in many names and forms: incentives, commitments,
recognition, and politics. In every case, they can quickly redirect us from doing
to being. From earning to pretending. Ego aids in that deception every step of
the way. It’s why Boyd wanted young people to see that if we are not careful, we

can very easily find ourselves corrupted by the very occupation we wish to
serve.
How do you prevent derailment? Well, often we fall in love with an image of
what success looks like. In Boyd’s world, the number of stars on your shoulder
or the nature of your appointment or its location could easily be confused as a
proxy for real accomplishment. For other people, it’s their job title, the business
school they went to, the number of assistants they have, the location of their
parking space, the grants they earn, their access to the CEO, the size of their
paycheck, or the number of fans they have.
Appearances are deceiving. Having authority is not the same as being an
authority. Having the right and being right are not the same either. Being
promoted doesn’t necessarily mean you’re doing good work and it doesn’t mean
you are worthy of promotion (they call it failing upward in such bureaucracies).
Impressing people is utterly different from being truly impressive.
So who are you with? Which side will you choose? This is the roll call that
life puts before us.
Boyd had another exercise. Visiting with or speaking to groups of Air Force
officers, he’d write on the chalkboard in big letters the words: DUTY, HONOR,
COUNTRY. Then he would cross those words out and replace them with three
others: PRIDE, POWER, GREED. His point was that many of the systems and
structures in the military—the ones that soldiers navigate in order to get ahead—
can corrupt the very values they set out to serve. There’s a quip from the
historian Will Durant, that a nation is born stoic and dies epicurean. That’s the
sad truth Boyd was illustrating, how positive virtues turn sour.
How many times have we seen this played out in our own short lives—in
sports, in relationships, or projects or people that we care deeply about? This is
what the ego does. It crosses out what matters and replaces it with what doesn’t.
A lot of people want to change the world, and it’s good that they do. You want
to be the best at what you do. Nobody wants to just be an empty suit. But in
practical terms, which of the three words Boyd wrote on the chalkboard are
going to get you there? Which are you practicing now? What’s fueling you?
The choice that Boyd puts in front of us comes down to purpose. What is your
purpose? What are you here to do? Because purpose helps you answer the
question “To be or to do?“ quite easily. If what matters is you—your reputation,
your inclusion, your personal ease of life—your path is clear: Tell people what
they want to hear. Seek attention over the quiet but important work. Say yes to
promotions and generally follow the track that talented people take in the

industry or field you’ve chosen. Pay your dues, check the boxes, put in your
time, and leave things essentially as they are. Chase your fame, your salary, your
title, and enjoy them as they come.
“A man is worked upon by what he works on,” Frederick Douglass once said.
He would know. He’d been a slave, and he saw what it did to everyone involved,
including the slaveholders themselves. Once a free man, he saw that the choices
people made, about their careers and their lives, had the same effect. What you
choose to do with your time and what you choose to do for money works on you.
The egocentric path requires, as Boyd knew, many compromises.
If your purpose is something larger than you—to accomplish something, to
prove something to yourself—then suddenly everything becomes both easier and
more difficult. Easier in the sense that you know now what it is you need to do
and what is important to you. The other “choices” wash away, as they aren’t
really choices at all. They’re distractions. It’s about the doing, not the
recognition. Easier in the sense that you don’t need to compromise. Harder
because each opportunity—no matter how gratifying or rewarding—must be
evaluated along strict guidelines: Does this help me do what I have set out to do?
Does this allow me to do what I need to do? Am I being selfish or selfless?
In this course, it is not “Who do I want to be in life?” but “What is it that I
want to accomplish in life?” Setting aside selfish interest, it asks: What calling
does it serve? What principles govern my choices? Do I want to be like everyone
else or do I want to do something different?
In other words, it’s harder because everything can seem like a compromise.
Although it’s never too late, the earlier you ask yourself these questions the
better.
Boyd undeniably changed and improved his field in a way that almost no
other theorist has since Sun Tzu or von Clausewitz. He was known as Genghis
John for the way he never let obstacles or opponents stop him from what he
needed to do. His choices were not without their costs. He was also known as the
ghetto colonel because of his frugal lifestyle. He died with a drawerful of
thousands of dollars in uncashed expense checks from private contractors, which
he equated with bribes. That he never advanced above colonel was not his doing;
he was repeatedly held back for promotions. He was forgotten by history as a
punishment for the work he did.
Think about this the next time you start to feel entitled, the next time you
conflate fame and the American Dream. Think about how you might measure up
to a great man like that.

Think about this the next time you face that choice: Do I need this? Or is it
really about ego? Are you ready to make the right decision? Or do the prizes still
glitter off in the distance?
To be or to do—life is a constant roll call.

BECOME A STUDENT

Let No Man’s Ghost Come Back to Say My Training Let Me Down.
—SIGN IN THE NEW YORK FIRE DEPARTMENT TRAINING ACADEMY

I

n April in the early 1980s, a single day became one guitarist’s nightmare and
became another’s dream, and dream job. Without notice, members of the
underground metal band Metallica assembled before a planned recording session
in a decrepit warehouse in New York and informed their guitarist Dave Mustaine
he was being thrown out of the group. With few words, they handed him a bus
ticket back to San Francisco.
That same day, a decent young guitarist, Kirk Hammett, barely in his twenties
and member of a band called Exodus, was given the job. Thrown right into a
new life, he performed his first show with the band a few days later.
One would assume that this was the moment Hammett had been waiting for
his whole life. Indeed it was. Though only known in small circles at the time,
Metallica was a band that seemed destined to go places. Their music had already
begun to push the boundaries of the genre of thrash metal, and cult stardom had
already begun. Within a few short years, it would be one of the biggest bands in
the world, eventually selling more than 100 million albums.
It was around this time that Kirk came to what must have been a humbling
realization—that despite his years of playing and being invited to join Metallica,
he wasn’t as good as he’d like to be. At his home in San Francisco, he looked for
a guitar teacher. In other words, despite joining his dream group and quite
literally turning professional, Kirk insisted that he needed more instruction—that
he was still a student. The teacher he sought out had a reputation for being a
teacher’s teacher, and for working with musical prodigies like Steve Vai.
Joe Satriani, the man Hammett chose as his instructor, would himself go on to
become known as one of the best guitar players of all time and sell more than 10
million records of his unique, virtuosic music. Teaching out of a small music

shop in Berkeley, Satriani’s playing style made him an unusual choice for
Hammett. That was the point—Kirk wanted to learn what he didn’t know, to
firm up his understanding of the fundamentals so that he might continue
exploring this new genre of music he now had a chance to pursue.
Satriani makes it clear where Hammett was lacking—it wasn’t talent,
certainly. “The main thing with Kirk . . . was he was a really good guitar player
when he walked in the door. He was already playing lead guitar . . . he was
already shredding. He had a great right hand, he knew most of his chords, he just
didn’t learn how to play in an environment where he learned all the names and
how to connect everything together.”
That didn’t mean that their sessions were some sort of fun study group. In
fact, Satriani explained that what separated Hammett from the others was his
willingness to endure the type of instruction they wouldn’t. “He was a good
student. Many of his friends and contemporaries would storm out complaining
thinking I was too harsh a teacher.”
Satriani’s system was clear: that there would be weekly lessons, that these
lessons must be learned, and if they weren’t, that Hammett was wasting
everyone’s time and needn’t bother to come back. So for the next two years Kirk
did as Satriani required, returning every week for objective feedback, judgment,
and drilling in technique and musical theory for the instrument he would soon be
playing in front of thousands, then tens of thousands, and then literally hundreds
of thousands of people. Even after that two-year study period, he would bring to
Satriani licks and riffs he’d been working on with the band, and learned to pare
down the instinct for more, and hone his ability to do more with fewer notes, and
to focus on feeling those notes and expressing them accordingly. Each time, he
improved as a player and as an artist.
The power of being a student is not just that it is an extended period of
instruction, it also places the ego and ambition in someone else’s hands. There is
a sort of ego ceiling imposed—one knows that he is not better than the “master”
he apprentices under. Not even close. You defer to them, you subsume yourself.
You cannot fake or bullshit them. An education can’t be “hacked”; there are no
shortcuts besides hacking it every single day. If you don’t, they drop you.
We don’t like thinking that someone is better than us. Or that we have a lot
left to learn. We want to be done. We want to be ready. We’re busy and
overburdened. For this reason, updating your appraisal of your talents in a
downward direction is one of the most difficult things to do in life—but it is
almost always a component of mastery. The pretense of knowledge is our most

dangerous vice, because it prevents us from getting any better. Studious selfassessment is the antidote.
The result, no matter what your musical tastes happen to be, was that
Hammett became one of the great metal guitarists in the world, taking thrash
metal from an underground movement into a thriving global musical genre. Not
only that, but from those lessons, Satriani honed his own technique and became
much better himself. Both the student and the teacher would go on to fill
stadiums and remake the musical landscape.
The mixed martial arts pioneer and multi-title champion Frank Shamrock has
a system he trains fighters in that he calls plus, minus, and equal. Each fighter, to
become great, he said, needs to have someone better that they can learn from,
someone lesser who they can teach, and someone equal that they can challenge
themselves against.
The purpose of Shamrock’s formula is simple: to get real and continuous
feedback about what they know and what they don’t know from every angle. It
purges out the ego that puffs us up, the fear that makes us doubt ourselves, and
any laziness that might make us want to coast. As Shamrock observed, “False
ideas about yourself destroy you. For me, I always stay a student. That’s what
martial arts are about, and you have to use that humility as a tool. You put
yourself beneath someone you trust.” This begins by accepting that others know
more than you and that you can benefit from their knowledge, and then seeking
them out and knocking down the illusions you have about yourself.
The need for a student mind-set doesn’t stop with fighting or music. A
scientist must know the core principles of science and the discoveries occurring
on the cutting edge. A philosopher must know deeply, and also know how little
they know, as Socrates did. A writer must be versed in the canon—and read and
be challenged by her contemporaries too. A historian must know ancient and
modern history, as well as their specialty. Professional athletes have teams of
coaches, and even powerful politicians have advisers and mentors.
Why? To become great and to stay great, they must all know what came
before, what is going on now, and what comes next. They must internalize the
fundamentals of their domain and what surrounds them, without ossifying or
becoming stuck in time. They must be always learning. We must all become our
own teachers, tutors, and critics.
Think about what Hammett could have done—what we might have done in
his position were we to suddenly find ourselves a rock star, or a soon-to-be-rock
star in our chosen field. The temptation is to think: I’ve made it. I’ve arrived.

They tossed the other guy because he’s not as good as I am. They chose me
because I have what it takes. Had he done that, we’d probably have never heard
of him or the band. There are, after all, plenty of forgotten metal groups from the
1980s.
A true student is like a sponge. Absorbing what goes on around him, filtering
it, latching on to what he can hold. A student is self-critical and self-motivated,
always trying to improve his understanding so that he can move on to the next
topic, the next challenge. A real student is also his own teacher and his own
critic. There is no room for ego there.
Take fighting as an example again, where self-awareness is particularly
crucial because opponents are constantly looking to match strength against
weakness. If a fighter is not capable of learning and practicing every day, if he is
not relentlessly looking for areas of improvement, examining his own
shortcomings, and finding new techniques to borrow from peers and opponents,
he will be broken down and destroyed.
It is not all that different for the rest of us. Are we not fighting for or against
something? Do you think you are the only one who hopes to achieve your goal?
You can’t possibly believe you’re the only one reaching for that brass ring.
It tends to surprise people how humble aspiring greats seem to have been.
What do you mean they weren’t aggressive, entitled, aware of their own
greatness or their destiny? The reality is that, though they were confident, the
act of being an eternal student kept these men and women humble.
“It is impossible to learn that which one thinks one already knows,” Epictetus
says. You can’t learn if you think you already know. You will not find the answers
if you’re too conceited and self-assured to ask the questions. You cannot get
better if you’re convinced you are the best.
The art of taking feedback is such a crucial skill in life, particularly harsh and
critical feedback. We not only need to take this harsh feedback, but actively
solicit it, labor to seek out the negative precisely when our friends and family
and brain are telling us that we’re doing great. The ego avoids such feedback at
all costs, however. Who wants to remand themselves to remedial training? It
thinks it already knows how and who we are—that is, it thinks we are
spectacular, perfect, genius, truly innovative. It dislikes reality and prefers its
own assessment.
Ego doesn’t allow for proper incubation either. To become what we ultimately
hope to become often takes long periods of obscurity, of sitting and wrestling
with some topic or paradox. Humility is what keeps us there, concerned that we

don’t know enough and that we must continue to study. Ego rushes to the end,
rationalizes that patience is for losers (wrongly seeing it as a weakness), and
assumes that we’re good enough to give our talents a go in the world.
As we sit down to proof our work, as we make our first elevator pitch,
prepare to open our first shop, as we stare out into the dress rehearsal audience,
ego is the enemy—giving us wicked feedback, disconnected from reality. It’s
defensive, precisely when we cannot afford to be defensive. It blocks us from
improving by telling us that we don’t need to improve. Then we wonder why we
don’t get the results we want, why others are better and why their success is
more lasting.
Today, books are cheaper than ever. Courses are free. Access to teachers is no
longer a barrier—technology has done away with that. There is no excuse for not
getting your education, and because the information we have before us is so vast,
there is no excuse for ever ending that process either.
Our teachers in life are not only those we pay, as Hammett paid Satriani. Nor
are they necessarily part of some training dojo, like it is for Shamrock. Many of
the best teachers are free. They volunteer because, like you, they once were
young and had the same goals you do. Many don’t even know they are teaching
—they are simply exemplars, or even historical figures whose lessons survive in
books and essays. But ego makes us so hardheaded and hostile to feedback that
it drives them away or puts them beyond our reach.
It’s why the old proverb says, “When student is ready, the teacher appears.”

DON’T BE PASSIONATE

You seem to want that vivida vis animi which spurs and excites most young men to please, to
shine, to excel. Without the desire and the pains necessary to be considerable, depend upon it,
you never can be so.
—LORD CHESTERFIELD

P

assion—it’s all about passion. Find your passion. Live passionately. Inspire
the world with your passion.
People go to Burning Man to find passion, to be around passion, to rekindle
their passion. Same goes for TED and the now enormous SXSW and a thousand
other events, retreats, and summits, all fueled by what they claim to be life’s
most important force.
Here’s what those same people haven’t told you: your passion may be the
very thing holding you back from power or influence or accomplishment.
Because just as often, we fail with—no, because of—passion.
Early on in her ascendant political career, a visitor once spoke of Eleanor
Roosevelt’s “passionate interest” in a piece of social legislation. The person had
meant it as a compliment. But Eleanor’s response is illustrative. “Yes,” she did
support the cause, she said. “But I hardly think the word ‘passionate’ applies to
me.”
As a genteel, accomplished, and patient woman born while the embers of the
quiet Victorian virtues were still warm, Roosevelt was above passion. She had
purpose. She had direction. She wasn’t driven by passion, but by reason.
George W. Bush, Dick Cheney, and Donald Rumsfeld, on the other hand,
were passionate about Iraq. Christopher McCandless was bursting with passion
as he headed “into the wild.” So was Robert Falcon Scott as he set out to explore
the arctic, bitten as he was with “the Pole mania” (as were many climbers of the
tragic 1996 Everest climb, momentarily struck with what psychologists now call
“goalodicy”). The inventor and investors of the Segway believed they had a
world-changing innovation on their hands and put everything into evangelizing

it. That all of these talented, smart individuals were fervent believers in what
they sought to do is without dispute. It’s also clear that they were also
unprepared and incapable of grasping the objections and real concerns of
everyone else around them.
The same is true for countless entrepreneurs, authors, chefs, business owners,
politicians, and designers that you’ve never heard of—and never will hear of,
because they sunk their own ships before they’d hardly left the harbor. Like
every other dilettante, they had passion and lacked something else.
To be clear, I’m not talking about caring. I’m talking about passion of a
different sort—unbridled enthusiasm, our willingness to pounce on what’s in
front of us with the full measure of our zeal, the “bundle of energy” that our
teachers and gurus have assured us is our most important asset. It is that burning,
unquenchable desire to start or to achieve some vague, ambitious, and distant
goal. This seemingly innocuous motivation is so far from the right track it hurts.
Remember, “zealot” is just a nice way to say “crazy person.”
A young basketball player named Lewis Alcindor Jr., who won three national
championships with John Wooden at UCLA, used one word to describe the style
of his famous coach: “dispassionate.” As in not passionate. Wooden wasn’t
about rah-rah speeches or inspiration. He saw those extra emotions as a burden.
Instead, his philosophy was about being in control and doing your job and never
being “passion’s slave.” The player who learned that lesson from Wooden would
later change his name to one you remember better: Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.
No one would describe Eleanor Roosevelt or John Wooden or his notoriously
quiet player Kareem as apathetic. They wouldn’t have said they were frenetic or
zealous either. Roosevelt, one of the most powerful and influential female
activists in history and certainly America’s most important First Lady, was
known primarily for her grace, her poise, and her sense of direction. Wooden
won ten titles in twelve years, including seven in a row, because he developed a
system for winning and worked with his players to follow it. Neither of them
were driven by excitement, nor were they bodies in constant motion. Instead, it
took them years to become the person they became known as. It was a process of
accumulation.
In our endeavors, we will face complex problems, often in situations we’ve
never faced before. Opportunities are not usually deep, virgin pools that require
courage and boldness to dive into, but instead are obscured, dusted over, blocked
by various forms of resistance. What is really called for in these circumstances is
clarity, deliberateness, and methodological determination.

But too often, we proceed like this . . .
A flash of inspiration: I want to do the best and biggest ______ ever. Be the
youngest ______. The only one to ______. The “firstest with the mostest.”
The advice: Okay, well, here’s what you’ll need to do step-by-step to
accomplish it.
The reality: We hear what we want to hear. We do what we feel like doing,
and despite being incredibly busy and working very hard, we accomplish very
little. Or worse, find ourselves in a mess we never anticipated.
Because we only seem to hear about the passion of successful people, we
forget that failures shared the same trait. We don’t conceive of the consequences
until we look at their trajectory. With the Segway, the inventor and investors
wrongly assumed a demand much greater than ever existed. With the run-up to
the war in Iraq, its proponents ignored objections and negative feedback because
they conflicted with what they so deeply needed to believe. The tragic end to the
Into the Wild story is the result of youthful naiveté and a lack of preparation.
With Robert Falcon Scott, it was overconfidence and zeal without consideration
of the real dangers. We imagine Napoleon was brimming with passion as he
contemplated the invasion of Russia and only finally became free of it as he
limped home with a fraction of the men he’d so confidently left with. In many
more examples we see the same mistakes: overinvesting, underinvesting, acting
before someone is really ready, breaking things that required delicacy—not so
much malice as the drunkenness of passion.
Passion typically masks a weakness. Its breathlessness and impetuousness
and franticness are poor substitutes for discipline, for mastery, for strength and
purpose and perseverance. You need to be able to spot this in others and in
yourself, because while the origins of passion may be earnest and good, its
effects are comical and then monstrous.
Passion is seen in those who can tell you in great detail who they intend to
become and what their success will be like—they might even be able to tell you
specifically when they intend to achieve it or describe to you legitimate and
sincere worries they have about the burdens of such accomplishments. They can
tell you all the things they’re going to do, or have even begun, but they cannot
show you their progress. Because there rarely is any.
How can someone be busy and not accomplish anything? Well, that’s the
passion paradox.
If the definition of insanity is trying the same thing over and over and
expecting different results, then passion is a form of mental retardation—

deliberately blunting our most critical cognitive functions. The waste is often
appalling in retrospect; the best years of our life burned out like a pair of
spinning tires against the asphalt.
Dogs, god bless them, are passionate. As numerous squirrels, birds, boxes,
blankets, and toys can tell you, they do not accomplish most of what they set out
to do. A dog has an advantage in all this: a graciously short short-term memory
that keeps at bay the creeping sense of futility and impotence. Reality for us
humans, on the other hand, has no reason to be sensitive to the illusions we
operate under. Eventually it will intrude.
What humans require in our ascent is purpose and realism. Purpose, you
could say, is like passion with boundaries. Realism is detachment and
perspective.
When we are young, or when our cause is young, we feel so intensely—
passion like our hormones runs strongest in youth—that it seems wrong to take it
slow. This is just our impatience. This is our inability to see that burning
ourselves out or blowing ourselves up isn’t going to hurry the journey along.
Passion is about. (I am so passionate about ______.) Purpose is to and for. (I
must do ______. I was put here to accomplish ______. I am willing to endure
______ for the sake of this.) Actually, purpose deemphasizes the I. Purpose is
about pursuing something outside yourself as opposed to pleasuring yourself.
More than purpose, we also need realism. Where do we start? What do we do
first? What do we do right now? How are we sure that what we’re doing is
moving us forward? What are we benchmarking ourselves against?
“Great passions are maladies without hope,” as Goethe once said. Which is
why a deliberate, purposeful person operates on a different level, beyond the
sway or the sickness. They hire professionals and use them. They ask questions,
they ask what could go wrong, they ask for examples. They plan for
contingencies. Then they are off to the races. Usually they get started with small
steps, complete them, and look for feedback on how the next set can be better.
They lock in gains, and then get better as they go, often leveraging those gains to
grow exponentially rather than arithmetically.
Is an iterative approach less exciting than manifestos, epiphanies, flying
across the country to surprise someone, or sending four-thousand-word streamof-consciousness e-mails in the middle of the night? Of course. Is it less
glamorous and bold than going all in and maxing out your credit cards because
you believe in yourself? Absolutely. Same goes for the spreadsheets, the
meetings, the trips, the phone calls, software, tools, and internal systems—and

every how-to article ever written about them and the routines of famous people.
Passion is form over function. Purpose is function, function, function.
The critical work that you want to do will require your deliberation and
consideration. Not passion. Not naïveté.
It’d be far better if you were intimidated by what lies ahead—humbled by its
magnitude and determined to see it through regardless. Leave passion for the
amateurs. Make it about what you feel you must do and say, not what you care
about and wish to be. Remember Talleyrand’s epigram for diplomats, “Surtout,
pas trop de zèle” (“Above all, not too much zeal”). Then you will do great
things. Then you will stop being your old, good-intentioned, but ineffective self.

FOLLOW THE CANVAS STRATEGY

Great men have almost always shown themselves as ready to obey as they afterwards proved
able to command.
—LORD MAHON

I

n the Roman system of art and science, there existed a concept for which we
have only a partial analog. Successful businessmen, politicians, or rich
playboys would subsidize a number of writers, thinkers, artists, and performers.
More than just being paid to produce works of art, these artists performed a
number of tasks in exchange for protection, food, and gifts. One of the roles was
that of an anteambulo—literally meaning “one who clears the path.” An
anteambulo proceeded in front of his patron anywhere they traveled in Rome,
making way, communicating messages, and generally making the patron’s life
easier.
The famous epigrammist Martial fulfilled this role for many years, serving for
a time under the patron Mela, a wealthy businessman and brother of the Stoic
philosopher and political adviser Seneca. Born without a rich family, Martial
also served under another businessman named Petilius. As a young writer, he
spent most of his day traveling from the home of one rich patron to another,
providing services, paying his respects, and receiving small token payments and
favors in return.
Here’s the problem: like most of us with our internships and entry-level
positions (or later on, publishers or bosses or clients), Martial absolutely hated
every minute of it. He seemed to believe that this system somehow made him a
slave. Aspiring to live like some country squire, like the patrons he serviced,
Martial wanted money and an estate that was all his own. There, he dreamed, he
could finally produce his works in peace and independence. As a result, his
writing often drags with a hatred and bitterness about Rome’s upper crust, from
which he believed he was cruelly shunted aside.

For all his impotent rage, what Martial couldn’t see was that it was his unique
position as an outsider to society that gave him such fascinating insight into
Roman culture that it survives to this day. Instead of being pained by such a
system, what if he’d been able to come to terms with it? What if—gasp—he
could have appreciated the opportunities it offered? Nope. It seemed to eat him
up inside instead.
It’s a common attitude that transcends generations and societies. The angry,
unappreciated genius is forced to do stuff she doesn’t like, for people she doesn’t
respect, as she makes her way in the world. How dare they force me to grovel
like this! The injustice! The waste!
We see it in recent lawsuits in which interns sue their employers for pay. We
see kids more willing to live at home with their parents than to submit to
something they’re “overqualified” to work for. We see it in an inability to meet
anyone else on their terms, an unwillingness to take a step back in order to
potentially take several steps forward. I will not let them get one over on me. I’d
rather we both have nothing instead.
It’s worth taking a look at the supposed indignities of “serving” someone else.
Because in reality, not only is the apprentice model responsible for some of the
greatest art in the history of the world—everyone from Michelangelo to
Leonardo da Vinci to Benjamin Franklin has been forced to navigate such a
system—but if you’re going to be the big deal you think you are going to be,
isn’t this a rather trivial temporary imposition?
When someone gets his first job or joins a new organization, he’s often given
this advice: Make other people look good and you will do well. Keep your head
down, they say, and serve your boss. Naturally, this is not what the kid who was
chosen over all the other kids for the position wants to hear. It’s not what a
Harvard grad expects—after all, they got that degree precisely to avoid this
supposed indignity.
Let’s flip it around so it doesn’t seem so demeaning: It’s not about kissing ass.
It’s not about making someone look good. It’s about providing the support so
that others can be good. The better wording for the advice is this: Find canvases
for other people to paint on. Be an anteambulo. Clear the path for the people
above you and you will eventually create a path for yourself.
When you are just starting out, we can be sure of a few fundamental realities:
1) You’re not nearly as good or as important as you think you are; 2) You have
an attitude that needs to be readjusted; 3) Most of what you think you know or
most of what you learned in books or in school is out of date or wrong.

There’s one fabulous way to work all that out of your system: attach yourself
to people and organizations who are already successful and subsume your
identity into theirs and move both forward simultaneously. It’s certainly more
glamorous to pursue your own glory—though hardly as effective. Obeisance is
the way forward.
That’s the other effect of this attitude: it reduces your ego at a critical time in
your career, letting you absorb everything you can without the obstructions that
block others’ vision and progress.
No one is endorsing sycophancy. Instead, it’s about seeing what goes on from
the inside, and looking for opportunities for someone other than yourself.
Remember that anteambulo means clearing the path—finding the direction
someone already intended to head and helping them pack, freeing them up to
focus on their strengths. In fact, making things better rather than simply looking
as if you are.
Many people know of Benjamin Franklin’s famous pseudonymous letters
written under names like Silence Dogwood. What a clever young prodigy, they
think, and miss the most impressive part entirely: Franklin wrote those letters,
submitted them by sliding them under the print-shop door, and received
absolutely no credit for them until much later in his life. In fact, it was his
brother, the owner, who profited from their immense popularity, regularly
running them on the front page of his newspaper. Franklin was playing the long
game, though—learning how public opinion worked, generating awareness of
what he believed in, crafting his style and tone and wit. It was a strategy he used
time and again over his career—once even publishing in his competitor’s paper
in order to undermine a third competitor—for Franklin saw the constant benefit
in making other people look good and letting them take credit for your ideas.
Bill Belichick, the four-time Super Bowl–winning head coach of the New
England Patriots, made his way up the ranks of the NFL by loving and mastering
the one part of the job that coaches disliked at the time: analyzing film. His first
job in professional football, for the Baltimore Colts, was one he volunteered to
take without pay—and his insights, which provided ammunition and critical
strategies for the game, were attributed exclusively to the more senior coaches.
He thrived on what was considered grunt work, asked for it and strove to
become the best at precisely what others thought they were too good for. “He
was like a sponge, taking it all in, listening to everything,” one coach said. “You
gave him an assignment and he disappeared into a room and you didn’t see him

again until it was done, and then he wanted to do more,” said another. As you
can guess, Belichick started getting paid very soon.
Before that, as a young high school player, he was so knowledgeable about
the game that he functioned as a sort of assistant coach even while playing the
game. Belichick’s father, himself an assistant football coach for Navy, taught
him a critical lesson in football politics: that if he wanted to give his coach
feedback or question a decision, he needed to do it in private and self-effacingly
so as not to offend his superior. He learned how to be a rising star without
threatening or alienating anyone. In other words, he had mastered the canvas
strategy.
You can see how easily entitlement and a sense of superiority (the trappings
of ego) would have made the accomplishments of either of these men
impossible. Franklin would never have been published if he’d prioritized credit
over creative expression—indeed, when his brother found out, he literally beat
him out of jealousy and anger. Belichick would have pissed off his coach and
then probably been benched if he had one-upped him in public. He certainly
wouldn’t have taken his first job for free, and he wouldn’t have sat through
thousands of hours of film if he cared about status. Greatness comes from
humble beginnings; it comes from grunt work. It means you’re the least
important person in the room—until you change that with results.
There is an old saying, “Say little, do much.” What we really ought to do is
update and apply a version of that to our early approach. Be lesser, do more.
Imagine if for every person you met, you thought of some way to help them,
something you could do for them? And you looked at it in a way that entirely
benefited them and not you. The cumulative effect this would have over time
would be profound: You’d learn a great deal by solving diverse problems. You’d
develop a reputation for being indispensable. You’d have countless new
relationships. You’d have an enormous bank of favors to call upon down the
road.
That’s what the canvas strategy is about—helping yourself by helping others.
Making a concerted effort to trade your short-term gratification for a longer-term
payoff. Whereas everyone else wants to get credit and be “respected,” you can
forget credit. You can forget it so hard that you’re glad when others get it instead
of you—that was your aim, after all. Let the others take their credit on credit,
while you defer and earn interest on the principal.
The strategy part of it is the hardest. It’s easy to be bitter, like Martial. To hate
even the thought of subservience. To despise those who have more means, more

experience, or more status than you. To tell yourself that every second not spent
doing your work, or working on yourself, is a waste of your gift. To insist, I will
not be demeaned like this.
Once we fight this emotional and egotistical impulse, the canvas strategy is
easy. The iterations are endless.
Maybe it’s coming up with ideas to hand over to your boss.
Find people, thinkers, up-and-comers to introduce them to each
other. Cross wires to create new sparks.
Find what nobody else wants to do and do it.
Find inefficiencies and waste and redundancies. Identify leaks and
patches to free up resources for new areas.
Produce more than everyone else and give your ideas away
In other words, discover opportunities to promote their creativity, find outlets
and people for collaboration, and eliminate distractions that hinder their progress
and focus. It is a rewarding and infinitely scalable power strategy. Consider each
one an investment in relationships and in your own development.
The canvas strategy is there for you at any time. There is no expiration date
on it either. It’s one of the few that age does not limit—on either side, young or
old. You can start at any time—before you have a job, before you’re hired and
while you’re doing something else, or if you’re starting something new or find
yourself inside an organization without strong allies or support. You may even
find that there’s no reason to ever stop doing it, even once you’ve graduated to
heading your own projects. Let it become natural and permanent; let others
apply it to you while you’re too busy applying it to those above you.
Because if you pick up this mantle once, you’ll see what most people’s egos
prevent them from appreciating: the person who clears the path ultimately
controls its direction, just as the canvas shapes the painting.

RESTRAIN YOURSELF

I have observed that those who have accomplished the greatest results are those who “keep
under the body”; are those who never grow excited or lose self-control, but are always calm,
self-possessed, patient, and polite.
—BOOKER T. WASHINGTON

P

eople who knew Jackie Robinson as a young man probably wouldn’t have
predicted that they’d one day see him become the first black player in Major
League Baseball. Not that he wasn’t talented, or that the idea of eventually
integrating white baseball was inconceivable, it’s that he wasn’t exactly known
for his restraint and poise.
As a teenager, Robinson ran with a small gang of friends who regularly found
themselves in trouble with local police. He challenged a fellow student to a fight
at a junior college picnic for using a slur. In a basketball game, he surreptitiously
struck a hard-fouling white opponent with the ball so forcefully that the kid bled
everywhere. He was arrested more than once for arguing with and challenging
police, who he felt treated him unfairly.
Before he started at UCLA, he spent the night in jail (and had a gun drawn on
him by an officer) for nearly fighting a white man who’d insulted his friends.
And in addition to rumors of inciting protests against racism, Jackie Robinson
effectively ended his career as a military officer at Camp Hood in 1944 when a
bus driver attempted to force him to sit in the back in spite of laws that forbade
segregation on base buses. By arguing and cursing at the driver and then directly
challenging his commanding officer after the fracas, Jackie set in motion a series
of events that led to a court-martial. Despite being acquitted, he was discharged
shortly afterward.
It’s not just understandable and human that he did this; it was probably the
right thing to do. Why should he let anyone else treat him that way? No one
should have to stand for that.

Except sometimes they do. Are there not goals so important that we’d put up
with anything to achieve them?
When Branch Rickey, the manager and owner of the Brooklyn Dodgers,
scouted Jackie to potentially become the first black player in baseball, he had
one question: Do you have the guts? “I’m looking,” Rickey told him, “for a ball
player with the guts not to fight back.” In fact, in their famous meeting, Rickey
playacted the abuse that Robinson was likely to experience if he accepted
Rickey’s challenge: a hotel clerk refusing him a room, a rude waiter in a
restaurant, an opponent shouting slurs. This, Robinson assured him, he was
ready to handle.
There were plenty of players Rickey could have gone with. But he needed
one who wouldn’t let his ego block him from seeing the bigger picture.
As he started in baseball’s farm system, then in the pros, Robinson faced
more than just slights from service staff or reticent players. There was an
aggressive, coordinated campaign to libel, boo, provoke, freeze out, attack,
maim, or even kill. In his career, he was hit by more than seventy-two pitches,
nearly had his Achilles tendon taken out by players who aimed their spikes at
him, and that says nothing of the calls he was cheated out of and the breaks of
the game that didn’t go his way. Yet Jackie Robinson held to his unwritten pact
with Rickey, never giving into explosive anger—however deserved. In fact, in
nine years in the league, he never hit another player with his fist.
Athletes seem spoiled and hotheaded to us today, but we have no concept of
what the leagues were like then. In 1956, Ted Williams, one of the most revered
and respected players in the history of the game, was once caught spitting at his
fans. As a white player he could not only get away with this, he later told
reporters, “I’m not a bit sorry for what I did. I was right and I’d spit again at the
same people who booed me today . . . Nobody’s going to stop me from spitting.”
For a black player, this sort of behavior would have been not only unthinkable
but shortsighted beyond comprehension. Robinson had no such freedom—it
would have ended not only his career, but set back his grand experiment for a
generation.
Jackie’s path called for him to put aside both his ego and in some respects his
basic sense of fairness and rights as a human being. Early in his career, the
manager of the Philadelphia Phillies, Ben Chapman, was particularly brutal in
his taunting during a game. “They’re waiting for you in the jungles, black boy!”
he yelled over and over. “We don’t want you here, nigger.” Not only did Jackie
not respond—despite, as he later wrote, wanting to “grab one of those white sons

of bitches and smash his teeth in with my despised black fist”—a month later he
agreed to take a friendly photo with Chapman to help save the man’s job.
The thought of touching, posing with such an asshole, even sixty years
removed, almost turns the stomach. Robinson called it one of the most difficult
things he ever did, but he was willing to because it was part of a larger plan. He
understood that certain forces were trying to bait him, to ruin him. Knowing
what he wanted and needed to do in baseball, it was clear what he would have to
tolerate in order do it. He shouldn’t have had to, but he did.
Our own path, whatever we aspire to, will in some ways be defined by the
amount of nonsense we are willing to deal with. Our humiliations will pale in
comparison to Robinson’s, but it will still be hard. It will still be tough to keep
our self-control.
The fighter Bas Rutten sometimes writes the letter R on both his hands before
fights—for the word rustig, which means “relax” in Dutch. Getting angry,
getting emotional, losing restraint is a recipe for failure in the ring. You cannot,
as John Steinbeck once wrote to his editor, “[lose] temper as a refuge from
despair.” Your ego will do you no favors here, whether you’re struggling with a
publisher, with critics, with enemies, or a capricious boss. It doesn’t matter that
they don’t understand or that you know better. It’s too early for that. It’s too
soon.
Oh, you went to college? That doesn’t mean the world is yours by right. But it
was the Ivy League? Well, people are still going to treat you poorly, and they will
still yell at you. You have a million dollars or a wall full of awards? That doesn’t
mean anything in the new field you’re trying to tackle.
It doesn’t matter how talented you are, how great your connections are, how
much money you have. When you want to do something—something big and
important and meaningful—you will be subjected to treatment ranging from
indifference to outright sabotage. Count on it.
In this scenario, ego is the absolute opposite of what is needed. Who can
afford to be jerked around by impulses, or believe that you’re god’s gift to
humanity, or too important to put up with anything you don’t like?
Those who have subdued their ego understand that it doesn’t degrade you
when others treat you poorly; it degrades them.
Up ahead there will be: Slights. Dismissals. Little fuck yous. One-sided
compromises. You’ll get yelled at. You’ll have to work behind the scenes to
salvage what should have been easy. All this will make you angry. This will

make you want to fight back. This will make you want to say: I am better than
this. I deserve more.
Of course, you’ll want to throw that in other people’s faces. Worse, you’ll
want to get in other people’s faces, people who don’t deserve the respect,
recognition, or rewards they are getting. In fact, those people will often get perks
instead of you. When someone doesn’t reckon you with the seriousness that
you’d like, the impulse is to correct them. (As we all wish to say: Do you know
who I am?!) You want to remind them of what they’ve forgotten; your ego
screams for you to indulge it.
Instead, you must do nothing. Take it. Eat it until you’re sick. Endure it.
Quietly brush it off and work harder. Play the game. Ignore the noise; for the
love of God, do not let it distract you. Restraint is a difficult skill but a critical
one. You will often be tempted, you will probably even be overcome. No one is
perfect with it, but try we must.
It is a timeless fact of life that the up-and-coming must endure the abuses of
the entrenched. Robinson was twenty-eight when he started with the Dodgers,
and he’d already paid plenty of dues in life as both a black man and a soldier.
Still, he was forced to do it again. It’s a sad fact of life that new talents are
regularly missed, and even when recognized, often unappreciated. The reasons
always vary, but it’s a part of the journey.
But you’re not able to change the system until after you’ve made it. In the
meantime, you’ll have to find some way to make it suit your purposes—even if
those purposes are just extra time to develop properly, to learn from others on
their dime, to build your base and establish yourself.
As Robinson succeeded, after he had proved himself as the Rookie of the
Year and as an MVP, and as his spot on the Dodgers was certain, he began to
more clearly assert himself and his boundaries as a player and as a man. Having
carved out his space, he felt that he could argue with umpires, he could throw his
shoulder if he needed to make a player back off or to send a message.
No matter how confident and famous Robinson became, he never spit on
fans. He never did anything that undermined his legacy. A class act from opening
day until the end, Jackie Robinson was not without passion. He had a temper and
frustrations like all of us do. But he learned early that the tightrope he walked
would tolerate only restraint and had no forgiveness for ego.
Honestly, not many paths do.

GET OUT OF YOUR OWN HEAD

A person who thinks all the time has nothing to think about except thoughts, so he loses touch
with reality and lives in a world of illusions.
—ALAN WATTS

I

t is Holden Caulfield, the self-absorbed boy walking the streets of Manhattan,
struggling to adjust to the world. It is a young Arturo Bandini in Los Angeles,
alienating every person he meets as he tries to become a famous writer. It is the
blue blood Binx Bolling in 1950s uptown New Orleans, trying to escape the
“everydayness” of life.
These fictional characters all had something in common: they couldn’t get out
of their own heads.
In J. D. Salinger’s The Catcher in the Rye, Holden can’t stay in school, is
petrified of growing up, and wants desperately to get away from it all. In John
Fante’s Ask the Dust (part of a series known as The Bandini Quartet), this young
writer doesn’t experience the life he is living, he sees it all “across a page in a
typewriter,” wondering if nearly every second of his life is a poem, a play, a
story, a news article with him as its main character. In Walker Percy’s The
Moviegoer, his protagonist, Binx, is addicted to watching movies, preferring an
idealized version of life on the screen to his own uncomfortable ennui.
It’s always dangerous to psychologize a writer based on his work, but these
are famously autobiographical novels. When we look at the writers’ lives, the
facts are clear: J. D. Salinger really did suffer from a sort of self-obsession and
immaturity that made the world too much for him to bear, driving him from
human contact and paralyzing his genius. John Fante struggled to reconcile his
enormous ego and insecurity with relative obscurity for most of his career,
eventually abandoning his novels for the golf course and Hollywood bars. Only
near death, blind with diabetes, was he finally able to get serious again. The

Moviegoer, Walker Percy’s first book, came only after he’d conquered his almost
teenage indolence and existential crisis, which lasted alarmingly into his forties.
How much better could these writers have been had they managed to get
through these troubles earlier? How much easier would their lives have been?
It’s an urgent question they pushed onto their readers with their cautionary
characters.
Because sadly, this trait, the inability to get out of one’s head, is not restricted
to fiction. Twenty-four hundred years ago, Plato spoke of the type of people who
are guilty of “feasting on their own thoughts.” It was apparently common
enough even then to find people who “instead of finding out how something they
desire might actually come about, [they] pass that over, so as to avoid tiring
deliberations about what’s possible. They assume that what they desire is
available and proceed to arrange the rest, taking pleasure in thinking through
everything they’ll do when they have what they want, thereby making their lazy
souls even lazier.” Real people preferring to live in passionate fiction than in
actual reality.
The Civil War general George McClellan is the perfect example of this
archetype. He was chosen to command the Union forces because he checked all
the boxes of what a great general should be: West Point grad, proven in battle, a
student of history, of regal bearing, loved by his men.
Why did he turn out to be quite possibly the worst Union general, even in a
crowded field of incompetent and self-absorbed leaders? Because he could never
get out of his own head. He was in love with his vision of himself as the head of
a grand army. He could prepare an army for battle like a professional, but when
it came to lead one into battle, when the rubber needed to meet the road, troubles
arose.
He became laughably convinced that the enemy was growing larger and
larger (it wasn’t—at one point he actually had a three-times advantage). He was
convinced of constant threats and intrigues from his political allies (there weren’t
any). He was convinced that the only way to win the war was with the perfect
plan and a single decisive campaign (he was wrong). He was so convinced of all
of it that he froze and basically did nothing . . . for months at a time.
McClellan was constantly thinking about himself and how wonderful he was
doing—congratulating himself for victories not yet won, and more often,
horrible defeats he had saved the cause from. When anyone—including his
superiors—questioned this comforting fiction, he reacted like a petulant,
delusional, vainglorious, and selfish ass. By itself that’s insufferable, but it meant

another thing: his personality made it impossible to do what he needed to do
most—win battles.
A historian who fought under McClellan at Antietam later summed it up: “His
egotism is simply colossal—there is no other word for it.” We tend to think that
ego equals confidence, which is what we need to be in charge. In fact, it can
have the opposite effect. In McClellan’s case it deprived him of the ability to
lead. It robbed him of the ability to think that he even needed to act.
The repeated opportunities he missed would be laughable were it not for the
thousands and thousands of lives they cost. The situation was made worse by the
fact that two pious, quiet Southerners—Lee and Stonewall Jackson—with a
penchant for taking the initiative were able to embarrass him with inferior
numbers and inferior resources. Which is what happens when leaders get stuck
in their own heads. It can happen to us too.
The novelist Anne Lamott describes that ego story well. “If you are not
careful,” she warns young writers, “station KFKD (K-Fucked) will play in your
head twenty-four hours a day, nonstop, in stereo.”
Out of the right speaker in your inner ear will come the endless stream of
self-aggrandizement, the recitation of one’s specialness, of how much
more open and gifted and brilliant and knowing and misunderstood and
humble one is. Out of the left speaker will be the rap songs of selfloathing, the lists of all the things one doesn’t do well, of all the mistakes
one has made today and over an entire lifetime, the doubt, the assertion
that everything that one touches turns to shit, that one doesn’t do
relationships well, that one is in every way a fraud, incapable of selfless
love, that one had no talent or insight, and on and on and on.
Anyone—particularly the ambitious—can fall prey to this narration, good and
bad. It is natural for any young, ambitious person (or simply someone whose
ambition is young) to get excited and swept up by their thoughts and feelings.
Especially in a world that tells us to keep and promote a “personal brand.” We’re
required to tell stories in order to sell our work and our talents, and after enough
time, forget where the line is that separates our fictions from reality.
Ultimately this disability will paralyze us. Or it will become a wall between
us and the information we need to do our jobs—which is largely why McClellan
continually fell for flawed intelligence reports he ought to have known were
wrong. The idea that his task was relatively straightforward, that he just needed

to get started, was almost too easy and too obvious to someone who had thought
so much about it all.
He’s not that different from the rest of us. We’re all full of anxieties, doubts,
impotence, pains, and sometimes a little tinge of crazy. We’re like teenagers in
this regard.
As the psychologist David Elkind has famously researched, adolescence is
marked by a phenomenon known now as the “imaginary audience.” Consider a
thirteen-year-old so embarrassed that he misses a week of class, positive that the
entire school is thinking and murmuring about some tiny incident that in truth
hardly anyone noticed. Or a teenage girl who spends three hours in front of the
mirror each morning, as if she’s about to go on stage. They do this because
they’re convinced that their every move is being watched with rapt attention by
the rest of the world.
Even as adults, we’re susceptible to this fantasy during a harmless walk down
the street. We plug in some headphones and all of a sudden there’s a soundtrack.
We flip up our jacket collar and consider briefly how cool we must look. We
replay the successful meeting we’re heading toward in our head. The crowds
part as we pass. We’re fearless warriors, on our way to the top.
It’s the opening credits montage. It’s a scene in a novel. It feels good—so
much better than those feelings of doubt and fear and normalness—and so we
stay stuck inside our heads instead of participating in the world around us.
That’s ego, baby.
What successful people do is curb such flights of fancy. They ignore the
temptations that might make them feel important or skew their perspective.
General George C. Marshall—essentially the opposite of McClellan even though
they briefly held the same position a few generations apart—refused to keep a
diary during World War II despite the requests of historians and friends. He
worried that it would turn his quiet, reflective time into a sort of performance
and self-deception. That he might second-guess difficult decisions out of concern
for his reputation and future readers and warp his thinking based on how they
would look.
All of us are susceptible to these obsessions of the mind—whether we run a
technology startup or are working our way up the ranks of the corporate
hierarchy or have fallen madly in love. The more creative we are, the easier it is
to lose the thread that guides us.
Our imagination—in many senses an asset—is dangerous when it runs wild.
We have to rein our perceptions in. Otherwise, lost in the excitement, how can

we accurately predict the future or interpret events? How can we stay hungry
and aware? How can we appreciate the present moment? How can we be
creative within the realm of practicality?
Living clearly and presently takes courage. Don’t live in the haze of the
abstract, live with the tangible and real, even if—especially if—it’s
uncomfortable. Be part of what’s going on around you. Feast on it, adjust for it.
There’s no one to perform for. There is just work to be done and lessons to be
learned, in all that is around us.

THE DANGER OF EARLY PRIDE

A proud man is always looking down on things and people; and, of course, as long as you are
looking down, you cannot see something that is above you.
—C. S. LEWIS

A

t eighteen, a rather triumphant Benjamin Franklin returned to visit Boston,
the city he’d run away from seven months before. Full of pride and selfsatisfaction, he had a new suit, a watch, and a pocketful of coins that he spread
out and showed to everyone he ran into—including his older brother, whom he
particularly hoped to impress. All posturing by a boy who was not much more
than an employee in a print shop in Philadelphia.
In a meeting with Cotton Mather, one of the town’s most respected figures,
and a former adversary, Franklin quickly illustrated just how ridiculously
inflated his young ego had become. Chatting with Mather as they walked down a
hallway, Mather suddenly admonished him, “Stoop! Stoop!” Too caught up in
his performance, Franklin walked right into a low ceiling beam. Mather’s
response was perfect: “Let this be a caution to you not always to hold your head
so high,” he said wryly. “Stoop, young man, stoop—as you go through this
world—and you’ll miss many hard thumps.”
Christians believe that pride is a sin because it is a lie—it convinces people
that they are better than they are, that they are better than God made them. Pride
leads to arrogance and then away from humility and connection with their fellow
man.
You don’t have to be Christian to see the wisdom in this. You need only to
care about your career to understand that pride—even in real accomplishments—
is a distraction and a deluder.
“Whom the gods wish to destroy,” Cyril Connolly famously said, “they first
call promising.” Twenty-five hundred years before that, the elegiac poet

Theognis wrote to his friend, “The first thing, Kurnos, which gods bestow on
one they would annihilate, is pride.” Yet we pick up this mantle on purpose!
Pride blunts the very instrument we need to own in order to succeed: our
mind. Our ability to learn, to adapt, to be flexible, to build relationships, all of
this is dulled by pride. Most dangerously, this tends to happen either early in life
or in the process—when we’re flushed with beginner’s conceit. Only later do
you realize that that bump on the head was the least of what was risked.
Pride takes a minor accomplishment and makes it feel like a major one. It
smiles at our cleverness and genius, as though what we’ve exhibited was merely
a hint of what ought to come. From the start, it drives a wedge between the
possessor and reality, subtly and not so subtly changing her perceptions of what
something is and what it isn’t. It is these strong opinions, only loosely secured
by fact or accomplishment, that send us careering toward delusion or worse.
Pride and ego say:
I am an entrepreneur because I struck out on my own.
I am going to win because I am currently in the lead.
I am a writer because I published something.
I am rich because I made some money.
I am special because I was chosen.
I am important because I think I should be.
At one time or another, we all indulge this sort of gratifying label making. Yet
every culture seems to produce words of caution against it. Don’t count your
chickens before they hatch. Don’t cook the sauce before catching the fish. The
way to cook a rabbit is first to catch a rabbit. Game slaughtered by words cannot
be skinned. Punching above your weight is how you get injured. Pride goeth
before the fall.
Let’s call that attitude what it is: fraud. If you’re doing the work and putting
in the time, you won’t need to cheat, you won’t need to overcompensate.
Pride is a masterful encroacher. John D. Rockefeller, as a young man,
practiced a nightly conversation with himself. “Because you have got a start,”
he’d say aloud or write in his diary, “you think you are quite a merchant; look
out or you will lose your head—go steady.”
Early in his career, he’d had some success. He’d gotten a good job. He was
saving money. He had a few investments. Considering his father had been a
drunken swindler, this was no small feat. Rockefeller was on the right track.

Understandably, a sort of self-satisfaction with his accomplishments—and the
trajectory he was heading in—began to seep in. In a moment of frustration, he
once shouted at a bank officer who refused to lend him money, “Some day I’ll be
the richest man in the world!”
Let’s count Rockefeller as maybe the only man in the world to say that and
then go on to become the richest man in the world. But for every one of him,
there are a dozen more delusional assholes who said the exact same thing and
genuinely believed it, and then came nowhere close—in part because their pride
worked against them, and made other people hate them too.
All of this was why Rockefeller knew he needed to rein himself in and to
privately manage his ego. Night after night he asked himself, “Are you going to
be a fool? Are you going to let this money puff you up?” (However small it
was.) “Keep your eyes open,” he admonished himself. “Don’t lose your
balance.”
As he later reflected, “I had a horror of the danger of arrogance. What a
pitiful thing it is when a man lets a little temporary success spoil him, warp his
judgment, and he forgets what he is!” It creates a sort of myopic, onanistic
obsession that warps perspective, reality, truth, and the world around us. The
childlike little prince in Saint-Exupéry’s famous story makes the same
observation, lamenting that “vain men never hear anything but praise.” That’s
exactly why we can’t afford to have it as a translator.
Receive feedback, maintain hunger, and chart a proper course in life. Pride
dulls these senses. Or in other cases, it tunes up other negative parts of ourselves:
sensitivity, a persecution complex, the ability to make everything about us.
As the famous conqueror and warrior Genghis Khan groomed his sons and
generals to succeed him later in life, he repeatedly warned them, “If you can’t
swallow your pride, you can’t lead.” He told them that pride would be harder to
subdue than a wild lion. He liked the analogy of a mountain. He would say,
“Even the tallest mountains have animals that, when they stand on it, are higher
than the mountain.”
We tend to be on guard against negativity, against the people who are
discouraging us from pursuing our callings or doubting the visions we have for
ourselves. This is certainly an obstacle to beware of, though dealing with it is
rather simple. What we cultivate less is how to protect ourselves against the
validation and gratification that will quickly come our way if we show promise.
What we don’t protect ourselves against are people and things that make us feel
good—or rather, too good. We must prepare for pride and kill it early—or it will

kill what we aspire to. We must be on guard against that wild self-confidence
and self-obsession. “The first product of self-knowledge is humility,” Flannery
O’Connor once said. This is how we fight the ego, by really knowing ourselves.
The question to ask, when you feel pride, then, is this: What am I missing
right now that a more humble person might see? What am I avoiding, or running
from, with my bluster, franticness, and embellishments? It is far better to ask and
answer these questions now, with the stakes still low, than it will be later.
It’s worth saying: just because you are quiet doesn’t mean that you are
without pride. Privately thinking you’re better than others is still pride. It’s still
dangerous. “That on which you so pride yourself will be your ruin,” Montaigne
had inscribed on the beam of his ceiling. It’s a quote from the playwright
Menander, and it ends with “you who think yourself to be someone.”
We are still striving, and it is the strivers who should be our peers—not the
proud and the accomplished. Without this understanding, pride takes our selfconception and puts it at odds with the reality of our station, which is that we
still have so far to go, that there is still so much to be done.
After hitting his head and hearing from Mather, Franklin spent a lifetime
battling against his pride, because he wanted to do much and understood that
pride would made it much harder. Which is why, despite what would be dizzying
accomplishments in any era—wealth, fame, power—Franklin never had to
experience most of the “misfortunes brought upon people by their carrying their
heads too high.”
At the end, this isn’t about deferring pride because you don’t deserve it yet. It
isn’t “Don’t boast about what hasn’t happened yet.” It is more directly “Don’t
boast.” There’s nothing in it for you.

WORK, WORK, WORK

The best plan is only good intentions unless it degenerates into work.
—PETER DRUCKER

T

he painter Edgar Degas, though best known for his beautiful Impressionist
paintings of dancers, toyed briefly with poetry. As a brilliant and creative
mind, the potential for great poems was all there—he could see beauty, he could
find inspiration. Yet there are no great Degas poems. There is one famous
conversation that might explain why. One day, Degas complained to his friend,
the poet Stéphane Mallarmé, about his trouble writing. “I can’t manage to say
what I want, and yet I’m full of ideas.” Mallarmé’s response cuts to the bone.
“It’s not with ideas, my dear Degas, that one makes verse. It’s with words.”
Or rather, with work.
The distinction between a professional and a dilettante occurs right there—
when you accept that having an idea is not enough; that you must work until you
are able to recreate your experience effectively in words on the page. As the
philosopher and writer Paul Valéry explained in 1938, “A poet’s function . . . is
not to experience the poetic state: that is a private affair. His function is to create
it in others.” That is, his job is to produce work.
To be both a craftsman and an artist. To cultivate a product of labor and
industry instead of just a product of the mind. It’s here where abstraction meets
the road and the real, where we trade thinking and talking for working.
“You can’t build a reputation on what you’re going to do,” was how Henry
Ford put it. The sculptor Nina Holton hit the same note in psychologist Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi’s landmark study on creativity. “That germ of an idea,” she
told him, “does not make a sculpture which stands up. It just sits there. So the
next stage, of course, is the hard work.” The investor and serial entrepreneur Ben
Horowitz put it more bluntly: “The hard thing isn’t setting a big, hairy, audacious
goal. The hard thing is laying people off when you miss the big goal. . . . The

hard thing isn’t dreaming big. The hard thing is waking up in the middle of the
night in a cold sweat when the dream turns into a nightmare.”
Sure, you get it. You know that all things require work and that work might be
quite difficult. But do you really understand? Do you have any idea just how
much work there is going to be? Not work until you get your big break, not work
until you make a name for yourself, but work, work, work, forever and ever.
Is it ten thousand hours or twenty thousand hours to mastery? The answer is
that it doesn’t matter. There is no end zone. To think of a number is to live in a
conditional future. We’re simply talking about a lot of hours—that to get where
we want to go isn’t about brilliance, but continual effort. While that’s not a
terribly sexy idea, it should be an encouraging one. Because it means it’s all
within reach—for all of us, provided we have the constitution and humbleness to
be patient and the fortitude to put in the work.
By this point, you probably understand why the ego would bristle at this idea.
Within reach?! it complains. That means you’re saying I don’t have it now.
Exactly right. You don’t. No one does.
Our ego wants the ideas and the fact that we aspire to do something about
them to be enough. Wants the hours we spend planning and attending
conferences or chatting with impressed friends to count toward the tally that
success seems to require. It wants to be paid well for its time and it wants to do
the fun stuff—the stuff that gets attention, credit, or glory.
That’s the reality. Where we decide to put our energy decides what we’ll
ultimately accomplish.
As a young man, Bill Clinton began a collection of note cards upon which he
would write names and phone numbers of friends and acquaintances who might
be of service when he eventually entered politics. Each night, before he ever had
a reason to, he would flip through the box, make phone calls, write letters, or add
notations about their interactions. Over the years, this collection grew—to ten
thousand cards (before it was eventually digitized). It’s what put him in the Oval
Office and continues to return dividends.
Or think of Darwin, working for decades on his theory of evolution,
refraining from publishing it because it wasn’t yet perfect. Hardly anyone knew
what he was working on. No one said, Hey Charles, it’s okay that you’re taking
so long, because what you’re working on is just so important. They didn’t know.
He couldn’t have known. He just knew that it wasn’t done yet, that it could be
better, and that that was enough to keep him going.

So: Do we sit down, alone, and struggle with our work? Work that may or
may not go anywhere, that may be discouraging or painful? Do we love work,
making a living to do work, not the other way around? Do we love practice, the
way great athletes do? Or do we chase short-term attention and validation—
whether that’s indulging in the endless search for ideas or simply the distraction
of talk and chatter?
Fac, si facis. (Do it if you’re going to do it.)
There is another apt Latin expression: Materiam superabat opus. (The
workmanship was better than the material.) The material we’ve been given
genetically, emotionally, financially, that’s where we begin. We don’t control
that. We do control what we make of that material, and whether we squander it.
As a young basketball player, Bill Bradley would remind himself, “When you
are not practicing, remember, someone somewhere is practicing, and when you
meet him he will win.” The Bible says something similar in its own way:
“Blessed are those servants whom the master finds awake when he comes.” You
can lie to yourself, saying that you put in the time, or pretend that you’re
working, but eventually someone will show up. You’ll be tested. And quite
possibly, found out.
Since Bradley went on to be an All-American, a Rhodes Scholar, then a twotime champion with the New York Knicks and a U.S. senator, you get the sense
that this sort of dedication will take you places.
So we must have it. Because there is no triumph without toil.
Wouldn’t it be great if work was as simple as opening a vein and letting the
genius pour out? Or if you could walk into that meeting and spit brilliance off
the top of your head? You walk up to the canvas, hurl your paint at it, and
modern art emerges, right? That is the fantasy—rather, that is the lie.
Back to another popular old trope: Fake it ’til you make it. It’s no surprise that
such an idea has found increasing relevance in our noxiously bullshit, Nerf
world. When it is difficult to tell a real producer from an adept self-promoter, of
course some people will roll the dice and manage to play the confidence game.
Make it so you don’t have to fake it—that’s they key. Can you imagine a doctor
trying to get by with anything less? Or a quarterback, or a bull rider? More to the
point, would you want them to? So why would you try otherwise?
Every time you sit down to work, remind yourself: I am delaying gratification
by doing this. I am passing the marshmallow test. I am earning what my
ambition burns for. I am making an investment in myself instead of in my ego.

Give yourself a little credit for this choice, but not so much, because you’ve got
to get back to the task at hand: practicing, working, improving.
Work is finding yourself alone at the track when the weather kept everyone
else indoors. Work is pushing through the pain and crappy first drafts and
prototypes. It is ignoring whatever plaudits others are getting, and more
importantly, ignoring whatever plaudits you may be getting. Because there is
work to be done. Work doesn’t want to be good. It is made so, despite the
headwind.
There is another old expression: You know a workman by the chips they
leave. It’s true. To judge your progress properly, just take a look at the floor.

FOR EVERYTHING THAT COMES NEXT, EGO IS THE
ENEMY . . .

’Tis a common proof,
That lowliness is young ambition’s ladder.
—SHAKESPEARE

W

e know where we want to end up: success. We want to matter. Wealth and
recognition and reputation are nice too. We want it all.
The problem is that we’re not sure that humility can get us there. We are
petrified, as the Reverend Dr. Sam Wells put it, that if we are humble, we will
end up “subjugated, trodden on, embarrassed and irrelevant.”
Midway through his career, if you’d asked our model Sherman how he felt,
he probably would have described himself in almost exactly those terms. He had
not made much money. He had won no great battles. He had not seen his name
in lights or headlines. He might have, at that moment, before the Civil War,
begun to question the path he’d chosen, and whether those who follow it finished
last.
This is the thinking that creates the Faustian bargain that turns most clean
ambition into shameless addiction. In the early stages, ego can be temporarily
adaptive. Craziness can pass for audaciousness. Delusions can pass for
confidence, ignorance for courage. But it’s just kicking the costs down the road.
Because no one ever said, reflecting on the whole of someone’s life, “Man,
that monstrous ego sure was worth it.”
The internal debate about confidence calls to mind a well-known concept
from the radio pioneer Ira Glass, which could be called the Taste/Talent Gap.
All of us who do creative work . . . we get into it because we have good
taste. But it’s like there’s a gap, that for the first couple years that you’re
making stuff, what you’re making isn’t so good . . . It’s really not that

great. It’s trying to be good, it has ambition to be good, but it’s not quite
that good. But your taste—the thing that got you into the game—your taste
is still killer, and your taste is good enough that you can tell that what
you’re making is kind of a disappointment to you.
It is in precisely this gap that ego can seem comforting. Who wants to look at
themselves and their work and find that it does not measure up? And so here we
might bluster our way through. Cover up hard truths with sheer force of
personality and drive and passion. Or, we can face our shortcomings honestly
and put the time in. We can let this humble us, see clearly where we are talented
and where we need to improve, and then put in the work to bridge that gap. And
we can set upon positive habits that will last a lifetime.
If ego was tempting in Sherman’s time, in this era, we are like Lance
Armstrong training for the 1999 Tour de France. We are Barry Bonds debating
whether to walk into the BALCO clinic. We flirt with arrogance and deceit, and
in the process grossly overstate the importance of winning at all costs. Everyone
is juicing, the ego says to us, you should too. There’s no way to beat them
without it, we think.
Of course, what is truly ambitious is to face life and proceed with quiet
confidence in spite of the distractions. Let others grasp at crutches. It will be a
lonely fight to be real, to say “I’m not going to take the edge off.” To say, “I am
going to be myself, the best version of that self. I am in this for the long game,
no matter how brutal it might be.” To do, not be.
For Sherman, it was precisely his choice that prepared him for the time his
country and history most needed him—and allowed him to navigate the massive
responsibilities that shortly came his way. In this quiet crucible, he’d forged a
personality that was ambitious but patient, innovative without being brash, brave
without being dangerous. He was a real leader.
You have a chance to do this yourself. To play a different game, to be utterly
audacious in your aims. Because what comes next is going to test you in ways
that you cannot begin to understand. For ego is a wicked sister of success.
And you’re about to experience what that means.

SUCCESS
Here we are at the top of a mountain we worked hard to climb—or at least the summit is in sight.
Now we face new temptations and problems. We breathe thinner air in an unforgiving environment.
Why is success so ephemeral? Ego shortens it. Whether a collapse is dramatic or a slow erosion, it’s
always possible and often unnecessary. We stop learning, we stop listening, and we lose our grasp on
what matters. We become victims of ourselves and the competition. Sobriety, open-mindedness,
organization, and purpose—these are the great stabilizers. They balance out the ego and pride that
comes with achievement and recognition.

Two different characters are presented to our emulation; the one, of proud ambition and
ostentatious avidity. The other, of humble modesty and equitable justice. Two different
models, two different pictures, are held out to us, according to which we may fashion our own
character and behaviour; the one more gaudy and glittering in its colouring; the other more
correct and more exquisitely beautiful in its outline.
—ADAM SMITH

A

t a business meeting in January 1924, Howard Hughes Sr., the successful
inventor and tool magnate, stood up, convulsed, and died from a sudden
heart attack at the age of fifty-four. His son, a quiet, reserved, and sheltered boy
of just eighteen, inherited three fourths of the private company, which held
patents and leases critical to oil drilling, worth nearly $1 million. Various family
members were bequeathed the remaining shares.
In a move of almost incomprehensible foresight, the young Hughes, whom
many saw as a spoiled little boy, made the decision to buy out his relatives and
control the entire company himself. Against their objections and still legally
considered a minor, Hughes leveraged his personal assets and nearly all the
company’s funds to purchase the stock, and in doing so, consolidated ownership
of a business that would create billions of dollars of cash profit over the next
century.
It was a bold move for a young man with essentially zero experience in
business. And it was with similar boldness that over his career he would create
one of the most embarrassing, wasteful, and dishonest business track records in
history. In retrospect, his years at the helm of the Hughes empire resemble a
deranged crime spree more than a capitalistic enterprise.
One cannot argue whether Hughes was gifted, visionary, and brilliant. He just
was. Literally a mechanical genius, he was also one of the best and bravest pilots
in the pioneer days of aviation. And as a businessman and filmmaker he had the
ability to predict wide, sweeping changes that came to transform not just the
industries he was involved in, but America itself.
Yet, after filtering out his acumen from the legend, glamour, and selfpromotion at which he was so adept, only one image remains: an egomaniac who
evaporated hundreds of millions of dollars of his own wealth and met a

miserable, pathetic end. Not by accident, not because he was beset by unforeseen
circumstances or competition, but almost exclusively due to his own actions.
A quick rundown of his feats—if you can call them that—provides a stark
perspective:
After purchasing control of his father’s tool company from his family, Hughes
abandoned it almost immediately except to repeatedly siphon off its cash. He left
Houston and never stepped foot in the company’s headquarters again. He moved
to Los Angeles, where he decided to become a film producer and celebrity.
Trading stocks from his bedside, he lost more than $8 million in the market
leading up to the Depression. His most well-known movie, Hell’s Angels, took
three years to make, lost $1.5 million on a budget of $4.2 million, and nearly
bankrupted the tool company in the process. Then, not having learned a lesson
the first time, Hughes lost another $4 million on Chrysler stock in early 1930.
He then put all this aside to enter the aviation business, creating a defense
contractor called the Hughes Aircraft Company. Despite some astounding
personal achievements as an inventor, Hughes’s company was a failure. His two
contracts during World War II, worth $40 million, were massive failures at the
expense of the American taxpayer and himself. The most notable, the Spruce
Goose—which Hughes called the Hercules and which was one of the biggest
planes ever made—took more than five years to develop, cost roughly $20
million, and flew just a single time for barely a mile, only 70 feet above the
water. At his insistence and expense, it then sat in an air-conditioned hangar in
Long Beach for decades at the cost of $1 million a year. Deciding to double
down on the film business, Hughes purchased the movie studio RKO and
produced losses of over $22 million (and went from two thousand employees to
fewer than five hundred as he ran it into the ground over several years). Tiring of
these businesses as he had of the tool company, he forsook defense contracting
and handed it off to executives to run, where it slowly began to thrive . . .
because of his absence.
It would make sense to stop here to avoid belaboring the issue—but that
would risk skipping Hughes’s egregious tax fraud; the plane crashes and fatal car
accidents; the millions he wasted on private investigators, lawyers, contracts for
starlets he refused to let act, property he never lived in; the fact that the only
thing that got him to behave responsibly was the threat of public exposure; the
paranoia, racism, and bullying; the failed marriages; the drug addiction; and
dozens of other ventures and businesses he mismanaged.

“That we have made a hero out of Howard Hughes,” a young Joan Didion
wrote, “tells us something interesting about ourselves.” She’s absolutely right.
For Howard Hughes, despite his reputation, was quite possibly one of the worst
businessmen of the twentieth century. Usually a bad businessman fails and
ceases to be in business anymore, making it hard to see what truly caused his
failures. But thanks to the steady chain of profits from his father’s company,
which he found too boring to interfere with, Hughes was able to stay afloat,
allowing us to see the damage that his ego repeatedly wrought—to himself as a
person, to the people around him, to what he wanted to accomplish.
There is a scene from Howard’s slow descent into madness that bears
illustrating. His biographers have him sitting naked in his favorite white chair,
unwashed, unkempt, working around the clock to battle lawyers, investigations,
investors, in an attempt to save his empire and to hide his shameful secrets. One
minute he would dictate some irrational multipage memo about Kleenex, food
preparation, or how employees should not speak to him directly, and then he
would turn around and seize upon a genuinely brilliant strategy to outrun his
creditors and enemies. It was as if, they observed, his mind and business were
split in two parts. It was as if, they wrote, “IBM had deliberately established a
pair of subsidiaries, one to produce computers and profits, another to
manufacture Edsels and losses.” If someone was looking for a flesh-and-blood
metaphor for ego and destruction, it would be hard to do better than this image
of a man working furiously with one hand toward a goal and with the other
working equally hard to undermine it.
Howard Hughes, like all of us, was not completely crazy or completely sane.
His ego, fueled and exacerbated by physical injuries (mostly from plane and car
crashes for which he was at fault) and various addictions, led him into a darkness
that we can scarcely comprehend. There were brief moments of lucidity when
the sharp mind of Hughes broke through—times when he made some of his best
moves—but as he progressed through life, these moments became increasingly
rare. Eventually, ego killed Howard Hughes as much as the mania and trauma
did—if they were ever separate to begin with.
You can only see this if you want to see it. It’s more attractive and exciting to
see the rebel billionaire, the eccentric, the world renown, and the fame, and
think: Oh, how I want that. You do not. Howard Hughes, like so many wealthy
people, died in an asylum of his own making. He felt little joy. He enjoyed
almost nothing of what he had. Most importantly, he wasted. He wasted so much
talent, so much bravery, and so much energy.

Without virtue and training, Aristotle observed, “it is hard to bear the results
of good fortune suitably.” We can learn from Hughes because he was so publicly
and visibly unable to bear his birthright properly. His endless taste for the
spotlight, no matter how unflattering, gives us an opportunity to see our own
tendencies, our own struggles with success and luck, refracted back through his
tumultuous life. His enormous ego and its destructive path through Hollywood,
through the defense industry, through Wall Street, through the aviation industry
give us a look inside someone who was repeatedly felled by impulses we all
have.
Of course, he’s far from the only person in history to follow such an arc. Will
you follow his trajectory?
Sometimes ego is suppressed on the ascent. Sometimes an idea is so powerful
or timing is so perfect (or one is born into wealth or power) that it can
temporarily support or even compensate for a massive ego. As success arrives,
like it does for a team that has just won a championship, ego begins to toy with
our minds and weaken the will that made us win in the first place. We know that
empires always fall, so we must think about why—and why they seem to always
collapse from within.
Harold Geneen was the CEO who more or less invented the concept of the
modern international conglomerate. Through a series of acquisitions, mergers,
and takeovers (more than 350 in all), he took a small company called ITT from
$1 million in revenues in 1959 to nearly $17 billion in 1977, the year he retired.
Some claimed that Geneen himself was an egotist—in any case, he spoke
candidly about the effects that ego had in his industry and warned executives
against it.
“The worst disease which can afflict business executives in their work is not,
as popularly supposed, alcoholism; it’s egotism,” Geneen famously said. In the
Mad Men era of corporate America, there was a major drinking problem, but ego
has the same roots—insecurity, fear, a dislike for brutal objectivity. “Whether in
middle management or top management, unbridled personal egotism blinds a
man to the realities around him; more and more he comes to live in a world of
his own imagination; and because he sincerely believes he can do no wrong, he
becomes a menace to the men and women who have to work under his
direction,” he wrote in his memoirs.
Here we are having accomplished something. After we give ourselves proper
credit, ego wants us to think, I’m special. I’m better. The rules don’t apply to me.

“Man is pushed by drives,” Viktor Frankl observed. “But he is pulled by
values.” Ruled by or ruling? Which are you? Without the right values, success is
brief. If we wish to do more than flash, if we wish to last, then it is time to
understand how to battle this new form of ego and what values and principles are
required in order to beat it.
Success is intoxicating, yet to sustain it requires sobriety. We can’t keep
learning if we think we already know everything. We cannot buy into myths we
make ourselves, or the noise and chatter of the outside world. We must
understand that we are a small part of an interconnected universe. On top of all
this, we have to build an organization and a system around what we do—one that
is about the work and not about us.
The verdict on Hughes is in. Ego wrecked him. A similar judgment awaits us
all at some point. Over the course of your own career, you will face the choices
that he did—that all people do. Whether you built your empire from nothing or
inherited it, whether your wealth is financial or merely a cultivated talent,
entropy is seeking to destroy it as you read this.
Can you handle success? Or will it be the worst thing that ever happened to
you?

ALWAYS STAY A STUDENT

Every man I meet is my master in some point, and in that I learn of him.
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON

T

he legend of Genghis Khan has echoed through history: A barbarian
conqueror, fueled by bloodlust, terrorizing the civilized world. We have him
and his Mongol horde traveling across Asia and Europe, insatiable, stopping at
nothing to plunder, rape, and kill not just the people who stood in their way, but
the cultures they had built. Then, not unlike his nomadic band of warriors, this
terrible cloud simply disappeared from history, because the Mongols built
nothing that could last.
Like all reactionary, emotional assessments, this could not be more wrong.
For not only was Genghis Khan one of the greatest military minds who ever
lived, he was a perpetual student, whose stunning victories were often the result
of his ability to absorb the best technologies, practices, and innovations of each
new culture his empire touched.
In fact, if there is one theme in his reign and in the several centuries of
dynastic rule that followed, it’s this: appropriation. Under Genghis Khan’s
direction, the Mongols were as ruthless about stealing and absorbing the best of
each culture they encountered as they were about conquest itself. Though there
were essentially no technological inventions, no beautiful buildings or even great
Mongol art, with each battle and enemy, their culture learned and absorbed
something new. Genghis Khan was not born a genius. Instead, as one biographer
put it, his was “a persistent cycle of pragmatic learning, experimental adaptation,
and constant revision driven by his uniquely disciplined and focused will.”
He was the greatest conqueror the world ever knew because he was more
open to learning than any other conqueror has ever been.
Khan’s first powerful victories came from the reorganization of his military
units, splitting his soldiers into groups of ten. This he stole from neighboring

Turkic tribes, and unknowingly converted the Mongols to the decimal system.
Soon enough, their expanding empire brought them into contact with another
“technology” they’d never experienced before: walled cities. In the Tangut raids,
Khan first learned the ins and outs of war against fortified cities and the
strategies critical to laying siege, and quickly became an expert. Later, with help
from Chinese engineers, he taught his soldiers how to build siege machines that
could knock down city walls. In his campaigns against the Jurched, Khan
learned the importance of winning hearts and minds. By working with the
scholars and royal family of the lands he conquered, Khan was able to hold on to
and manage these territories in ways that most empires could not. Afterward, in
every country or city he held, Khan would call for the smartest astrologers,
scribes, doctors, thinkers, and advisers—anyone who could aid his troops and
their efforts. His troops traveled with interrogators and translators for precisely
this purpose.
It was a habit that would survive his death. While the Mongols themselves
seemed dedicated almost solely to the art of war, they put to good use every
craftsman, merchant, scholar, entertainer, cook, and skilled worker they came in
contact with. The Mongol Empire was remarkable for its religious freedoms, and
most of all, for its love of ideas and convergence of cultures. It brought lemons
to China for the first time, and Chinese noodles to the West. It spread Persian
carpets, German mining technology, French metalworking, and Islam. The
cannon, which revolutionized warfare, was said to be the resulting fusion of
Chinese gunpowder, Muslim flamethrowers, and European metalwork. It was
Mongol openness to learning and new ideas that brought them together.
As we first succeed, we will find ourselves in new situations, facing new
problems. The freshly promoted soldier must learn the art of politics. The
salesman, how to manage. The founder, how to delegate. The writer, how to edit
others. The comedian, how to act. The chef turned restaurateur, how to run the
other side of the house.
This is not a harmless conceit. The physicist John Wheeler, who helped
develop the hydrogen bomb, once observed that “as our island of knowledge
grows, so does the shore of our ignorance.” In other words, each victory and
advancement that made Khan smarter also bumped him against new situations
he’d never encountered before. It takes a special kind of humility to grasp that
you know less, even as you know and grasp more and more. It’s remembering
Socrates’ wisdom lay in the fact that he knew that he knew next to nothing.

With accomplishment comes a growing pressure to pretend that we know
more than we do. To pretend we already know everything. Scientia infla
(knowledge puffs up). That’s the worry and the risk—thinking that we’re set and
secure, when in reality understanding and mastery is a fluid, continual process.
The nine-time Grammy– and Pulitzer Prize–winning jazz musician Wynton
Marsalis once advised a promising young musician on the mind-set required in
the lifelong study of music: “Humility engenders learning because it beats back
the arrogance that puts blinders on. It leaves you open for truths to reveal
themselves. You don’t stand in your own way. . . . Do you know how you can
tell when someone is truly humble? I believe there’s one simple test: because
they consistently observe and listen, the humble improve. They don’t assume, ‘I
know the way.’”
No matter what you’ve done up to this point, you better still be a student. If
you’re not still learning, you’re already dying.
It is not enough only to be a student at the beginning. It is a position that one
has to assume for life. Learn from everyone and everything. From the people you
beat, and the people who beat you, from the people you dislike, even from your
supposed enemies. At every step and every juncture in life, there is the
opportunity to learn—and even if the lesson is purely remedial, we must not let
ego block us from hearing it again.
Too often, convinced of our own intelligence, we stay in a comfort zone that
ensures that we never feel stupid (and are never challenged to learn or reconsider
what we know). It obscures from view various weaknesses in our understanding,
until eventually it’s too late to change course. This is where the silent toll is
taken.
Each of us faces a threat as we pursue our craft. Like sirens on the rocks, ego
sings a soothing, validating song—which can lead to a wreck. The second we let
the ego tell us we have graduated, learning grinds to a halt. That’s why Frank
Shamrock said, “Always stay a student.” As in, it never ends.
The solution is as straightforward as it is initially uncomfortable: Pick up a
book on a topic you know next to nothing about. Put yourself in rooms where
you’re the least knowledgeable person. That uncomfortable feeling, that
defensiveness that you feel when your most deeply held assumptions are
challenged—what about subjecting yourself to it deliberately? Change your
mind. Change your surroundings.
An amateur is defensive. The professional finds learning (and even,
occasionally, being shown up) to be enjoyable; they like being challenged and

humbled, and engage in education as an ongoing and endless process.
Most military cultures—and people in general—seek to impose values and
control over what they encounter. What made the Mongols different was their
ability to weigh each situation objectively, and if need be, swap out previous
practices for new ones. All great businesses start this way, but then something
happens. Take the theory of disruption, which posits that at some point in time,
every industry will be disrupted by some trend or innovation that, despite all the
resources in the world, the incumbent interests will be incapable of responding
to. Why is this? Why can’t businesses change and adapt?
A large part of it is because they lost the ability to learn. They stopped being
students. The second this happens to you, your knowledge becomes fragile.
The great manager and business thinker Peter Drucker says that it’s not
enough simply to want to learn. As people progress, they must also understand
how they learn and then set up processes to facilitate this continual education.
Otherwise, we are dooming ourselves to a sort of self-imposed ignorance.

DON’T TELL YOURSELF A STORY

Myth becomes myth not in the living but in the retelling.
—DAVID MARANISS

S

tarting in 1979, football coach and general manager Bill Walsh took the
49ers from being the worst team in football, and perhaps professional sports,
to a Super Bowl victory, in just three years. It would have been tempting, as he
hoisted the Lombardi Trophy over his head, to tell himself that the quickest
turnaround in NFL history had been his plan all along. It would have been
tempting decades later, when he assembled his memoirs, to assume that narrative
as well.
It’s a sexy story. That his takeover, his turnaround, and the transformation
were assiduously scheduled. That it all happened exactly as he wanted—because
he was just that good and that talented. No one would have faulted him if he said
that.
Yet he refused to indulge in those fantasies. When people asked Walsh
whether he had a timetable for winning the Super Bowl, do you know what his
answer was? The answer was always no. Because when you take over a team
that bad, such ambitions would have been utterly delusional.
The year before he arrived, the 49ers were 2 and 14. The organization was
demoralized, broken, without draft picks, and fully ensconced in a culture of
losing. His first season, they lost another fourteen games. He nearly resigned
midway through his second year, because he wasn’t sure he could do it. Yet,
twenty-four months from taking over (and a little over a year from having almost
quit), there he was, the Super Bowl champion “genius.”
How did it happen? How was that not part of the “plan”?
The answer is that when Bill Walsh took control, he wasn’t focused on
winning per se. Instead, he implemented what he called his “Standard of
Performance.” That is: What should be done. When. How. At the most basic

level and throughout the organization, Walsh had only one timetable, and it was
all about instilling these standards.
He focused on seemingly trivial details: Players could not sit down on the
practice field. Coaches had to wear a tie and tuck their shirts in. Everyone had to
give maximum effort and commitment. Sportsmanship was essential. The locker
room must be neat and clean. There would be no smoking, no fighting, no
profanity. Quarterbacks were told where and how to hold the ball. Linemen were
drilled on thirty separate critical drills. Passing routes were monitored and
graded down to the inch. Practices were scheduled to the minute.
It would be a mistake to think this was about control. The Standard of
Performance was about instilling excellence. These seemingly simple but
exacting standards mattered more than some grand vision or power trip. In his
eyes, if the players take care of the details, “the score takes care of itself.” The
winning would happen.
Walsh was strong and confident enough to know that these standards would
eventually contribute to victory. He was also humble enough to know that when
victory would happen was not something he could predict. That it happened
faster than for any coach in history? Well, that was a fortuitous break of the
game. It was not because of his grand vision. In fact, in his second season, a
coach complained to the owner that Walsh was too caught up in minutiae and
had no goals to win. Walsh fired that coach for tattling.
We want so desperately to believe that those who have great empires set out
to build one. Why? So we can indulge in the pleasurable planning of ours. So we
can take full credit for the good that happens and the riches and respect that
come our way. Narrative is when you look back at an improbable or unlikely
path to your success and say: I knew it all along. Instead of: I hoped. I worked. I
got some good breaks. Or even: I thought this could happen. Of course you
didn’t really know all along—or if you did, it was more faith than knowledge.
But who wants to remember all the times you doubted yourself?
Crafting stories out of past events is a very human impulse. It’s also
dangerous and untrue. Writing our own narrative leads to arrogance. It turns our
life into a story—and turns us into caricatures—while we still have to live it. As
the author Tobias Wolff writes in his novel Old School, these explanations and
stories get “cobbled together later, more or less sincerely, and after the stories
have been repeated they put on the badge of memory and block all other routes
of exploration.”

Bill Walsh understood that it was really the Standard of Performance—the
deceptively small things—that was responsible for the team’s transformation and
victory. But that’s too boring for newspaper headlines. It’s why he ignored it
when they called him “the Genius.”
To accept the title and the story wouldn’t be a harmless personal gratification.
These narratives don’t change the past, but they do have the power to negatively
impact our future.
His players shortly proved the risks inherent in letting a story go to their
heads. Like most of us, they wanted to believe that their unlikely victory
occurred because they were special. In the two seasons after their first Super
Bowl, the team failed terribly—partly due to the dangerous confidence that
accompanies these kinds of victories—losing 12 of 22 games. This is what
happens when you prematurely credit yourself with powers you don’t yet have
control of. This is what happens when you start to think about what your rapid
achievements say about you and begin to slacken the effort and standards that
initially fueled them.
Only when the team returned wholeheartedly to the Standard of Performance
did they win again (three more Super Bowls and nine conference or division
championships in a decade). Only when they stopped with the stories and
focused on the task at hand did they begin to win like they had before.
Here’s the other part: once you win, everyone is gunning for you. It’s during
your moment at the top that you can afford ego the least—because the stakes are
so much higher, the margins for error are so much smaller. If anything, your
ability to listen, to hear feedback, to improve and grow matter more now than
ever before.
Facts are better than stories and image. The twentieth-century financier
Bernard Baruch had a great line: “Don’t try to buy at the bottom and sell at the
top. This can’t be done—except by liars.” That is, people’s claims about what
they’re doing in the market are rarely to be trusted. Jeff Bezos, the founder of
Amazon, has talked about this temptation. He reminds himself that there was “no
aha moment” for his billion-dollar behemoth, no matter what he might read in
his own press clippings. The founding of a company, making money in the
market, or the formation of an idea is messy. Reducing it to a narrative
retroactively creates a clarity that never was and never will be there.
When we are aspiring we must resist the impulse to reverse engineer success
from other people’s stories. When we achieve our own, we must resist the desire

to pretend that everything unfolded exactly as we’d planned. There was no grand
narrative. You should remember—you were there when it happened.
A few years ago, one of the founders of Google gave a talk in which he said
that the way he judges prospective companies and entrepreneurs is by asking
them “if they’re going to change the world.” Which is fine, except that’s not how
Google started. (Larry Page and Sergey Brin were two Stanford PhDs working
on their dissertations.) It’s not how YouTube started. (Its founders weren’t trying
to reinvent TV; they were trying to share funny video clips.) It’s not how most
true wealth was created, in fact.
Investor Paul Graham (who invested in Airbnb, reddit, Dropbox, and others),
working in the same city as Walsh a few decades later, explicitly warns startups
against having bold, sweeping visions early on. Of course, as a capitalist, he
wants to fund companies that massively disrupt industries and change the world
—that’s where the money is. He wants them to have “frighteningly ambitious”
ideas, but explains, “The way to do really big things seems to be to start with
deceptively small things.” He’s saying you don’t make a frontal attack out of
ego; instead, you start with a small bet and iteratively scale your ambitions as
you go. His other famous piece of advice, “Keep your identity small,” fits well
here. Make it about the work and the principles behind it—not about a glorious
vision that makes a good headline.
Napoleon had the words “To Destiny!” engraved on the wedding ring he gave
his wife. Destiny was what he’d always believed in, it was how he justified his
boldest, most ambitious ideas. It was also why he overreached time and time
again, until his real destiny was divorce, exile, defeat, and infamy. A great
destiny, Seneca reminds us, is great slavery.
There is a real danger in believing it when people use the word “genius”—
and it’s even more dangerous when we let hubris tell ourselves we are one. The
same goes for any label that comes along with a career: are we suddenly a
“filmmaker,” “writer,” “investor,” “entrepreneur,” or “executive” because we’ve
accomplished one thing? These labels put you at odds not just with reality, but
with the real strategy that made you successful in the first place. From that place,
we might think that success in the future is just the natural next part of the story
—when really it’s rooted in work, creativity, persistence, and luck.
Certainly Google’s alienation from its own roots (confusing vision and
potential with scientific and technological prowess) will cause it to stumble soon
enough. It fact, the public failures of projects like Google Glass and Google Plus
might be evidence of it already. They’re not alone. Too often, artists who think it

was “inspiration” or “pain” that fueled their art and create an image around that
—instead of hard work and sincere hustle—will eventually find themselves at
the bottom of a bottle or on the wrong end of a needle.
The same goes for us, whatever we do. Instead of pretending that we are
living some great story, we must remain focused on the execution—and on
executing with excellence. We must shun the false crown and continue working
on what got us here.
Because that’s the only thing that will keep us here.

WHAT’S IMPORTANT TO YOU?

To know what you like is the beginning of wisdom and of old age.
—ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

A

t the end of the Civil War, Ulysses S. Grant and his friend William
Tecumseh Sherman were two of the most respected and important men in
America. Essentially the dual architects of the Union’s victory, a grateful
country, with a snap of its fingers, said: Whatever you like, as long as you live, is
yours.
With this freedom at their disposal, Sherman and Grant took different paths.
Sherman, whose track we followed earlier, abhorred politics and repeatedly
declined entreaties to run for office. “I have all the rank I want,” he told them.
Having seemingly mastered his ego, he would later retire to New York City,
where he lived in what was, by all appearances, happiness and contentment.
Grant, who had expressed almost no prior interest in politics, and, in fact, had
succeeded as a general precisely because he didn’t know how to play politics,
chose instead to pursue the highest office in the land: the presidency. Elected by
a landslide, he then presided over one of the most corrupt, contentious, and least
effective administrations in American history. A genuinely good and loyal
individual, he was not cut out for the dirty world of Washington, and it made
quick work of him. He left office a maligned and controversial figure after two
exhausting terms, almost surprised by how poorly it had gone.
After the presidency, Grant invested almost every penny he had to create a
financial brokerage house with a controversial investor named Ferdinand Ward.
Ward, a Bernie Madoff of his day, turned it into a Ponzi scheme, and publicly
bankrupted Grant. As Sherman wrote with sympathy and understanding of his
friend, Grant had “aimed to rival the millionaires, who would have given their
all to have won any of his battles.” Grant had accomplished so much, but to him,

it wasn’t enough. He couldn’t decide what was important—what actually
mattered—to him.
That’s how it seems to go: we’re never happy with what we have, we want
what others have too. We want to have more than everyone else. We start out
knowing what is important to us, but once we’ve achieved it, we lose sight of
our priorities. Ego sways us, and can ruin us.
Compelled by his sense of honor to cover the debts of the firm, Grant took
out a loan using his priceless war mementos as collateral. Broken in mind, spirit,
and body, the last years of his life found him battling painful throat cancer, and
racing to finish his memoirs so that he might leave his family with something to
live on. He made it, just barely.
One shudders to think of the vital forces drained from this hero, who died at
just sixty-three in agony and defeat, this straightforward, honest man who just
couldn’t help himself, who couldn’t manage to focus, and ended up far outside
the bounds of his ample genius. What could he have done with those years
instead? How might have America looked otherwise? How much more could he
have done and accomplished?
Not that he is unique in this regard. All of us regularly say yes unthinkingly,
or out of vague attraction, or out of greed or vanity. Because we can’t say no—
because we might miss out on something if we did. We think “yes” will let us
accomplish more, when in reality it prevents exactly what we seek. All of us
waste precious life doing things we don’t like, to prove ourselves to people we
don’t respect, and to get things we don’t want.
Why do we do this? Well, it should be obvious by now.
Ego leads to envy and it rots the bones of people big and small. Ego
undermines greatness by deluding its holder.
Most of us begin with a clear idea of what we want in life. We know what’s
important to us. The success we achieve, especially if it comes early or in
abundance, puts us in an unusual place. Because now, all of a sudden, we’re in a
new place and have trouble keeping our bearings.
The farther you travel down that path of accomplishment, whatever it may be,
the more often you meet other successful people who make you feel
insignificant. It doesn’t matter how well you’re doing; your ego and their
accomplishments make you feel like nothing—just as others make them feel the
same way. It’s a cycle that goes on ad infinitum . . . while our brief time on earth
—or the small window of opportunity we have here—does not.

So we unconsciously pick up the pace to keep up with others. But what if
different people are running for different reasons? What if there is more than one
race going on?
That’s what Sherman was saying about Grant. There is a certain “Gift of the
Magi” irony in how badly we chase what will not be truly pleasurable. At the
very least, it won’t last. If only we could all stop for a second.
Let’s be clear: competitiveness is an important force in life. It’s what drives
the market and is behind some of mankind’s most impressive accomplishments.
On an individual level, however, it’s absolutely critical that you know who
you’re competing with and why, that you have a clear sense of the space you’re
in.
Only you know the race you’re running. That is, unless your ego decides the
only way you have value is if you’re better than, have more than, everyone
everywhere. More urgently, each one of us has a unique potential and purpose;
that means that we’re the only ones who can evaluate and set the terms of our
lives. Far too often, we look at other people and make their approval the standard
we feel compelled to meet, and as a result, squander our very potential and
purpose.
According to Seneca, the Greek word euthymia is one we should think of
often: it is the sense of our own path and how to stay on it without getting
distracted by all the others that intersect it. In other words, it’s not about beating
the other guy. It’s not about having more than the others. It’s about being what
you are, and being as good as possible at it, without succumbing to all the things
that draw you away from it. It’s about going where you set out to go. About
accomplishing the most that you’re capable of in what you choose. That’s it. No
more and no less. (By the way, euthymia means “tranquillity” in English.)
It’s time to sit down and think about what’s truly important to you and then
take steps to forsake the rest. Without this, success will not be pleasurable, or
nearly as complete as it could be. Or worse, it won’t last.
This is especially true with money. If you don’t know how much you need,
the default easily becomes: more. And so without thinking, critical energy is
diverted from a person’s calling and toward filling a bank account. When “you
combine insecurity and ambition,” the plagiarist and disgraced journalist Jonah
Lehrer said when reflecting back on his fall, “you get an inability to say no to
things.”
Ego rejects trade-offs. Why compromise? Ego wants it all.

Ego tells you to cheat, though you love your spouse. Because you want what
you have and what you don’t have. Ego says that sure, even though you’re just
starting to get the hang of one thing, why not jump right in the middle of
another? Eventually, you say yes to too much, to something too far beyond the
pale. We’re like Captain Ahab, chasing Moby Dick, for reasons we don’t even
understand anymore.
Maybe your priority actually is money. Or maybe it’s family. Maybe it’s
influence or change. Maybe it’s building an organization that lasts, or serves a
purpose. All of these are perfectly fine motivations. But you do need to know.
You need to know what you don’t want and what your choices preclude. Because
strategies are often mutually exclusive. One cannot be an opera singer and a teen
pop idol at the same time. Life requires those trade-offs, but ego can’t allow it.
So why do you do what you do? That’s the question you need to answer. Stare
at it until you can. Only then will you understand what matters and what doesn’t.
Only then can you say no, can you opt out of stupid races that don’t matter, or
even exist. Only then is it easy to ignore “successful” people, because most of
the time they aren’t—at least relative to you, and often even to themselves. Only
then can you develop that quiet confidence Seneca talked about.
The more you have and do, the harder maintaining fidelity to your purpose
will be, but the more critically you will need to. Everyone buys into the myth
that if only they had that—usually what someone else has—they would be happy.
It may take getting burned a few times to realize the emptiness of this illusion.
We all occasionally find ourselves in the middle of some project or obligation
and can’t understand why we’re there. It will take courage and faith to stop
yourself.
Find out why you’re after what you’re after. Ignore those who mess with your
pace. Let them covet what you have, not the other way around. Because that’s
independence.

ENTITLEMENT, CONTROL, AND PARANOIA

One of the symptoms of approaching nervous breakdown is the belief that one’s work is
terribly important.
—BERTRAND RUSSELL

W

hen Xerxes, the Persian emperor, crossed the Hellespont during his
invasion of Greece, the waters surged up and destroyed the bridges his
engineers had spent days building. And so he threw chains into the river, ordered
it be given three hundred lashes, and branded it with hot irons. As his men
delivered his punishment, they were ordered to harangue it: “You salt and bitter
stream, your master lays this punishment upon you for injuring him, who never
injured you.” Oh, and he cut off the heads of the men who had built the bridges.
Herodotus, the great historian, called the display “presumptuous,” which is
probably an understatement. Surely “preposterous” and “delusional” are more
appropriate. Then again, it was part of his personality. Shortly before this,
Xerxes had written a letter to a nearby mountain in which he needed to cut a
canal. You may be tall and proud, he wrote, but don’t you dare cause me any
trouble. Otherwise, I’ll topple you into the sea.
How hilarious is that? More important, how pathetic?
Xerxes’ delusional threats are unfortunately not a historical anomaly. With
success, particularly power, come some of the greatest and most dangerous
delusions: entitlement, control, and paranoia.
Hopefully you won’t find yourself so crazed that you start
anthropomorphizing, and inflicting retribution on inanimate objects. That’s pure,
recognizable crazy, and thankfully rare. What’s more likely, and more common,
is we begin to overestimate our own power. Then we lose perspective.
Eventually, we can end like Xerxes, a monstrous joke.
“The Strongest Poison ever known,” the poet William Blake wrote, “came
from Caesar’s Laurel Crown.” Success casts a spell over us.

The problem lies in the path that got us to success in the first place. What
we’ve accomplished often required feats of raw power and force of will. Both
entrepreneurship and art required the creation of something where nothing
existed before. Wealth means beating the market and the odds. Athletic
champions have proved their physical superiority over opponents.
Achieving success involved ignoring the doubts and reservations of the
people around us. It meant rejecting rejection. It required taking certain risks. We
could have given up at any time, but we’re here precisely because we didn’t.
Persistence and courage in the face of ridiculous odds are partially irrational
traits—in some cases really irrational. When it works, those tendencies can feel
like they’ve been vindicated.
And why shouldn’t they? It’s human to think that since it’s been done once—
that the world was changed in some big or small way—that there is now a
magical power in our possession. We’re here because we’re bigger, stronger,
smarter. That we make the reality we inhabit.
Right before he destroyed his own billion-dollar company, Ty Warner, creator
of Beanie Babies, overrode the cautious objections of one of his employees and
bragged, “I could put the Ty heart on manure and they’d buy it!” He was wrong.
And the company not only catastrophically failed, he later narrowly missed
going to jail.
It doesn’t matter if you’re a billionaire, a millionaire, or just a kid who
snagged a good job early. The complete and utter sense of certainty that got you
here can become a liability if you’re not careful. The demands and dream you
had for a better life? The ambition that fueled your effort? These begin as earnest
drives but left unchecked become hubris and entitlement. The same goes for the
instinct to take charge; now you’re addicted to control. Driven to prove the
doubters wrong? Welcome to the seeds of paranoia.
Yes, there are legitimate stresses and anguish that come with the
responsibilities of your new life. All the things you’re managing, the frustrating
mistakes of people who should know better, the endless creep of obligations—no
one prepares us for that, which makes the feelings all the harder to deal with.
The promised land was supposed to be nice, not aggravating. But you can’t let
the walls close in on you. You’ve got to get yourself—and your perceptions—
under control.
When Arthur Lee was sent to France and England to serve as one of
America’s diplomats during the Revolutionary War, instead of relishing the
opportunity to work with his fellow diplomat Silas Deane and elder statesman

Benjamin Franklin, he raged and resented them and suspected them of disliking
him. Finally, Franklin wrote him a letter (one that we’ve probably all deserved to
get at one point or another): “If you do not cure yourself of this temper,”
Franklin advised, “it will end in insanity, of which it is the symptomatic
forerunner.” Probably because he was in such command of his own temper,
Franklin decided that writing the letter was cathartic enough. He never sent it.
If you’ve ever listened to the Oval Office tapes of Richard Nixon, you can
hear the same sickness, and you wish someone could have sent him such a letter.
It’s a harrowing insight into a man who has lost his grip not just on what he is
legally allowed to do, on what his job was (to serve the people), but on reality
itself. He vacillates wildly from supreme confidence to dread and fear. He talks
over his subordinates and rejects information and feedback that challenges what
he wants to believe. He lives in a bubble in which no one can say no—not even
his conscience.
There’s a letter from General Winfield Scott to Jefferson Davis, then the
secretary of war for the United States. Davis belligerently pestered Scott
repeatedly about some trivial matter. Scott ignored it until, finally, forced to
address it, he wrote that he pitied Davis. “Compassion is always due,” he said to
him, “to an enraged imbecile, who lays about him in blows which hurt only
himself.“
Ego is its own worst enemy. It hurts the ones we love too. Our families and
friends suffer for it. So do our customers, fans, and clients. A critic of Napoleon
nailed it when remarking: “He despises the nation whose applause he seeks.” He
couldn’t help but see the French people as pieces to be manipulated, people he
had to be better than, people who, unless they were totally, unconditionally
supportive of him, were against him.
A smart man or woman must regularly remind themselves of the limits of
their power and reach.
Entitlement assumes: This is mine. I’ve earned it. At the same time,
entitlement nickels and dimes other people because it can’t conceive of valuing
another person’s time as highly as its own. It delivers tirades and
pronouncements that exhaust the people who work for and with us, who have no
choice other than to go along. It overstates our abilities to ourselves, it renders
generous judgment of our prospects, and it creates ridiculous expectations.
Control says, It all must be done my way—even little things, even
inconsequential things. It can become paralyzing perfectionism, or a million
pointless battles fought merely for the sake of exerting its say. It too exhausts

people whose help we need, particularly quiet people who don’t object until
we’ve pushed them to their breaking point. We fight with the clerk at the airport,
the customer service representative on the telephone, the agent who examines
our claim. To what end? In reality, we don’t control the weather, we don’t
control the market, we don’t control other people, and our efforts and energies in
spite of this are pure waste.
Paranoia thinks, I can’t trust anyone. I’m in this totally by myself and for
myself. It says, I’m surrounded by fools. It says, focusing on my work, my
obligations, myself is not enough. I also have to be orchestrating various
machinations behind the scenes—to get them before they get me; to get them
back for the slights I perceive.
Everyone has had a boss, a partner, a parent like this. All that strife, anger,
chaos, and conflict. How did it go for them? How did it end?
“He who indulges empty fears earns himself real fears,” wrote Seneca, who
as a political adviser witnessed destructive paranoia at the highest levels.
The sad feedback loop is that the relentless “looking out for number one” can
encourage other people to undermine and fight us. They see that behavior for
what it really is: a mask for weakness, insecurity, and instability. In its frenzy to
protect itself, paranoia creates the persecution it seeks to avoid, making the
owner a prisoner of its own delusions and chaos.
Is this the freedom you envisioned when you dreamed of your success?
Likely not.
So stop.

MANAGING YOURSELF

It is not enough to have great qualities; we should also have the management of them.
—LA ROCHEFOUCAULD

I

n 1953, Dwight D. Eisenhower returned from his inaugural parade and
entered the White House for the first time as president late in the evening. As
he walked into the Executive Mansion, his chief usher handed Eisenhower two
letters marked “Confidential and Secret” that had been sent to him earlier in the
day. Eisenhower’s reaction was swift: “Never bring me a sealed envelope,” he
said firmly. “That’s what I have a staff for.”
How snobbish, right? Had the office really gone to his head already?
Not at all. Eisenhower recognized the seemingly insignificant event for what
it was: a symptom of a disorganized, dysfunctional organization. Not everything
needed to run through him. Who was to say that the envelope was even
important? Why hadn’t anyone screened it?
As president, his first priority in office was organizing the executive branch
into a smooth, functioning, and order-driven unit, just like his military units had
been—not because he didn’t want to work himself, but because everyone had a
job and he trusted and empowered them to do it. As his chief of staff later put it,
“The president does the most important things. I do the next most important
things.”
The public image of Eisenhower is of the man playing golf. In reality, he was
not someone who ever slacked off, but the leisure time he did have was available
because he ran a tight ship. He knew that urgent and important were not
synonyms. His job was to set the priorities, to think big picture, and then trust
the people beneath him to do the jobs they were hired for.
Most of us are not the president, or even president of a company, but in
moving up the ladder in life, the system and work habits that got us where we
are won’t necessarily keep us there. When we’re aspiring or small time, we can

be idiosyncratic, we can compensate for disorganization with hard work and a
little luck. That’s not going to cut it in the majors. In fact, it’ll sink you if you
can’t grow up and organize.
We can contrast Eisenhower’s system in the White House with the infamous
car company created by John DeLorean, when he walked away from GM to
produce his brand of futuristic cars. A few decades removed from the company’s
spectacular implosion, we can be forgiven for thinking the man was just ahead of
his time. In fact, his rise and fall is as timeless a story as there is: Power-hungry
narcissist undermines his own vision, and loses millions of dollars of other
people’s money in the process.
DeLorean was convinced that the culture of order and discipline at GM had
held brilliant creatives like himself down. When he set out to found his company,
he deliberately did everything differently, flouting conventional wisdom and
business practices. The result was not the freewheeling, creative sanctuary that
DeLorean naively envisioned. It was, instead, an overbearingly political,
dysfunctional, and even corrupt organization that collapsed under its own
weight, eventually resorting to criminality and fraud, and losses of some $250
million.
The DeLorean failed both as a car and as a company because it was
mismanaged from top to bottom—with an emphasis on the mismanagement at
the top, by the top. That is: DeLorean himself was the problem. Compared to
Eisenhower, he worked constantly, with very different results.
As one executive put it, DeLorean “had the ability to recognize a good
opportunity but he didn’t know how to make it happen.” Another executive
described his management style as “chasing colored balloons”—he was
constantly distracted and abandoning one project for another. He was a genius.
Sadly, that’s rarely enough.
Though probably not on purpose, DeLorean created a culture in which ego
ran free. Convinced that continued success was simply his by right, he seemed to
bristle at concepts like discipline, organization, or strategic planning. Employees
were not given enough direction, and then at other times, overwhelmed with
trivial instructions. DeLorean couldn’t delegate—except to lackeys whose blind
loyalty was prized over competence or skill. On top of all this, he was often late
or preoccupied.
Executives were allowed to work on extracurricular activities on the company
dime, encouraged specifically to chase side projects that benefited their boss at
the expense of the company. As CEO, DeLorean often bent the truth to investors,

fellow officers, and suppliers, and this habit was contagious throughout the
company.
Like many people driven by a demon, DeLorean’s decisions were motivated
by everything but what would have been efficient, manageable, or responsible.
Instead of improving or fixing GM’s system, it’s as if he threw out order
altogether. What ensued was chaos in which no one followed the rules, no one
was accountable, and very little got done. The only reason it didn’t collapse
immediately was that DeLorean was a master of public relations—a skill that
held the whole story together until the first faulty cars came off the assembly
line.
Not surprisingly, the cars were terrible. They didn’t work. Cost per unit was
massively over budget. They hadn’t secured enough dealers. They couldn’t
deliver cars to the ones they had. The launch was a disaster. DeLorean Motor
Company never recovered.
It turns out that becoming a great leader is difficult. Who knew?!
DeLorean couldn’t manage himself, and so he had trouble managing others.
And so he managed to fail, both himself and the dream.
Management? That’s the reward for all your creativity and new ideas?
Becoming the Man? Yes—in the end, we all face becoming the adult supervision
we originally rebelled against. Yet often we react petulantly and prefer to think:
Now that I’m in charge, things are going to be different!
Think about Eisenhower. He was the damn president—the most powerful
man in the world. He could have kicked back and done things how he liked. If he
was disorganized, people would have just had to deal with it (there have been
plenty of those presidents before). Yet he wasn’t. He understood that order and
responsibility were what the country needed. And that this far outweighed his
own concerns.
What was so sad about DeLorean is that, like a lot of talented people, his
ideas were on point. His car was an exciting innovation. His model could have
worked. He had all the assets and the talent. It was his ego and the
disorganization that resulted from it that prevented the ingredients from coming
together—just as it they do for so many of us.
As you become successful in your own field, your responsibilities may begin
to change. Days become less and less about doing and more and more about
making decisions. Such is the nature of leadership. This transition requires
reevaluating and updating your identity. It requires a certain humility to put aside
some of the more enjoyable or satisfying parts of your previous job. It means

accepting that others might be more qualified or specialized in areas in which
you considered yourself competent—or at least their time is better spent on them
than yours.
Yes, it would be more fun to be constantly involved in every tiny matter, and
might make us feel important to be the person called to put out fires. The little
things are endlessly engaging and often flattering, while the big picture can be
hard to discern. It’s not always fun, but it is the job. If you don’t think big picture
—because you’re too busy playing “boss man”—who will?
Of course, there is no “right” system. Sometimes systems are better
decentralized. Sometimes they are better in a strict hierarchy. Every project and
goal deserves an approach fitted perfectly to what needs to be done. Maybe a
creative, relaxed environment makes the most sense for what you’re doing.
Maybe you can run your business remotely, or maybe it’s better for everyone to
see each other face-to-face.
What matters is that you learn how to manage yourself and others, before
your industry eats you alive. Micromanagers are egotists who can’t manage
others and they quickly get overloaded. So do the charismatic visionaries who
lose interest when it’s time to execute. Worse yet are those who surround
themselves with yes-men or sycophants who clean up their messes and create a
bubble in which they can’t even see how disconnected from reality they are.
Responsibility requires a readjustment and then increased clarity and purpose.
First, setting the top-level goals and priorities of the organization and your life.
Then enforcing and observing them. To produce results and only results.
A fish stinks from the head, is the saying. Well, you’re the head now.

BEWARE THE DISEASE OF ME

If I am not for myself who will be for me? If I am only for myself, who am I?
—HILLEL

T

here were great Allied generals of World War II—Patton, Bradley,
Montgomery, Eisenhower, MacArthur, Zhukov—and then there was George
Catlett Marshall Jr. Although all of them served their countries and fought and
led bravely, one stands apart.
Today, we see World War II as a clear fight in which good aligned selflessly
against evil. The problem is that victory and the passage of time have obscured
the all-too-humanness of the people who were on the right side of that fight.
That is: we forget the politics, the backstabbing, the spotlight coveting, the
posturing, the greed, and the ass-covering among the Allies. While the other
generals protected their turf, fought with each other, and eagerly aspired to their
place in history, that behavior was virtually absent in one man: General George
Marshall.
More impressively, Marshall quietly outpaced all of them with the magnitude
of his accomplishments. What was his secret?
Pat Riley, the famous coach and manager who led the Los Angeles Lakers
and Miami Heat to multiple championships, says that great teams tend to follow
a trajectory. When they start—before they have won—a team is innocent. If the
conditions are right, they come together, they watch out for each other and work
together toward their collective goal. This stage, he calls the “Innocent Climb.”
After a team starts to win and media attention begins, the simple bonds that
joined the individuals together begin to fray. Players calculate their own
importance. Chests swell. Frustrations emerge. Egos appear. The Innocent
Climb, Pat Riley says, is almost always followed by the “Disease of Me.” It can
“strike any winning team in any year and at any moment,” and does with
alarming regularity.

It’s Shaq and Kobe, unable to play together. It’s Jordan punching Steve Kerr,
Horace Grant, and Will Perdue—his own team members. He punched people on
his own team! It’s Enron employees plunging California into darkness for
personal profit. It’s leaks to the media from a disgruntled executive hoping to
scuttle a project he dislikes. It’s negging and every other intimidation tactic.
For us, it’s beginning to think that we’re better, that we’re special, that our
problems and experiences are so incredibly different from everyone else’s that
no one could possibly understand. It’s an attitude that has sunk far better people,
teams, and causes than ours.
With General Marshall, who began his term as chief of staff of the U.S. Army
on the day Germany invaded Poland in 1939 and served through the entire war,
we see one of history’s few exceptions to this trend. Marshall somehow never
caught the Disease of Me, and in many ways, often shamed it out of the people
who did.
It begins with his balanced relationship to rank, an obsession for most people
in his line of work.
He was not a man who abstained from every public show of rank or status. He
insisted that the president call him General Marshall, not George, for example.
(He earned it, right?) But while other generals regularly lobbied for promotions
—General MacArthur advanced over other officers in the prewar years largely
due to the aggressive efforts of his mother—Marshall actively discouraged it.
When others began to push for Marshall to be chief of staff, he asked them to
stop, because “[it] makes me conspicuous in the army. Too conspicuous in fact.”
Later, he discouraged an effort by the House to pass a bill awarding him the rank
of field marshal—not only because he thought the name Field Marshal Marshall
would sound ridiculous, but because he didn’t want to outrank or hurt his
mentor, General Pershing, who was near death and a constant source of advice
and guidance.
Can you imagine? In all these cases, his sense of honor meant turning down
honors, and often letting them go to other people. Like any normal human being,
he wanted them, only the right way. More important, he knew that, however nice
they would have been to have, he could do without them while perhaps others
could not. Ego needs honors in order to be validated. Confidence, on the other
hand, is able to wait and focus on the task at hand regardless of external
recognition.
Early on in our careers, we may be able to make these sacrifices more easily.
We can drop out of a prestigious college to start our own company. Or we can

tolerate being looked over once in a while. Once we’ve “made it,“ the tendency
is to switch to the mind-set of “getting what’s mine.” Now, all of a sudden
awards and recognition matter—even though they weren’t what got us here. We
need that money, that title, that media attention—not for the team or the cause,
but for ourselves. Because we’ve earned it.
Let’s make one thing clear: we never earn the right to be greedy or to pursue
our interests at the expense of everyone else. To think otherwise is not only
egotistical, it’s counterproductive.
Marshall was tested on this to the extreme. A job he’d trained his whole life
for was up for grabs: command of the troops on D-Day, essentially the largest
coordinated invasion the world had ever seen. Roosevelt let it be known that it
was Marshall’s if he wanted it. A general’s place in history is assured by his feats
in battle, so even though Marshall was needed in Washington, Roosevelt wanted
to give him the opportunity to take command. Marshall would have none of it.
“The decision is yours, Mr. President; my wishes have nothing to do with the
matter.” The role and the glory went to Eisenhower.
It came to be that Eisenhower was, in fact, the best man for that job. He
performed superbly and helped win the war. Would anything else have been
worth the trade-off?
Yet this is what we regularly refuse to do; our ego precludes serving any
larger mission we’re a part of.
What are we going to do? Let someone get one over on us?
The writer Cheryl Strayed once told a young reader, “You’re becoming who
you are going to be and so you might as well not be an asshole.” This is one of
the most dangerous ironies of success—it can make us someone we never
wanted to be in the first place. The Disease of Me can corrupt the most innocent
climb.
There was a general who treated Marshall poorly—essentially banishing him
to some obscure postings in the middle of his career. Later, Marshall surpassed
him and had his chance for revenge. Except—he didn’t take it. Because
whatever the man’s flaws, Marshall saw that he was still of use and that the
country would be worse off without him. What were the thanks for this quiet
suppression of ego? Just another job well done—and not much more.
The word for that is one we don’t use much anymore: magnanimous. It was
good strategy too, of course, but mostly Marshall was gracious, forgiving, and
magnanimous because it was right. According to observers as high up as

President Truman, what separated Marshall from nearly everyone else in the
military and politics is that “never did General Marshall think about himself.”
There is another story of Marshall sitting for one of the many official portraits
that was required of him. After appearing many times and patiently honoring the
requests, Marshall was finally informed by the painter that he was finished and
free to go. Marshall stood up and began to leave. “Don’t you want to see the
painting?” the artist asked. “No, thank you,” Marshall said respectfully and left.
Is that to say that managing your image isn’t important? Of course not. Early
in your career, you’ll notice that you jump on every opportunity to do so. As you
become more accomplished, you’ll realize that so much of it is a distraction from
your work—time spent with reporters, with awards, and with marketing are time
away from what you really care about.
Who has time to look at a picture of himself? What’s the point?
As his wife later observed, the people who saw George Marshall as simply
modest or quiet missed what was special about the man. He had the same traits
that everyone has—ego, self-interest, pride, dignity, ambition—but they were
“tempered by a sense of humility and selflessness.”
It doesn’t make you a bad person to want to be remembered. To want to make
it to the top. To provide for yourself and your family. After all, that’s all part of
the allure.
There is a balance. Soccer coach Tony Adams expresses it well. Play for the
name on the front of the jersey, he says, and they’ll remember the name on the
back.
When it comes to Marshall, the old idea that selflessness and integrity could
be weaknesses or hold someone back are laughably disproven. Sure, some
people might have trouble telling you much about him—but each and every one
of them lives in a world he was largely responsible for shaping.
The credit? Who cares.

MEDITATE ON THE IMMENSITY

A monk is a man who is separated from all and who is in harmony with all.
—EVAGRIUS PONTICUS

I

n 1879, the preservationist and explorer John Muir took his first trip to
Alaska. As he explored the fjords and rocky landscapes of Alaska’s now
famous Glacier Bay, a powerful feeling struck him all at once. He’d always been
in love with nature, and here in the unique summer climate of the far north, in
this single moment, it was as if the entire world was in sync. As if he could see
the entire ecosystem and circle of life before him. His pulse began to pick up,
and he and the group were “warmed and quickened into sympathy with
everything, taken back into the heart of nature” from which we all came.
Thankfully, Muir noticed and recorded in his journal the beautiful cohesion of
the world around him, which few have ever matched since.
We feel the life and motion about us, and the universal beauty: the tides
marching back and forth with weariless industry, laving the beautiful
shores, and swaying the purple dulse of the broad meadows of the sea
where the fishes are fed, the wild streams in rows white with waterfalls,
ever in bloom and ever in song, spreading their branches over a thousand
mountains; the vast forests feeding on the drenching sunbeams, every cell
in a whirl of enjoyment; misty flocks of insects stirring all the air, the wild
sheep and goats on the grassy ridges above the woods, bears in the berrytangles, mink and beaver and otter far back on many a river and lake;
Indians and adventurers pursuing their lonely ways; birds tending to their
young—everywhere, everywhere, beauty and life, and glad, rejoicing
action.

In this moment, he was experiencing what the Stoics would call sympatheia
—a connectedness with the cosmos.The French philosopher Pierre Hadot has
referred to it as the “oceanic feeling.” A sense of belonging to something larger,
of realizing that “human things are an infinitesimal point in the immensity.” It is
in these moments that we’re not only free but drawn toward important questions:
Who am I? What am I doing? What is my role in this world?
Nothing draws us away from those questions like material success—when we
are always busy, stressed, put upon, distracted, reported to, relied on, apart from.
When we’re wealthy and told that we’re important or powerful. Ego tells us that
meaning comes from activity, that being the center of attention is the only way to
matter.
When we lack a connection to anything larger or bigger than us, it’s like a
piece of our soul is gone. Like we’ve detached ourselves from the traditions we
hail from, whatever that happens to be (a craft, a sport, a brotherhood or
sisterhood, a family). Ego blocks us from the beauty and history in the world. It
stands in the way.
No wonder we find success empty. No wonder we’re exhausted. No wonder it
feels like we’re on a treadmill. No wonder we lose touch with the energy that
once fueled us.
Here’s an exercise: walk onto ancient battlefield or a place of historical
significance. Look at the statues and you can’t help but see how similar the
people look, how little has changed since then—since before, and how it will be
forever after. Here a great man once stood. Here another brave woman died.
Here a cruel rich man lived, in this palatial home . . . It’s the sense that others
have been here before you, generations of them, in fact.
In those moments, we have a sense of the immensity of the world. Ego is
impossible, because we realize, if only fleetingly, what Emerson meant when he
said that “Every man is a quotation from all his ancestors.” They are part of us,
we are part of a tradition. Embrace the power of this position and learn from it. It
is an exhilarating feeling to grasp this, like the one that Muir felt in Alaska. Yes,
we are small. We are also a piece of this great universe and a process.
The astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson has described this duality well—it’s
possible to bask in both your relevance and irrelevance to the cosmos. As he
says, “When I look up in the universe, I know I’m small, but I’m also big. I’m
big because I’m connected to the universe and the universe is connected to me.”
We just can’t forget which is bigger and which has been here longer.

Why do you think that great leaders and thinkers throughout history have
“gone out into the wilderness” and come back with inspiration, with a plan, with
an experience that puts them on a course that changes the world? It’s because in
doing so they found perspective, they understood the larger picture in a way that
wasn’t possible in the bustle of everyday life. Silencing the noise around them,
they could finally hear the quiet voice they needed to listen to.
Creativity is a matter of receptiveness and recognition. This cannot happen if
you’re convinced the world revolves around you.
By removing the ego—even temporarily—we can access what’s left standing
in relief. By widening our perspective, more comes into view.
It’s sad how disconnected from the past and the future most of us really are.
We forget that woolly mammoths walked the earth while the pyramids were
being built. We don’t realize that Cleopatra lived closer to our time than she did
to the construction of those famous pyramids that marked her kingdom. When
British workers excavated the land in Trafalgar Square to build Nelson’s Column
and its famous stone lions, in the ground they found the bones of actual lions,
who’d roamed that exact spot just a few thousand years before. Someone
recently calculated that it takes but a chain of six individuals who shook hands
with one another across the centuries to connect Barack Obama to George
Washington. There’s a video you can watch on YouTube of a man on a CBS
game show, “I’ve Got a Secret,” in 1956, in an episode that also happened to
feature a famous actress named Lucille Ball. His secret? He was in Ford’s
Theatre when Lincoln was assassinated. England’s government only recently
paid off debts it incurred as far back as 1720 from events like the South Sea
Bubble, the Napoleonic wars, the empire’s abolition of slavery, and the Irish
potato famine—meaning that in the twenty-first century there was still a direct
and daily connection to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
As our power or talents grow, we like to think that makes us special—that we
live in blessed, unprecedented times. This is compounded by the fact that so
many of the photos we see from even fifty years ago are still in black and white,
and we seem to assume that the world was in black and white. Obviously, it
wasn’t—their sky was the same color as ours (in some places brighter than ours),
they bled the same way we did, and their cheeks got flushed just like ours do.
We are just like them, and always will be.
“It’s hard to be humble when you’re as great as I am,” Muhammad Ali once
said. Yeah, okay. That’s why great people have to work even harder to fight
against this headwind. It’s hard to be self-absorbed and convinced of your own

greatness inside the solitude and quiet of a sensory deprivation tank. It’s hard to
be anything but humble walking alone along a beach late at night with an endless
black ocean crashing loudly against the ground next to you.
We have to actively seek out this cosmic sympathy. There’s the famous Blake
poem that opens with “To see a World in a Grain of Sand / And a Heaven in a
Wild Flower / Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand / And Eternity in an hour.”
That’s what we’re after here. That’s the transcendental experience that makes our
petty ego impossible.
Feel unprotected against the elements or forces or surroundings. Remind
yourself how pointless it is to rage and fight and try to one-up those around you.
Go and put yourself in touch with the infinite, and end your conscious separation
from the world. Reconcile yourself a bit better with the realities of life. Realize
how much came before you, and how only wisps of it remain.
Let the feeling carry you as long as you can. Then when you start to feel
better or bigger than, go and do it again.

MAINTAIN YOUR SOBRIETY

The height of cultivation runs to simplicity.
—BRUCE LEE

A

ngela Merkel is the antithesis of nearly every assumption we make about a
head of state—especially a German one. She is plain. She is modest. She
cares little for presentation or flash. She gives no fiery speeches. She has no
interest in expansion or domination. Mostly, she is quiet and reserved.
Chancellor Angela Merkel is sober, when far too many leaders are
intoxicated—with ego, with power, with position. This sobriety is precisely what
has made her a wildly popular three-term leader and, paradoxically, a powerful,
sweeping force for freedom and peace in modern Europe.
There is a story about Merkel as a young girl, at a swimming lesson. She
walked out on the diving board and stood there, thinking about whether she
should jump. Minutes ticked by. More minutes. Finally, just as the bell marking
the end of the lesson began to ring, she jumped. Was she afraid or just cautious?
Many years later, she would remind Europe’s leaders during a major crisis that
“Fear is a bad advisor.” As a kid on that diving board, she wanted to use every
allotted second to make the right decision, not driven by recklessness or fear.
In most cases, we think that people become successful through sheer energy
and enthusiasm. We almost excuse ego because we think it’s part and parcel of
the personality required to “make it big.” Maybe a bit of that overpoweringness
is what got you where you are. But let’s ask: Is it really sustainable for the next
several decades? Can you really outwork and outrun everyone forever?
The answer is no. The ego tells us we’re invincible, that we have unlimited
force that will never dissipate. But that can’t be what greatness requires—energy
without end?
Merkel is the embodiment of Aesop’s fable about the tortoise. She is slow and
steady. The historic night the Berlin Wall fell, she was thirty-five. She had one

beer, went to bed, and showed up early for work the next day. A few years later,
she had worked to become a respected but obscure physicist. Only then did she
enter politics. In her fifties, she became chancellor. It was a diligent, plodding
path.
Yet the rest of us want to get to the top as fast as humanly possible. We have
no patience for waiting. We’re high on getting high up the ranks. Once we’ve
made it, we tend to think that ego and energy is the only way to stay there. It’s
not.
When Russian president Vladimir Putin once attempted to intimidate Merkel
by letting his large hunting dog barge into a meeting (she is reportedly not a dog
lover), she didn’t flinch and later joked about it. As a result, he was the one who
looked foolish and insecure. During her rise and especially during her time in
power, she has consistently maintained her equilibrium and clearheadedness,
regardless of the immediate stressors or stimuli.
In a similar position, we might have sprung into “bold” action; we might have
gotten angry or drawn a line in the sand. We have to stand up for ourselves,
right? But do we? So often, this is just ego, escalating tension more than dealing
with it. Merkel is firm, clear, and patient. She’s willing to compromise on
everything except the principle at stake—which far too many people lose sight
of.
That is sobriety. That is command of oneself.
She did not become the most powerful woman in the Western world by
accident. More importantly, she’s maintained her perch for three terms with the
same formula.
The great philosopher king Marcus Aurelius knew this very well. Called to
politics almost against his will, he served the Roman people in continually
higher offices from his teens until his death. There was always pressing business
—appeals to hear, wars to fight, laws to pass, favors to grant. He strove to escape
what he called “imperialization”—the stain of absolute power that had wrecked
previous emperors. To do that, he wrote to himself, he must “fight to be the
person philosophy tried to make you.”
This is why the Zen philosopher Zuigan is supposed to have called out to
himself everyday:
“MASTER—”
“YES, SIR?”

Then he would add:
“BECOME SOBER.”
“YES, SIR.”
He would conclude by saying:
“DO NOT BE DECEIVED BY OTHERS.”
“YES SIR, YES SIR.”
Today, we might add to that:
“DON’T BE DECEIVED BY RECOGNITION YOU HAVE GOTTEN OR THE AMOUNT OF
MONEY IN YOUR BANK ACCOUNT.”
We have to fight to stay sober, despite the many different forces swirling
around our ego.
The historian Shelby Foote observed that “power doesn’t so much corrupt;
that’s too simple. It fragments, closes options, mesmerizes.” That’s what ego
does. It clouds the mind precisely when it needs to be clear. Sobriety is a
counterbalance, a hangover cure—or better, a prevention method.
Other politicians are bold and charismatic. But as Merkel supposedly said,
“You can’t solve . . . tasks with charisma.” She is rational. She analyzes. She
makes it about the situation, not about herself, as people in power often do. Her
background in science is helpful here, surely. Politicians are often vain,
obsessing about their image. Merkel is too objective for that. She cares about
results and little else. A German writer observed in a tribute on her fiftieth
birthday that unpretentiousness is Merkel’s main weapon.
David Halberstam, writing about the Patriots’ coach Bill Belichick, observed
that the man was “not only in the steak business, he had contempt for sizzle.”
You could say the same about Merkel. Leaders like Belichick and Merkel know
that steak is what wins games and moves nations forward. Sizzle, on the other
hand, makes it harder to make the right decisions—how to interact with others,
who to promote, which plays to run, what feedback to listen to, where to come
down on an issue.
Churchill’s Europe required one type of leader. Today’s interconnected world
requires its own. Because there is so much information to be sorted through, so

much competition, so much change, without a clear head . . . all is lost.
We’re not talking about abstinence from drugs or alcohol obviously, but there
certainly is an element of restraint to egoless sobriety—an elimination of the
unnecessary and the destructive. No more obsessing about your image; treating
people beneath you or above you with contempt; needing first-class trappings
and the star treatment; raging, fighting, preening, performing, lording over,
condescending, and marveling at your own awesomeness or self-anointed
importance.
Sobriety is the counterweight that must balance out success. Especially if
things keep getting better and better.
As James Basford remarked, “It requires a strong constitution to withstand
repeated attacks of prosperity.” Well, that’s where we are now.
There’s an old line about how if you want to live happy, live hidden. It’s true.
The problem is, that means the rest of us are deprived of really good examples.
We’re lucky to see someone like Merkel in the public eye, because she is the
representative of a very large, silent majority.
As hard as it might be to believe from what we see in the media, there
actually are some successful people with modest apartments. Like Merkel, they
have normal private lives with their spouses (her husband skipped her first
inauguration). They lack artifice, they wear normal clothes. Most successful
people are people you’ve never heard of. They want it that way.
It keeps them sober. It helps them do their jobs.

FOR WHAT OFTEN COMES NEXT, EGO IS THE ENEMY . . .

The evidence is in, and you are the verdict.
—ANNE LAMOTT

H

ere you are at the pinnacle. What have you found? Just how tough and
tricky it is to manage. You thought it would get easier when you arrived;
instead, it’s even harder—a different animal entirely. What you found is that you
must manage yourself in order to maintain your success.
The philosopher Aristotle was not unfamiliar with the worlds of ego and
power and empire. His most famous pupil was Alexander the Great, and partially
through Aristotle’s teachings, the young man conquered the entire known world.
Alexander was brave and brilliant and often generous and wise. Still, it’s clear
that he ignored Aristotle’s most important lesson—and that’s partially why he
died at age thirty-two, far from home, likely killed by his own men, who had
finally said, “Enough.”
It’s not that he was wrong to have great ambitions. Alexander just never
grasped Aristotle’s “golden mean”—that is, the middle ground. Repeatedly,
Aristotle speaks of virtue and excellence as points along a spectrum. Courage,
for instance, lies between cowardice on one end and recklessness on the other.
Generosity, which we all admire, must stop short of either profligacy and
parsimony in order to be of any use. Where the line—this golden mean—is can
be difficult to tell, but without finding it, we risk dangerous extremes. This is
why it is so hard to be excellent, Aristotle wrote. “In each case, it is hard work to
find the intermediate; for instance, not everyone, but only one who knows, finds
the midpoint in a circle.”
We can use the golden mean to navigate our ego and our desire to achieve.
Endless ambition is easy; anyone can put their foot down hard on the gas.
Complacency is easy too; it’s just a matter of taking that foot off the gas. We
must avoid what the business strategist Jim Collins terms the “undisciplined

pursuit of more,” as well as the complacency that comes with plaudits. To
borrow from Aristotle again, what’s difficult is to apply the right amount of
pressure, at the right time, in the right way, for the right period of time, in the
right car, going in the right direction.
If we don’t do this, the consequences can be dire.
There is a line from Napoleon, who, like Alexander, died miserably. He said,
“Men of great ambition have sought happiness . . . and have found fame.” What
he means is that behind every goal is the drive to be happy and fulfilled—but
when egotism takes hold, we lose track of our goal and end up somewhere we
never intended. Emerson, in his famous essay on Napoleon, takes pains to point
out that just a few years after his death, Europe was essentially exactly as it was
before Napoleon began his precipitous rise. All that death, that effort, that greed,
and those honors—for what? For basically nothing. Napoleon, he wrote, quickly
faded away, just like the smoke from his artillery.
Howard Hughes—despite his current reputation as some kind of bold
maverick—was not a happy man, no matter how awesome his life may seem
from history or movies. When he was near death, one of his aides sought to
reassure a suffering Hughes. “What an incredible life you have led,” the aide
said. Hughes shook his head and replied with the sad, emphatic honesty of
someone whose time has clearly come, “If you had ever swapped places in life
with me, I would be willing to bet that you would have demanded to swap back
before the passage of the first week.”
We do not have to follow in those footsteps. We know what decisions we
must make to avoid that ignominious, even pathetic end: protecting our sobriety,
eschewing greed and paranoia, staying humble, retaining our sense of purpose,
connecting to the larger world around us.
Because even if we manage ourselves well, prosperity holds no guarantees.
The world conspires against us in many ways, and the laws of nature say that
everything regresses toward the mean. In sports, the schedule gets harder after a
winning season, the bad teams get better draft picks, and the salary cap makes it
tough to keep a team together. In life, taxes go up the more you make, and the
more obligations society foists on you. The media is harder on those it has
covered before. Rumors and gossip are the cost of renown: He’s a drunk. She’s
gay. He’s a hypocrite. She’s a bitch. The crowd roots for the underdog, and roots
against the winners.
These are just facts of life. Who can afford to add denial to all that?

Instead of letting power make us delusional and instead of taking what we
have for granted, we’d be better to spend our time preparing for the shifts of fate
that inevitably occur in life. That is, adversity, difficulty, failure.
Who knows—maybe a downturn is exactly what’s coming next. Worse,
maybe you caused it. Just because you did something once, doesn’t mean you’ll
be able to do it successfully forever.
Reversals and regressions are as much a part of the cycle of life as anything
else.
But we can manage that too.

FAILURE
Here we are experiencing the trials endemic to any journey. Perhaps we’ve failed, perhaps our goal
turned out to be harder to achieve than anticipated. No one is permanently successful, and not
everyone finds success on the first attempt. We all deal with setbacks along the way. Ego not only
leaves us unprepared for these circumstances, it often contributed to their occurrence in the first
place. The way through, the way to rise again, requires a reorientation and increased self-awareness.
We don’t need pity—our own or anyone else’s—we need purpose, poise, and patience.

It is because mankind are disposed to sympathize more entirely with our joy than with our
sorrow, that we make parade of our riches, and conceal our poverty. Nothing is so mortifying
as to be obliged to expose our distress to the view of the public, and to feel, that though our
situation is open to the eyes of all mankind, no mortal conceives for us the half of what we
suffer.
—ADAM SMITH

F

or the first half of her life, Katharine Graham saw pretty much everything go
right.
Her father, Eugene Meyer, was a financial genius who made a fortune in the
stock market. Her mother was a beautiful as well as brilliant socialite. As a child,
Katharine had the best of everything: the best schools, the best teachers, big
houses, and servants to wait on her.
In 1933, her father bought the Washington Post, then a struggling but
important newspaper, which he began to turn around. The only child to express
any serious interest in it, Katharine inherited the paper when she was older and
handed over the management to her equally impressive husband, Philip Graham.
She was not another Howard Hughes, who squandered her family’s fortune.
She was not another rich kid who took the easy road in life because she could.
But it was a cushy life, no question about it. She had been, in her words, content
to be the tail to her husband’s (and parent’s) kite.
Then life took a turn. Phil Graham’s behavior became increasingly erratic. He
drank heavily. He made reckless business decisions and bought things they
couldn’t afford. He began having affairs. He publicly humiliated his wife in front
of nearly everyone they knew. Rich people problems, right? It turns out that he
had suffered a severe mental breakdown, and as Katharine attempted to nurse
him back to health, he killed himself with a hunting rifle while she napped in the
next room.
In 1963, at forty-six years old, Katharine Graham, a mother of three with no
work experience, found herself in charge of the Washington Post Company, a

vast corporation with thousands of employees. She was unprepared, timid, and
naive.
Though tragic, these events were not exactly a cataclysmic failure. Graham
was still rich, still white, still privileged. Still, it was not what she thought life
had planned for her. That’s the point. Failure and adversity are relative and
unique to each of us. Almost without exception, this is what life does: it takes
our plans and dashes them to pieces. Sometimes once, sometimes lots of times.
As the financial philosopher and economist George Goodman once observed,
it is as if “we are at a wonderful ball where the champagne sparkles in every
glass and soft laughter falls upon the summer air. We know at some moment the
black horsemen will come shattering through the terrace doors wreaking
vengeance and scattering the survivors. Those who leave early are saved, but the
ball is so splendid no one wants to leave while there is still time. So everybody
keeps asking—what time is it? But none of the clocks have hands.”
He was speaking of economic crises, although he may as well have been
talking about where all of us find ourselves, not just once in our lifetimes, but
often. Things are going well. Perhaps we’re aspiring to some big goal. Perhaps
we’re finally enjoying the fruits of our labors. At any point, fate can intervene.
If success is ego intoxication, then failure can be a devastating ego blow—
turning slips into falls and little troubles into great unravelings. If ego is often
just a nasty side effect of great success, it can be fatal during failure.
We have many names for these problems: Sabotage. Unfairness. Adversity.
Trials. Tragedy. No matter the label, it’s a trial. We don’t like it, and some of us
are sunk by it. Others seem to be built to make it through. In either case, it’s a
trial each person must endure.
This fate is as much written for us as it was written five thousand years ago
for the young king in Gilgamesh:
He will face a battle he knows not,
he will ride a road he knows not.
That’s what came to Katharine Graham. It turned out that taking over the
paper was the first in a series of trying and wrenching events that lasted for
nearly two decades.
Thomas Paine, remarking about George Washington, once wrote that there is
a “natural firmness in some minds which cannot be unlocked by trifles, but

which, when unlocked, discovers a cabinet of fortitude.” Graham seems to have
possessed a similar cabinet.
As she settled into her leadership position, Graham found that the paper’s
conservative board was a constant obstacle. They were patronizing and risk
averse and had held the company back. To succeed, she would have to develop
her own compass and not defer to others the way she always had. It eventually
became clear that she needed a new executive editor. Against the board’s advice,
she replaced the well-liked good old boy with an unknown young upstart.
Simple enough.
The next turn of the screw wasn’t. Just as the company was filing to go
public, the Post received a collection of stolen government documents that
editors asked Graham if they could run, despite a court order preventing their
publication. She consulted the company’s lawyers. She consulted the board. All
advised against it—fearing it could sink the IPO or tie the company up in
lawsuits for years. Torn, she decided to proceed and publish them—a decision
with essentially no precedent. Shortly thereafter, the paper’s investigation of a
burglary at the Democratic National Committee’s headquarters—relying on an
anonymous source—threatened to put the company permanently at odds with the
White House and Washington’s powerful elite (as well as jeopardizing the
government licenses they needed for the TV stations the Post owned). At one
point, Nixon loyalist and the attorney general of the United States John Mitchell
threatened that Graham had so overreached that her “tit” was going to be
“caught in a big fat wringer.” Another aide bragged that the White House was
now thinking about how to screw the paper over. Put yourself in her shoes: the
most powerful office in the world explicitly strategizing, “How can we hurt the
Post the most?”
On top of that, the Post’s stock price was less than stellar. The market was
poor. In 1974, an investor began aggressively buying up shares in the company.
The board was terrified. It could mean a hostile takeover. Graham was
dispatched to deal with him. The following year, the paper’s printers’ union
began a vicious, protracted strike. At one point, union members wore shirts that
said, “Phil Shot the Wrong Graham.” Despite—or perhaps because of—these
tactics, she decided to fight the strike. They fought back. At four o’clock one
morning came a a frantic call: the union had sabotaged company machinery,
beaten up an innocent staffer, and then set one of the printing presses on fire.
Typically, during printing strikes competitors will help fellow papers out with

their printing but Graham’s competitors refused, costing the Post $300,000 a day
in advertising revenue.
Then, a suite of major investors began to sell their stock positions in the
Washington Post Company, ostensibly having lost their faith in its prospects.
Graham, pushed by the activist investor she’d met with earlier, decided her best
option was to spend an enormous amount of the company’s money to buy back
its own shares on the public markets—a dangerous move that almost no one was
doing at the time.
That’s a list of problems exhausting to read about let alone live through. Yet
because of Graham’s perseverance, it shook out better than anyone could have
possibly predicted.
The leaked documents Katharine Graham published became known as the
Pentagon Papers and were one of the most important stories in the history of
journalism. The paper’s Watergate reporting, which so incensed the Nixon White
House, changed American history and took down an entire administration. It
also won the paper a Pulitzer Prize. The investor others had feared turned out to
be a young Warren Buffett, who became her business mentor and an enormous
advocate and steward of the company. (His small investments in her family’s
company would one day be worth hundreds of millions.) She prevailed in
negotiations with the union and the strike eventually ended. Her main competitor
in Washington, the one that had refused to come to her aid, the Star, suddenly
folded and was acquired by the Post. Her stock buybacks—made contrary not
only to business wisdom, but the judgment of the market—made the company
billions of dollars.
It turns out that the long hard slog she endured, the mistakes she made, the
repeated failures, crises, and attacks were all leading somewhere. If you’d
invested $1 in the Post’s IPO in 1971, it would be worth $89 by the time Graham
stepped down in 1993—compared to $14 for her industry and $5 for the S&P
500. It makes her not just one of the most successful female CEOs of her
generation and the first to run a Fortune 500 company, but one of the best CEOs
ever, period.
For someone born with a silver spoon in her mouth, the first decade and a half
was what you’d call a baptism of fire. Graham faced difficulty after difficulty,
difficulties that she wasn’t really equipped to handle, or so it seemed. There were
times when it probably felt like she should have just sold the damn thing and
enjoyed her massive wealth.

Graham didn’t cause her husband’s suicide, but it was left to her to carry on
without him. She didn’t ask for Watergate and the Pentagon Papers, but it fell on
her to navigate their incendiary nature. While others went on buying and merger
sprees in the eighties, she didn’t. She doubled down on herself and her own
company, despite the fact that it was treated as a weakling by Wall Street. She
could have taken the easy way a hundred times, but did not.
At any given moment, there is the chance of failure or setbacks. Bill Walsh
says, “Almost always, your road to victory goes through a place called ‘failure.’”
In order to taste success again, we’ve got to understand what led to this moment
(or these years) of difficulty, what went wrong and why. We must deal with the
situation in order to move past it. We’ll need to accept it and to push through it.
Graham was alone in most of this. She was blindly feeling her way through
the dark, trying to figure out a tough situation she never expected to be in. She’s
an example of how you can do most everything right and still find yourself in
deep shit.
We think that failure only comes to egomaniacs who were begging for it.
Nixon deserved to fail; did Graham? The reality is that while yes, often people
set themselves up to crash, good people fail (or other people fail them) all the
time too. People who have already been through a lot find themselves stuck with
more. Life isn’t fair.
Ego loves this notion, the idea that something is “fair” or not. Psychologists
call it narcissistic injury when we take personally totally indifferent and
objective events. We do that when our sense of self is fragile and dependent on
life going our way all the time. Whether what you’re going through is your fault
or your problem doesn’t matter, because it’s yours to deal with right now.
Graham’s ego didn’t cause her to fail, but if she’d had one, it certainly would
have prevented her from succeeding ever again. You could say that failure
always arrives uninvited, but through our ego, far too many of us allow it to stick
around.
What did Graham need through all this? Not swagger. Not bluster. She
needed to be strong. She needed confidence and a willingness to endure. A sense
of right and wrong. Purpose. It wasn’t about her. It was about preserving her
family’s legacy. Protecting the paper. Doing her job.
What about you? Will your ego betray you when things get difficult? Or can
you proceed without it?
When we face difficulty, particularly public difficulty (doubters, scandals,
losses), our friend the ego will show its true colors.

Absorbing the negative feedback, ego says: I knew you couldn’t do it. Why
did you ever try? It claims: This isn’t worth it. This isn’t fair. This is somebody
else’s problem. Why don’t you come up with a good excuse and wash your hands
of this? It tells us we shouldn’t have to put up with this. It tells us that we’re not
the problem.
That is, it adds self-injury to every injury you experience.
To paraphrase Epicurus, the narcissistically inclined live in an “unwalled
city.” A fragile sense of self is constantly under threat. Illusions and
accomplishments are not defenses, not when you’ve got the special sensitive
antennae trained to receive (and create) the signals that challenge your
precarious balancing act.
It is a miserable way to live.
The year before Walsh took over the 49ers, they went 2 and 14. His first year
as head coach and general manager, they went . . . 2 and 14. Can you imagine the
disappointment? All the changes, all the work that went into that first year, and
to end up in the exact same spot as the incompetent coach who preceded you?
That’s how most of us would think. And then we’d probably start blaming other
people.
Walsh realized he “had to look for evidence elsewhere” that it was turning
around. For him, it was in how the games were being played, the good decisions
and the changes that were being made inside the organization. Two seasons later,
they won the Super Bowl and then several more after that. At rock bottom those
victories must have felt like a long way off, which is why you have to be able to
see past and through.
As Goethe once observed, the great failing is “to see yourself as more than
you are and to value yourself at less than your true worth.” A good metaphor
might be the kind of stock buybacks that Katharine Graham made in the late
seventies and eighties. Stock buybacks are controversial—they usually come
from a company that is stalled or whose growth is decelerating. With buybacks,
a CEO is making a rather incredible statement. She’s saying: The market is
wrong. It’s valuing our company so incorrectly, and clearly has so little idea
where we are heading, that we’re going to spend the company’s precious cash on
a bet that they’re wrong.
Too often, dishonest or egotistical CEOs buy back company stock because
they’re delusional. Or because they want to artificially inflate the stock price.
Conversely, timid or weak CEOs wouldn’t even consider betting on themselves.
In Graham’s case, she made a value judgment; with Buffett’s help she could see

objectively that the market didn’t appreciate the true worth of the company’s
assets. She knew that the reputational hits, the learning curve, had all contributed
to a suppressed stock price, which aside from reducing her personal wealth,
created a massive opportunity for the company. Over a short period, she would
buy nearly 40 percent of the company’s shares at a fraction of what they’d later
be worth. The stock that Katharine Graham bought for approximately $20 a
share would less than a decade later be worth more than $300.
What both Graham and Walsh were doing was adhering to a set of internal
metrics that allowed them to evaluate and gauge their progress while everyone
on the outside was too distracted by supposed signs of failure or weakness.
This is what guides us through difficulty.
You might not get into your first choice college. You might not get picked for
the project or you might get passed over for the promotion. Someone might
outbid you for the job, for your dream house, for the opportunity you feel
everything depends on. This might happen tomorrow, it might happen twentyfive years from now. It could last for two minutes or ten years. We know that
everyone experiences failure and adversity, that we’re all subject to the rules of
gravity and averages. What does that mean? It means we’ll face them too.
As Plutarch finely expressed, “The future bears down upon each one of us
with all the hazards of the unknown.” The only way out is through.
Humble and strong people don’t have the same trouble with these troubles
that egotists do. There are fewer complaints and far less self-immolation.
Instead, there’s stoic—even cheerful—resilience. Pity isn’t necessary. Their
identity isn’t threatened. They can get by without constant validation.
This is what we’re aspiring to—much more than mere success. What matters
is that we can respond to what life throws at us.
And how we make it through.

ALIVE TIME OR DEAD TIME?

Vivre sans temps mort. (Live without wasted time.)
—PARISIAN POLITICAL SLOGAN

M

alcolm X was a criminal. He wasn’t Malcolm X at the time—they called
him Detroit Red and he was a criminal opportunist who did a little bit of
everything. He ran numbers. He sold drugs. He worked as a pimp. Then he
moved up to armed robbery. He had his own burglary gang, which he ruled over
with a combination of intimidation and boldness—exploiting the fact that he did
not seem afraid to kill or die.
Then, finally, he was arrested trying to fence an expensive watch he’d stolen.
He was carrying a gun at the time, though to his credit he made no move to fight
the officers who had trapped him. In his apartment, they found jewelry, furs, an
arsenal of guns, and all his burglary tools.
He got ten years. It was February 1946. He was barely twenty-one years old.
Even accounting for the shameful American racism and whatever systematic
legal injustices existed at the time, Malcolm X was guilty. He deserved to go to
jail. Who knows who else he would have hurt or killed had he continued his
escalating life of crime?
When your actions land you a lengthy prison sentence—rightly tried and
convicted—something has gone wrong. You’ve failed not only yourself, but the
basic standards of society and morality. That was the case with Malcolm.
So there he was in prison. A number. A body with roughly a decade to sit in a
cage.
He faced what Robert Greene—a man who sixty years later would find his
wildly popular books banned in many federal prisons—calls an “Alive Time or
Dead Time” scenario. How would the seven years ultimately play out? What
would Malcolm do with this time?

According to Greene, there are two types of time in our lives: dead time,
when people are passive and waiting, and alive time, when people are learning
and acting and utilizing every second. Every moment of failure, every moment
or situation that we did not deliberately choose or control, presents this choice:
Alive time. Dead time.
Which will it be?
Malcolm chose alive time. He began to learn. He explored religion. He taught
himself to be a reader by checking out a pencil and the dictionary from the
prison library and not only consumed it from start to finish, but copied it down
longhand from cover to cover. All these words he’d never known existed before
were transferred to his brain.
As he said later, “From then until I left that prison, in every free moment I
had, if I was not reading in the library, I was reading in my bunk.” He read
history, he read sociology, he read about religion, he read the classics, he read
philosophers like Kant and Spinoza. Later, a reporter asked Malcolm, “What’s
your alma mater?” His one word answer: “Books.” Prison was his college. He
transcended confinement through the pages he absorbed. He reflected that
months passed without his even thinking about being detained against his will.
He had “never been so truly free in his life.”
Most people know what Malcolm X did after he got out of prison, but they
don’t realize or understand how prison made that possible. How a mix of
acceptance, humility, and strength powered the transformation. They also aren’t
aware of how common this is in history, how many figures took seemingly
terrible situations—a prison sentence, an exile, a bear market or depression,
military conscription, even being sent to a concentration camp—and through
their attitude and approach, turned those circumstances into fuel for their unique
greatness.
Francis Scott Key wrote the poem that became the national anthem of the
United States while trapped on a ship during a prisoner exchange in the War of
1812. Viktor Frankl refined his psychologies of meaning and suffering during his
ordeal in three Nazi concentration camps.
Not that these opportunities always come in such serious situations. The
author Ian Fleming was on bed rest and, per doctors’ orders, forbidden from
using a typewriter. They were worried he’d exert himself by writing another
Bond novel. So he created Chitty Chitty Bang Bang by hand instead. Walt
Disney made his decision to become a cartoonist while laid up after stepping on
a rusty nail.

Yes, it would feel much better in the moment to be angry, to be aggrieved, to
be depressed or heartbroken. When injustice or the capriciousness of fate are
inflicted on someone, the normal reaction is to yell, to fight back, to resist. You
know the feeling: I don’t want this. I want ______. I want it my way. This is
shortsighted.
Think of what you have been putting off. Issues you declined to deal with.
Systemic problems that felt too overwhelming to address. Dead time is revived
when we use it as an opportunity to do what we’ve long needed to do.
As they say, this moment is not your life. But it is a moment in your life. How
will you use it?
Malcolm could have doubled down on the life that brought him to prison.
Dead time isn’t only dead because of sloth or complacency. He could have spent
those years becoming a better criminal, strengthening his contacts, or planning
his next score, but it still would have been dead time. He might have felt alive
doing it, even as he was slowly killing himself.
“Many a serious thinker has been produced in prisons,” as Robert Greene put
it, “where we have nothing to do but think.” Yet sadly, prisons—in their literal
and figurative forms—have produced far more degenerates, losers, and ne’er-dowells. Inmates might have had nothing to do but think; it’s just that what they
chose to think about made them worse and not better.
That’s what so many of us do when we fail or get ourselves into trouble.
Lacking the ability to examine ourselves, we reinvest our energy into exactly the
patterns of behavior that caused our problems to begin with.
It comes in many forms. Idly dreaming about the future. Plotting our revenge.
Finding refuge in distraction. Refusing to consider that our choices are a
reflection of our character. We’d rather do basically anything else.
But what if we said: This is an opportunity for me. I am using it for my
purposes. I will not let this be dead time for me.
The dead time was when we were controlled by ego. Now—now we can live.
Who knows what you’re currently doing. Hopefully it’s not a prison term,
even if it might feel like it. Maybe you’re sitting in a remedial high school class,
maybe you’re on hold, maybe it’s a trial separation, maybe you’re making
smoothies while you save up money, maybe you’re stuck waiting out a contract
or a tour of duty. Maybe this situation is one totally of your own making, or
perhaps it’s just bad luck.
In life, we all get stuck with dead time. Its occurrence isn’t in our control. Its
use, on the other hand, is.

As Booker T. Washington most famously put it, “Cast down your bucket
where you are.” Make use of what’s around you. Don’t let stubbornness make a
bad situation worse.

THE EFFORT IS ENOUGH

What matters to an active man is to do the right thing; whether the right thing comes to pass
should not bother him.
—GOETHE

B

elisarius is one of the greatest yet unknown military generals in all of
history. His name has been so obscured and forgotten by history that he
makes the underappreciated General Marshall seem positively famous. At least
they named the Marshall Plan after George.
As Rome’s highest-ranking commander under the Byzantine emperor
Justinian, Belisarius saved Western civilization on at least three occasions. As
Rome collapsed and the seat of the empire moved to Constantinople, Belisarius
was the only bright light in a dark time for Christianity.
He won brilliant victories at Dara, Carthage, Naples, Sicily, and
Constantinople. With just a handful of bodyguards against a crowd of tens of
thousands, Belisarius saved the throne when an uprising had grown so riotous
that the emperor made plans to abdicate. He reclaimed far-flung territories that
had been lost for years despite being undermanned and deprived of resources.
He recaptured and defended Rome for the first time since the barbarians had
sacked and taken it. All of this before he was forty.
His thanks? He was not given public triumphs. Instead, he was repeatedly
placed under suspicion by the paranoid emperor he served, Justinian. His
victories and sacrifices were undone with foolish treaties and bad faith. His
personal historian, Procopius, was corrupted by Justinian to tarnish the man’s
image and legacy. Later, he was relieved of command. His only remaining title
was the deliberately humiliating “Commander of the Royal Stable.” Oh, and at
the end of his illustrious career, Belisarius was stripped of his wealth, and
according to the legend, blinded, and forced to beg in the streets to survive.

Historians, scholars, and artists have lamented and argued about this
treatment for centuries. Like all fair-minded people, they’re outraged at the
stupidity, the ungratefulness, and injustice that this great and unusual man was
subjected to.
The one person we don’t hear complaining about any of this? Not at the time,
not at the end of his life, not even in private letters: Belisarius himself.
Ironically, he probably could have taken the throne on numerous occasions,
though it appears he was never even tempted. While the Emperor Justinian fell
prey to all the vices of absolute power—control, paranoia, selfishness, greed—
we see hardly a trace of them in Belisarius.
In his eyes, he was just doing his job—one he believed was his sacred duty.
He knew that he did it well. He knew he had done what was right. That was
enough.
In life, there will be times when we do everything right, perhaps even
perfectly. Yet the results will somehow be negative: failure, disrespect, jealousy,
or even a resounding yawn from the world.
Depending on what motivates us, this response can be crushing. If ego holds
sway, we’ll accept nothing less than full appreciation.
A dangerous attitude because when someone works on a project—whether it’s
a book or a business or otherwise—at a certain point, that thing leaves their
hands and enters the realm of the world. It is judged, received, and acted on by
other people. It stops being something he controls and it depends on them.
Belisarius could win his battles. He could lead his men. He could determine
his personal ethics. He could not control whether his work was appreciated or
whether it aroused suspicion. He had no ability to control whether a powerful
dictator would treat him well.
This reality rings essentially true for everyone in every kind of life. What was
so special about Belisarius was that he accepted the bargain. Doing the right
thing was enough. Serving his country, his God, and doing his duty faithfully
was all that mattered. Any adversity could be endured and any rewards were
considered extra.
Which is good, because not only was he often not rewarded for the good he
did, he was punished for it. That seems galling at first. Indignation is the reaction
we’d have if it happened to us or someone we know. What was his alternative?
Should he have done the wrong thing instead?
We are all faced with this same challenge in the pursuit of our own goals:
Will we work hard for something that can be taken away from us? Will we invest

time and energy even if an outcome is not guaranteed? With the right motives
we’re willing to proceed. With ego, we’re not.
We have only minimal control over the rewards for our work and effort—
other people’s validation, recognition, rewards. So what are we going to do? Not
be kind, not work hard, not produce, because there is a chance it wouldn’t be
reciprocated? C’mon.
Think of all the activists who will find that they can only advance their cause
so far. The leaders who are assassinated before their work is done. The inventors
whose ideas languish “ahead of their time.” According to society’s main metrics,
these people were not rewarded for their work. Should they have not done it?
Yet in ego, every one of us has considered doing precisely that.
If that is your attitude, how do you intend to endure tough times? What if
you’re ahead of the times? What if the market favors some bogus trend? What if
your boss or your clients don’t understand?
It’s far better when doing good work is sufficient. In other words, the less
attached we are to outcomes the better. When fulfilling our own standards is
what fills us with pride and self-respect. When the effort—not the results, good
or bad—is enough.
With ego, this is not nearly sufficient. No, we need to be recognized. We need
to be compensated. Especially problematic is the fact that, often, we get that. We
are praised, we are paid, and we start to assume that the two things always go
together. The “expectation hangover” inevitably ensues.
There was an unusual encounter between Alexander the Great and the famous
Cynic philosopher Diogenes. Allegedly, Alexander approached Diogenes, who
was lying down, enjoying the summer air, and stood over him and asked what
he, the most powerful man in the world, might be able to do for this notoriously
poor man. Diogenes could have asked for anything. What he requested was epic:
“Stop blocking my sun.” Even two thousand years later we can feel exactly
where in the solar plexus that must have hit Alexander, a man who always
wanted to prove how important he was. As the author Robert Louis Stevenson
later observed about this meeting, “It is a sore thing to have labored along and
scaled arduous hilltops, and when all is done, find humanity indifferent to your
achievement.”
Well, get ready for it. It will happen. Maybe your parents will never be
impressed. Maybe your girlfriend won’t care. Maybe the investor won’t see the
numbers. Maybe the audience won’t clap. But we have to be able to push
through. We can’t let that be what motivates us.

Belisarius had one last run. He was found innocent of the charges and his
honors restored—just in time to save the empire as a white-haired old man.
Except no, life is not a fairy tale. He was again wrongly suspected of plotting
against the emperor. In the famous Longfellow poem about our poor general, at
the end of his life he is impoverished and disabled. Yet he concludes with great
strength:
This, too, can bear;—I still
Am Belisarius!
You will be unappreciated. You will be sabotaged. You will experience
surprising failures. Your expectations will not be met. You will lose. You will
fail.
How do you carry on then? How do you take pride in yourself and your
work? John Wooden’s advice to his players says it: Change the definition of
success. “Success is peace of mind, which is a direct result of self-satisfaction in
knowing you made the effort to do your best to become the best that you are
capable of becoming.” “Ambition,” Marcus Aurelius reminded himself, “means
tying your well-being to what other people say or do . . . Sanity means tying it to
your own actions.”
Do your work. Do it well. Then “let go and let God.“ That’s all there needs to
be.
Recognition and rewards—those are just extra. Rejection, that’s on them, not
on us.
John Kennedy Toole’s great book A Confederacy of Dunces was universally
turned down by publishers, news that so broke his heart that he later committed
suicide in his car on an empty road in Biloxi, Mississippi. After his death, his
mother discovered the book, advocated on its behalf until it was published, and it
eventually won the Pulitzer Prize.
Think about that for a second. What changed between those submissions?
Nothing. The book was the same. It was equally great when Toole had it in
manuscript form and had fought with editors about it as it was when the book
was published, sold copies, and won awards. If only he could have realized this,
it would have saved him so much heartbreak. He couldn’t, but from his painful
example we can at least see how arbitrary many of the breaks in life are.
This is why we can’t let externals determine whether something was worth it
or not. It’s on us.

The world is, after all, indifferent to what we humans “want.” If we persist in
wanting, in needing, we are simply setting ourselves up for resentment or worse.
Doing the work is enough.

FIGHT CLUB MOMENTS

If you shut up truth and bury it under the ground, it will but grow, and gather to itself such
explosive power that the day it bursts through it will blow up everything in its way.
—EMILE ZOLA

T

here is hardly the space to list all the successful people who have hit rock
bottom.
The notion everyone experiences jarring, perspective-altering moments is
almost a cliché. That doesn’t mean it isn’t true.
J. K. Rowling finds herself seven years after college with a failed marriage,
no job, single parent, kids she can barely feed, and approaching homelessness. A
teenage Charlie Parker thinks he is tearing it up on stage, right in the pocket with
the rest of the crew, until Jo Jones throws a cymbal at him and chases him away
in humiliation. A young Lyndon Johnson is beaten to a pulp by a Hill Country
farm boy over a girl, finally shattering his picture of himself as “cock of the
walk.”
There are many ways to hit bottom. Almost everyone does in their own way,
at some point.
In the novel Fight Club, the character Jack’s apartment is blown up. All of his
possessions—“every stick of furniture,” which he pathetically loved—were lost.
Later it turns out that Jack blew it up himself. He had multiple personalities, and
“Tyler Durden” orchestrated the explosion to shock Jack from the sad stupor he
was afraid to do anything about. The result was a journey into an entirely
different and rather dark part of his life.
In Greek mythology, characters often experience katabasis—or “a going
down.” They’re forced to retreat, they experience a depression, or in some cases
literally descend into the underworld. When they emerge, it’s with heightened
knowledge and understanding.
Today, we’d call that hell—and on occasion we all spend some time there.

We surround ourselves with bullshit. With distractions. With lies about what
makes us happy and what’s important. We become people we shouldn’t become
and engage in destructive, awful behaviors. This unhealthy and ego-derived state
hardens and becomes almost permanent. Until katabasis forces us to face it.
Duris dura franguntur. Hard things are broken by hard things.
The bigger the ego the harder the fall.
It would be nice if it didn’t have to be that way. If we could nicely be nudged
to correct our ways, if a quiet admonishment was what it took to shoo away
illusions, if we could manage to circumvent ego on our own. But it is just not so.
The Reverend William A. Sutton observed some 120 years ago that “we cannot
be humble except by enduring humiliations.” How much better it would be to
spare ourselves these experiences, but sometimes it’s the only way the blind can
be made to see.
In fact, many significant life changes come from moments in which we are
thoroughly demolished, in which everything we thought we knew about the
world is rendered false. We might call these “Fight Club moments.” Sometimes
they are self-inflicted, sometimes inflicted on us, but whatever the cause they
can be catalysts for changes we were petrified to make.
Pick a time in your life (or perhaps it’s a moment you’re experiencing now).
A boss’s eviscerating critique of you in front of the entire staff. That sit-down
with the person you loved. The Google Alert that delivered the article you’d
hoped would never be written. The call from the creditor. The news that threw
you back in your chair, speechless and dumbfounded.
It was in those moments—when the break exposes something unseen before
—that you were forced to make eye contact with a thing called Truth. No longer
could you hide or pretend.
Such a moment raises many questions: How do I make sense of this? How do
I move onward and upward? Is this the bottom, or is there more to come?
Someone told me my problems, so how do I fix them? How did I let this happen?
How can it never happen again?
A look at history finds that these events seem to be defined by three traits:
1. They almost always came at the hands of some outside force or person.
2. They often involved things we already knew about ourselves, but were
too scared to admit.
3. From the ruin came the opportunity for great progress and
improvement.

Does everyone take advantage of that opportunity? Of course not. Ego often
causes the crash and then blocks us from improving.
Was the 2008 financial crisis not a moment in which everything was laid bare
for many people? The lack of accountability, the overleveraged lifestyles, the
greed, the dishonesty, the trends that could not possibly continue. For some, this
was a wake-up call. Others, just a few years later, are back exactly where they
were. For them, it will be worse next time.
Hemingway had his own rock-bottom realizations as a young man. The
understanding he took from them is expressed timelessly in his book A Farewell
to Arms. He wrote, “The world breaks every one and afterward many are strong
at the broken places. But those that will not break it kills.”
The world can show you the truth, but no one can force you to accept it.
In 12-step groups, almost all the steps are about suppressing the ego and
clearing out the entitlements and baggage and wreckage that has been
accumulated—so that you might see what’s left when all of that is stripped away
and the real you is left.
It’s always so tempting to turn to that old friend denial (which is your ego
refusing to believe that what you don’t like could be true).
Psychologists often say that threatened egotism is one of the most dangerous
forces on earth. The gang member whose “honor” is impugned. The narcissist
who is rejected. The bully who is made to feel shame. The impostor who is
exposed. The plagiarist or the embellisher whose story stops adding up.
These are not people you want to be near when they are cornered. Nor is it a
corner you would want to back yourself into. That’s where you get: How can
these people talk to me this way? Who do they think they are? I’ll make them all
pay.
Sometimes because we can’t face what’s been said or what’s been done, we
do the unthinkable in response to the unbearable: we escalate. This is ego in its
purest and most toxic form.
Look at Lance Armstrong. He cheated, but so did a lot of people. It was when
this cheating was made public and he was forced to see—if only for a second—
that he was a cheater that things got really bad. He insisted on denying it despite
all the evidence. He insisted on ruining other people’s lives. We’re so afraid to
lose our own esteem or, God forbid, the esteem of others, that we contemplate
doing terrible things.
“Everyone who does wicked things hates the light and does not come to the
light, lest his works should be exposed,” reads John 3:20. Big and small, this is

what we do. Getting hit with that spotlight doesn’t feel good—whether we’re
talking the exposure of ordinary self-deception or true evil—but turning away
only delays the reckoning. For how long, no one can say.
Face the symptoms. Cure the disease. Ego makes it so hard—it’s easier to
delay, to double down, to deliberately avoid seeing the changes we need to make
in our lives.
But change begins by hearing the criticism and the words of the people
around you. Even if those words are mean spirited, angry, or hurtful. It means
weighing them, discarding the ones that don’t matter, and reflecting on the ones
you do.
In Fight Club, the character has to firebomb his own apartment to finally
break through. Our expectations and exaggerations and lack of restraint made
such moments inevitable, ensuring that it would be painful. Now it’s here, what
will you make of it? You can change, or you can deny.
Vince Lombardi said this once: “A team, like men, must be brought to its
knees before it can rise again.” So yes, hitting bottom is as brutal as it sounds.
But the feeling after—it is one of the most powerful perspectives in the
world. President Obama described it as he neared the end of his tumultuous,
trying terms. “I’ve been in the barrel tumbling down Niagara Falls and I
emerged, and I lived, and that’s such a liberating feeling.”
If we could help it, it would be better if we never suffered illusions at all. It’d
be better if we never had to kneel or go over the edge. That’s what we’ve spent
so much time talking about so far in this book. If that fight is lost, we end up
here.
In the end, the only way you can appreciate your progress is to stand on the
edge of the hole you dug for yourself, look down inside it, and smile fondly at
the bloody claw prints that marked your journey up the walls.

DRAW THE LINE

It can ruin your life only if it ruins your character.
—MARCUS AURELIUS

J

ohn DeLorean ran his car company into the ground with a mix of outsized
ambition, negligence, narcissism, greed, and mismanagement. As the bad
news began to pile up and the picture was made clear and public, how do you
think he responded?
Was it with resigned acceptance? Did he acknowledge the errors his
disgruntled employees were speaking out about for the first time? Was he able to
reflect, even slightly, on the mistakes and decisions that had brought him, his
investors, and his employees so much trouble?
Of course not. Instead he put in motion a series of events that would end in a
$60 million drug deal and his subsequent arrest. That’s right, after his company
began to fail—failure almost exclusively tied to his unprofessional management
style—he figured the best way to save it all would be to secure financing through
an illegal shipment of 220 pounds of cocaine.
Sure, after his publicized and very embarrassing arrest, DeLorean was
eventually acquitted on the charges on the rather implausible argument of
“entrapment.” Except he is on video, holding up a baggie of cocaine, saying with
giddy excitement, “This stuff is as good as gold.”
There’s no question about who caused John DeLorean’s disintegration.
There’s also no question about who made it so much worse. The answer is: HIM.
He found himself in a hole and kept digging until he made it all the way to hell.
If only he’d stopped. If at any point he’d said: Is this the person I want to be?
People make mistakes all the time. They start companies they think they can
manage. They have grand and bold visions that were a little too grandiose. This
is all perfectly fine; it’s what being an entrepreneur or a creative or even a
business executive is about.

We take risks. We mess up.
The problem is that when we get our identity tied up in our work, we worry
that any kind of failure will then say something bad about us as a person. It’s a
fear of taking responsibility, of admitting that we might have messed up. It’s the
sunk cost fallacy. And so we throw good money and good life after bad and end
up making everything so much worse.
Let’s say the walls feel like they’re closing in. It might feel as if you’ve been
betrayed or your life’s work is being stolen. These are not rational, good
emotions that will lead to rational, good actions.
Ego asks: Why is this happening to me? How do I save this and prove to
everyone I’m as great as they think? It’s the animal fear of even the slightest sign
of weakness.
You’ve seen this. You’ve done this. Fighting desperately for something we’re
only making worse.
It is not a path to great things.
Take Steve Jobs. He was 100 percent responsible for his firing from Apple.
Due to his later success, Apple’s decision to fire him seems like an example of
poor leadership, but he was, at the time, unmanageable. His ego was
unequivocally out of control. If you were John Sculley and CEO of Apple, you’d
have fired that version of Steve Jobs too—and been right to do so.
Now Steve Jobs’s response to his firing was understandable. He cried. He
fought. When he lost, he sold all but a single share of his stock in Apple and
swore never to think of the place again. But then he started a new company and
threw his whole life into it. He tried to learn as best he could from the
management mistakes at the root of his first failure. He started another company
after that too, called Pixar. Steve Jobs, the famous egomaniac who parked in
handicap parking spaces just because he could, responded in this critical moment
in a surprising way. Humble for CEOs convinced of their own genius, anyway.
He worked until he’d not only proven himself again, but significantly resolved
the flaws that had caused his downfall to begin with.
It’s not often that successful or powerful people are able to do this. Not when
they experience heartrending failure.
American Apparel’s founder Dov Charney is an example. After losses of
some $300 million and numerous scandals, the company offered him a choice:
step aside as CEO and guide the company as a creative consultant (for a large
salary), or be fired. He rejected both options and picked something much worse.

After filing a lawsuit in protest, he gambled his entire ownership in the
company to initiate a hostile takeover with a hedge fund and insisted that his
conduct be investigated and judged. It was, and he was not vindicated. His
personal life was splashed across the headlines and embarrassing details
revealed. The lawyer he chose to represent him in his lawsuits happened to be
the same one who’d already sued Charney close to half a dozen times for sexual
harassment and financial irregularities. In the past, Charney had accused this
man of shaking him down and making bogus legal claims. Now they were
working together.
American Apparel spent more than $10 million it didn’t have to fight him off.
A judge issued a restraining order. Sales slumped. Finally, the company began
laying off factory workers and longtime employees—the exact people he
claimed to be fighting for—just to stay afloat. A year later, they were bankrupt
and he was out of money too.*
It’s like the disgraced statesman and general Alcibiades. In the Peloponnesian
War, he first fought for his home country and greatest love, Athens. Then driven
out for a drunken crime he may or may not have committed, he defected to
Sparta, Athens’ sworn enemy. Then running afoul of the Spartans, he defected to
Persia—the sworn enemy of both. Finally, he was recalled to Athens, where his
ambitious plans to invade Sicily drove the Athenians to their ultimate ruin.
Ego kills what we love. Sometimes, it comes close to killing us too.
It is interesting that Alexander Hamilton, who of all the Founding Fathers met
the most tragic and unnecessary end, would have wise words on this topic. But
indeed he does (if only he could have remembered his own advice before
fighting his fatal duel). “Act with fortitude and honor,” he wrote to a distraught
friend in serious financial and legal trouble of the man’s own making. “If you
cannot reasonably hope for a favorable extrication, do not plunge deeper. Have
the courage to make a full stop.”
A full stop. It’s not that these folks should have quit everything. It’s that a
fighter who can’t tap out or a boxer who can’t recognize when it’s time to retire
gets hurt. Seriously so. You have to be able to see the bigger picture.
But when ego is in control, who can?
Let’s say you’ve failed and let’s even say it was your fault. Shit happens and,
as they say, sometimes shit happens in public. It’s not fun. The questions remain:
Are you going to make it worse? Or are you going to emerge from this with your
dignity and character intact? Are you going to live to fight another day?

When a team looks like they’re going to lose a game, the coach doesn’t call
them all over and lie to them. Instead, he or she reminds them who they are and
what they’re capable of, and urges them to go back out there and embody that.
With winning or miracles off their minds, a good team does its best to complete
the game at the highest standard possible (and share the playing time with other
players who don’t regularly play). And sometimes, they even come back and
win.
Most trouble is temporary . . . unless you make that not so. Recovery is not
grand, it’s one step in front of the other. Unless your cure is more of the disease.
Only ego thinks embarrassment or failure are more than what they are.
History is full of people who suffered abject humiliations yet recovered to have
long and impressive careers. Politicians who lost elections or lost offices due to
indiscretions—but came back to lead after time had passed. Actors whose
movies bombed, authors who got writer’s block, celebrities who made gaffes,
parents who made mistakes, entrepreneurs with faltering companies, executives
who got fired, athletes who were cut, people who lived too well at the top of the
market. All these folks felt the hard edge of failure, just like we have. When we
lose, we have a choice: Are we going to make this a lose-lose situation for
ourselves and everyone involved? Or will it be a lose . . . and then win?
Because you will lose in life. It’s a fact. A doctor has to call time of death at
some point. They just do.
Ego says we’re the immovable object, the unstoppable force. This delusion
causes the problems. It meets failure and adversity with rule breaking—betting
everything on some crazy scheme; doubling down on behind-the-scenes
machinations or unlikely Hail Marys—even though that’s what got you to this
pain point in the first place.
At any given time in the circle of life, we may be aspiring, succeeding, or
failing—though right now we’re failing. With wisdom, we understand that these
positions are transitory, not statements about your value as a human being. When
success begins to slip from your fingers—for whatever reason—the response
isn’t to grip and claw so hard that you shatter it to pieces. It’s to understand that
you must work yourself back to the aspirational phase. You must get back to first
principles and best practices.
“He who fears death will never do anything worthy of a living man,” Seneca
once said. Alter that: He who will do anything to avoid failure will almost
certainly do something worthy of a failure.

The only real failure is abandoning your principles. Killing what you love
because you can’t bear to part from it is selfish and stupid. If your reputation
can’t absorb a few blows, it wasn’t worth anything in the first place.

MAINTAIN YOUR OWN SCORECARD

I never look back, except to find out about mistakes . . . I only see danger in thinking back
about things you are proud of.
—ELISABETH NOELLE-NEUMANN

O

n April 16, 2000, the New England Patriots drafted an extra quarterback
out of the University of Michigan. They’d scouted him thoroughly and had
their eye on him for some time. Seeing that he was still available, they took him.
It was the 6th round and the 199th pick of the draft.
The young quarterback’s name was Tom Brady.
He was fourth string at the beginning of his rookie season. By his second
season, he was a starter. New England won the Super Bowl that year. Brady was
named MVP.
In terms of return on investment, it’s probably the single greatest draft pick in
the history of football: four Super Bowl rings (out of 6 appearances), 14 starting
seasons, 172 wins, 428 touchdowns, 3 Super Bowl MVPs, 58,000 yards, 10 Pro
Bowls, and more division titles than any quarterback in history. It’s not even
finished paying dividends. Brady may still have many more seasons left in him.
So you’d think that the Patriots’ front office would be ecstatic with how it
turned out, and indeed, they were. They were also disappointed—deeply so—in
themselves. Brady’s surprising abilities meant that the Patriots’ scouting reports
were way off. For all their evaluations of players, they’d somehow missed or
miscalculated all of his intangible attributes. They’d let this gem wait until the
sixth round. Someone else could have drafted him. More than that, they didn’t
even know they were right about Brady until injuries knocked out Drew
Bledsoe, their prized starter, and forced them to realize his potential.
So, even though their bet paid off, the Patriots honed in on the specific
intelligence failure that could have prevented the pick from happening in the first

place. Not that they were nit-picking. Or indulging in perfectionism. They had
higher standards of performance to adhere to.
For years, Scott Pioli, director of personnel for the Patriots, kept a photo on
his desk of Dave Stachelski, a player the team had drafted in the 5th round, but
who never made it through training camp. It was a reminder: You’re not as good
as you think. You don’t have it all figured out. Stay focused. Do better.
Coach John Wooden was very clear about this too. The scoreboard was not
the judge of whether he or the team had achieved success—that wasn’t what
constituted “winning.” Bo Jackson wouldn’t get impressed when he hit a home
run or ran for a touchdown because he knew “he hadn’t done it perfect.” (In fact,
he didn’t ask for the ball after his first hit in major-league baseball for that
reason—to him it was “just a ground ball up the middle.”)
This is characteristic of how great people think. It’s not that they find failure
in every success. They just hold themselves to a standard that exceeds what
society might consider to be objective success. Because of that, they don’t much
care what other people think; they care whether they meet their own standards.
And these standards are much, much higher than everyone else’s.
The Patriots saw the Brady pick as being more lucky than smart. And though
some people are fine giving themselves credit for luck, they weren’t. No one
would say the Patriots—or any team in the NFL—are without ego. But in this
instance, instead of celebrating or congratulating themselves, they put their
heads back down and focused on how to get even better. That’s what makes
humility such a powerful force—organizationally, personally, professionally.
This isn’t necessarily fun, by the way. It can feel like self-inflicted torture
sometimes. But it does force you to always keep going, and always improve.
Ego can’t see both sides of the issue. It can’t get better because it only sees
the validation. Remember, “Vain men never hear anything but praise.” It can
only see what’s going well, not what isn’t. It’s why you might see egomaniacs
with temporary leads, but rarely lasting runs of it.
For us, the scoreboard can’t be the only scoreboard. Warren Buffett has said
the same thing, making a distinction between the inner scorecard and the
external one. Your potential, the absolute best you’re capable of—that’s the
metric to measure yourself against. Your standards are. Winning is not enough.
People can get lucky and win. People can be assholes and win. Anyone can win.
But not everyone is the best possible version of themselves.
Harsh, yes. The flip side is that it means being honestly able to be proud and
strong during the occasional defeat as well. When you take ego out of the

equation, other people’s opinions and external markers won’t matter as much.
That’s more difficult, but ultimately a formula for resilience.
The economist (and philosopher) Adam Smith had a theory for how wise and
good people evaluate their actions:
There are two different occasions upon which we examine our own
conduct, and endeavour to view it in the light in which the impartial
spectator would view it: first, when we are about to act; and secondly, after
we have acted. Our views are apt to be very partial in both cases; but they
are apt to be most partial when it is of most importance that they should be
otherwise. When we are about to act, the eagerness of passion will seldom
allow us to consider what we are doing, with the candour of an indifferent
person. . . . When the action is over, indeed, and the passions which
prompted it have subsided, we can enter more coolly into the sentiments of
the indifferent spectator.
This “indifferent spectator” is a sort of guide with which we can judge our
behavior, as opposed to the groundless applause that society so often gives out.
Not that it’s just about validation, though.
Think of all the people who excuse their behavior—politicians, powerful
CEOs, and the like—as “not technically illegal.” Think of the times that you’ve
excused your own with “no one will know.” This is the moral gray area that our
ego loves to exploit. Holding your ego against a standard (inner or indifferent or
whatever you want to call it) makes it less and less likely that excess or
wrongdoing is going to be tolerated by you. Because it’s not about what you can
get away with, it’s about what you should or shouldn’t do.
It’s a harder road at first, but one that ultimately makes us less selfish and
self-absorbed. A person who judges himself based on his own standards doesn’t
crave the spotlight the same way as someone who lets applause dictate success.
A person who can think long term doesn’t pity herself during short-term
setbacks. A person who values the team can share credit and subsume his own
interests in a way that most others can’t.
Reflecting on what went well or how amazing we are doesn’t get us
anywhere, except maybe to where we are right now. But we want to go further,
we want more, we want to continue to improve.
Ego blocks that, so we subsume it and smash it with continually higher
standards. Not that we are endlessly pursuing more, as if we’re racked with

greed, but instead, we’re inching our way toward real improvement, with
discipline rather than disposition.

ALWAYS LOVE

And why should we feel anger at the world?
As if the world would notice!
—EURIPIDES

I

n 1939, a young prodigy named Orson Welles was given one of the most
unheard-of deals in Hollywood history. He could write, act, and direct in two
films of his choosing for RKO, a major movie studio. For his first picture, he
decided to tell the story of a mysterious newspaper baron who became a prisoner
of his enormous empire and lifestyle.
William Randolph Hearst, the infamous media magnate, decided that this
movie was based on his life and, more important, that it did so offensively. He
then began, and initially succeeded in, an all-consuming campaign to destroy
one of the greatest films of all time.
Here’s what’s so interesting about this. First, Hearst most likely never even
saw the movie so he had no idea what was actually in it. Second, it wasn’t
intended to be about him—or at least solely about him. (As far as we know, the
character Charles Foster Kane was an amalgam of several historical figures
including Samuel Insull and Robert McCormick; the movie was inspired by two
similar portraits of power by Charlie Chaplin and Aldous Huxley; and it wasn’t
supposed to vilify, but to humanize.) Third, Hearst was one of the richest men in
the world at the time, and at seventy-eight, near the end of his life. Why would
he spend so much time on something as inconsequential as a fictional movie by a
first-time director? Fourth, it was his campaign to stop it that secured the
movie’s place in popular lore and made it clear the extent to which his drive to
control and manipulate would go. Ironically, he cemented his own legacy as a
reviled American figure more than any critic ever could have.
Thus, the paradox of hate and bitterness. It accomplishes almost exactly the
opposite of what we hope it does. In the Internet age, we call this the Streisand

effect (named after a similar attempt by the singer and actress Barbra Streisand,
who tried to legally remove a photo of her home from the Web. Her actions
backfired and far more people saw it than would have had she left the issue
alone.) Attempting to destroy something out of hate or ego often ensures that it
will be preserved and disseminated forever.
The lengths that Hearst went to were absurd. He sent his most influential and
powerful gossip columnist, Louella Parsons, to the studio to demand a screening.
Based on her feedback, he decided he would do everything in his power to block
it from being made public. He issued a directive that none of his newspapers
were to make any mention of any RKO film—the company producing Citizen
Kane—period. (More than a decade later, this ban still applied to Welles for all
Hearst papers.) Hearst’s papers began exploring negative stories about Welles
and his private life. His gossip columnist threatened to do the same to each of the
RKO board members. Hearst also made threats to the movie industry as a whole,
as a way of turning other studio heads against the picture. An $800,000 offer was
made for the rights to the film so that it might be burned or destroyed. Most
theater chains were pressured into refusing to show it, and no ads for it were
allowed in any Hearst-owned properties. Hearst sympathizers began reporting
rumors about Welles to various authorities, and in 1941, J. Edgar Hoover’s FBI
opened a file on him.
The result was that the movie failed commercially. It took years for it to find
its place in the culture. Only at great expense and with great exertion, was Hearst
able to hold it back.
We all have stuff that pisses us off. The more successful or powerful we are,
the more there will be that we think we need to protect in terms of our legacy,
image, and influence. If we’re not careful, however, we can end up wasting an
incredible amount of time trying to keep the world from displeasing or
disrespecting us.
It is a sobering thought to consider for a moment all the needless death and
needless waste inflicted over the eons by angry men or aggrieved women on
other people, on society, and on themselves. Over what? Reasons that can hardly
be remembered.
You know what is a better response to an attack or a slight or something you
don’t like? Love. That’s right, love. For the neighbor who won’t turn down the
music. For the parent that let you down. For the bureaucrat who lost your
paperwork. For the group that rejects you. For the critic who attacks you. The

former partner who stole your business idea. The bitch or the bastard who
cheated on you. Love.
Because, as the song lyrics go, “hate will get you every time.”
Okay, maybe love is too much to ask for whatever it is that you’ve had done
to you. You could at the very least try to let it go. You could try to shake your
head and laugh about it.
Otherwise the world will witness another example of a timeless and sad
pattern: Rich, powerful person becomes so isolated and delusional that when
something happens contrary to his wishes, he becomes consumed by it. The
same drive that made him great is suddenly a great weakness. He turns a minor
inconvenience into a massive sore. The wound festers, becomes infected, and
can even kill him.
This is what propelled Nixon forward and then, sadly, downward. Reflecting
on his own exile, he later acknowledged that his lifelong image of himself as a
scrappy fighter battling a hostile world was his undoing. He’d surrounded
himself with other such “tough guys.” People forget Nixon was reelected by a
landslide after Watergate broke. He just couldn’t help himself—he kept fighting,
he persecuted reporters, and he lashed out at everyone he felt had slighted or
doubted him. It’s what continued to feed the story and ultimately sank him. Like
many such people, he ended up doing more damage to himself than anyone else
could. The root of it was his hatefulness and his anger, and even being the most
powerful leader in the free world couldn’t change it.
It doesn’t need to be like that. Booker T. Washington tells an anecdote told to
him by Frederick Douglass, about a time he was traveling and was asked to
move and ride in the baggage car because of his race. A white supporter rushed
up to apologize for this horrible offense. “I am sorry, Mr. Douglass, that you
have been degraded in this manner,” the person said.
Douglass would have none of that. He wasn’t angry. He wasn’t hurt. He
replied with great fervor: “They cannot degrade Frederick Douglass. The soul
that is within me no man can degrade. I am not the one that is being degraded on
account of this treatment, but those who are inflicting it upon me.”
Certainly, this is an incredibly difficult attitude to maintain. It’s far easier to
hate. It’s natural to lash out.
Yet we find that what defines great leaders like Douglass is that instead of
hating their enemies, they feel a sort of pity and empathy for them. Think of
Barbara Jordan at the 1992 Democratic National Convention proposing an
agenda of “ . . . love. Love. Love. Love.” Think of Martin Luther King Jr., over

and over again, preaching that hate was a burden and love was freedom. Love
was transformational, hate was debilitating. In one of his most famous sermons,
he took it further: “We begin to love our enemies and love those persons that
hate us whether in collective life or individual life by looking at ourselves.” We
must strip ourselves of the ego that protects and suffocates us, because, as he
said, “Hate at any point is a cancer that gnaws away at the very vital center of
your life and your existence. It is like eroding acid that eats away the best and
the objective center of your life.”
Take inventory for a second. What do you dislike? Whose name fills you with
revulsion and rage? Now ask: Have these strong feelings really helped you
accomplish anything?
Take an even wider inventory. Where has hatred and rage ever really gotten
anyone?
Especially because almost universally, the traits or behaviors that have pissed
us off in other people—their dishonesty, their selfishness, their laziness—are
hardly going to work out well for them in the end. Their ego and
shortsightedness contains its own punishment.
The question we must ask for ourselves is: Are we going to be miserable just
because other people are?
Consider how Orson Welles responded to the multidecade campaign by
Hearst. According to his own account, he bumped into Hearst in an elevator on
the night of the movie’s premiere—the very one that Hearst had deployed
massive resources to prevent and destroy. Do you know what he did? He invited
Hearst to come. When Hearst declined, Welles joked that Charles Foster Kane
surely would have accepted.
It took a very long time for Welles’s genius in that movie to finally be
acknowledged by the rest of the world. No matter, Welles soldiered on, making
other movies and producing other fantastic art. By all accounts, he lived a
fulfilling and happy life. Eventually, Citizen Kane secured its place in the
forefront of cinematic history. Seventy years after the movie’s debut, it was
finally played at Hearst Castle at San Simeon, which is now a state park.
The events he endured weren’t exactly fair, but at least he didn’t let it ruin his
life. As Welles’s girlfriend of twenty-plus years said in his eulogy, referring not
just to Hearst, but to every slight he ever received in his long career in a
notoriously ruthless industry, “I promise you it didn’t make him bitter.” In other
words, he never became like Hearst.

Not everyone is capable of responding that way. At various points in our
lives, we seem to have different capacities for forgiveness and understanding.
And even when some people are able to carry on, they carry with them a
needless load of resentment. Remember Kirk Hammett, who suddenly became
the guitarist in Metallica? The man they kicked out to make room for him, Dave
Mustaine, went on to form another band, Megadeth. Even amidst his own
unbelievable success, he was eaten up with rage and hatred over the way he’d
been treated those many years before. It drove him to addiction and could have
killed him. It was eighteen years until he was able to even begin to process it,
and said it still felt like yesterday that he’d been hurt and rejected. When you
hear him tell it, as he did once on camera to his former bandmates, it sounds like
he ended up living under a bridge. In reality, the man sold millions of records,
produced great music, and lived the life of a rock star.
We have all felt this pain—and to quote his lyrics, “smile[d] its blacktooth
grin.” This obsession with the past, with something that someone did or how
things should have been, as much as it hurts, is ego embodied. Everyone else has
moved on, but you can’t, because you can’t see anything but your own way. You
can’t conceive of accepting that someone could hurt you, deliberately or
otherwise. So you hate.
In failure or adversity, it’s so easy to hate. Hate defers blame. It makes
someone else responsible. It’s a distraction too; we don’t do much else when
we’re busy getting revenge or investigating the wrongs that have supposedly
been done to us.
Does this get us any closer to where we want to be? No. It just keeps us
where we are—or worse, arrests our development entirely. If we are already
successful, as Hearst was, it tarnishes our legacy and turns sour what should be
our golden years.
Meanwhile, love is right there. Egoless, open, positive, vulnerable, peaceful,
and productive.

FOR EVERYTHING THAT COMES NEXT, EGO IS THE
ENEMY . . .

I don’t like work—no man does—but I like what is in the work—the chance to find yourself.
—JOSEPH CONRAD

I

n William Manchester’s epic biography of the life of Winston Churchill, the
middle volume—a third of the set—is titled Alone. For a full eight years,
Churchill stood more or less by himself against his shortsighted peers, against
the rising threat of fascism, even among the West.
But eventually, he triumphed again. And faced adversity again. And was
vindicated again.
Katharine Graham stood alone as she took over her family’s newspaper
empire. Her son, Donald Graham, must have felt similar pressure as he sought to
preserve the company during the dramatic declines of the industry in the mid2000s. Both made it through. So can you.
There is no way around it: We will experience difficulty. We will feel the
touch of failure. As Benjamin Franklin observed, those who “drink to the bottom
of the cup must expect to meet with some of the dregs.”
But what if those dregs weren’t so bad? As Harold Geneen put it, “People
learn from their failures. Seldom do they learn anything from success.” It’s why
the old Celtic saying tells us, “See much, study much, suffer much, that is the
path to wisdom.”
What you face right now could, should, and can be such a path.
Wisdom or ignorance? Ego is the swing vote.
Aspiration leads to success (and adversity). Success creates its own adversity
(and, hopefully, new ambitions). And adversity leads to aspiration and more
success. It’s an endless loop.
All of us exist on this continuum. We occupy different places on it at various
points in our lives. But when we do fail, it sucks. No question.

Whatever is next for us, we can be sure of one thing we’ll want to avoid. Ego.
It makes all the steps hard, but failure is the one it will make permanent. Unless
we learn, right here and right now, from our mistakes. Unless we use this
moment as an opportunity to understand ourselves and our own mind better, ego
will seek out failure like true north.
All great men and women went through difficulties to get to where they are,
all of them made mistakes. They found within those experiences some benefit—
even if it was simply the realization that they were not infallible and that things
would not always go their way. They found that self-awareness was the way out
and through—if they hadn’t, they wouldn’t have gotten better and they wouldn’t
have been able to rise again.
Which is why we have their mantra to guide us, so that we can survive and
thrive in every phase of our journey. It is simple (though, as always, never easy).
Not to aspire or seek out of ego.
To have success without ego.
To push through failure with strength, not ego.

EPILOGUE

There is something of a civil war going on within all of our lives. There is a recalcitrant South
of our soul revolting against the North of our soul. And there is this continual struggle within
the very structure of every individual life.
—MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.

I

f you’re reading this right now, then you’ve made it through this book. I was
afraid some people might not. To be perfectly honest, I wasn’t sure I’d ever
get here myself.
How do you feel? Tired? Confused? Free?
It is no easy task to go head-to-head with one’s ego. To accept first that ego
may be there. Then to subject it to scrutiny and criticism. Most of us can’t handle
uncomfortable self-examination. It’s easier to do just about anything else—in
fact, some of the world’s most unbelievable accomplishments are undoubtedly a
result of a desire to avoid facing the darkness of ego.
In any case, just by making it to this point you’ve struck a serious blow
against it. It’s not all you’ll need to do, but it is a start.
My friend the philosopher and martial artist Daniele Bolelli once gave me a
helpful metaphor. He explained that training was like sweeping the floor. Just
because we’ve done it once, doesn’t mean the floor is clean forever. Every day
the dust comes back. Every day we must sweep.
The same is true for ego. You would be stunned at what kind of damage dust
and dirt can do over time. And how quickly it accumulates and becomes utterly
unmanageable.
A few days after being fired by the American Apparel board of directors, Dov
Charney called me at 3 A.M. He was alternately despondent and angry—
genuinely believing himself to be totally blameless for his situation. I asked him,
“Dov, what are you going to do? Are you going to pull a Steve Jobs and start a
new company? Are you going to make a comeback?” He got quiet and said to
me with an earnestness I could feel through the phone and in my bones, “Ryan,

Steve Jobs died.” To him, in this addled state, this failure, this blow was
somehow the same as death. That was one of the last times we ever spoke. I
watched with horror in the months that followed as he wreaked havoc on the
company he had put everything into building.
It was a sad moment and one that has stayed with me.
But for the grace of God go I. But for the grace of God, that could be any
of us.
We all experience success and failure in our own way. Struggling to write this
book, I went through four hard-fought but rejected drafts of the proposal and
dozens of drafts of the manuscript. On my earlier projects, I’m sure the strain
would have broken me. Maybe I would have quit or tried to work with someone
else. Maybe I would have dug in my heels to get my way and irreparably
damaged the book.
At some point during the process, I came up with a therapeutic device. After
each draft, I would tear up the pages and feed the paper to a worm compost I
keep in my garage. A few months later, those painful pages were dirt that
nourished my yard, which I could walk with bare feet. It was a real and tangible
connection to that larger immensity. I liked to remind myself that the same
process is going to happen to me when I’m done, when I die and nature tears me
up.
One of the most freeing realizations came to me while I was writing and
thinking about the ideas in the pages you’ve just read. It occurred to me what a
damaging delusion this notion that our lives are “grand monuments” set to last
for all time really is. Any ambitious person knows that feeling—that you must
do great things, that you must get your way, and that if you don’t that you’re a
worthless failure and the world is conspiring against you. There is so much
pressure that eventually we all break under it or are broken by it.
Of course, that is not true. Yes, we all have potential within us. We all have
goals and accomplishments that we know we can achieve—whether it’s starting
a company, finishing a creative work, making a run at a championship, or getting
to the top of your respective field. These are worthy aims. A broken person will
not get there.
The problem is when ego intrudes on these pursuits, corrupting them and
undermining us as we set out to achieve and accomplish. Whispering lies as we
embark on that journey and whispering lies as we succeed in it, and worse,

whispering painful lies when we stumble along the way. Ego, like any drug,
might be indulged at first in a misguided attempt to get an edge or to take one
off. The problem is how quickly it becomes an end unto itself. Which is how one
finds oneself in surreal moments like the one I experienced on the phone with
Dov, or in any of the cautionary tales in this book.
In the course of my work and my life, I’ve found that most of the
consequences of ego are not quite so calamitous. Many of the people in your life
—and in our world—who have given over to their ego will not “get what they
deserve” in the sense of karmic justice that we were taught to believe in as kids.
I wish it were so simple.
Instead, the consequences are closer to the ending of one of my favorite
books, What Makes Sammy Run? by Budd Schulberg, a novel whose famous
character is based on the real lives of entertainment entrepreneurs like Samuel
Goldwyn and David O. Selznick. In the book, the narrator is called to the palatial
mansion of a calculating, ruthless, egotistical Hollywood mogul whose
precipitous rise he has followed with a mix of admiration and confusion and
eventually disgust.
In this moment of vulnerability, the narrator catches a true glimpse into the
man’s life—his lonely, empty marriage, his fear, his insecurity, his inability to be
still even for a second. He realizes that the vengeance—the bad karma—he’d
hoped for, for all the rules the man had broken, all the cheating ways he had
gotten ahead, wasn’t coming. Because it was already there. As he writes,
I had expected something conclusive and fatal and now I realized that what
was coming to him was not a sudden pay-off but a process, a disease he
had caught in the epidemic that swept over his birthplace like a plague; a
cancer that was slowly eating him away, the symptoms developing and
intensifying: success, loneliness, fear. Fear of all the bright young men, the
newer, fresher Sammy Glicks that would spring up to harass him, to
threaten him and finally overtake him.
That’s how ego manifests itself. And isn’t that what we’re desperately afraid
of becoming?
I’ll reveal one last thing I hope will make this come full circle. I first read that
passage when I was nineteen years old. It was reading assigned by a seasoned
mentor who had found, as I would, early success in the entertainment business.
The book was influential and informative for me, just as he’d known it would be.

Yet over the next few years, I worked myself into a nearly identical situation
as the characters in the book. Not just summoned to the palatial home to watch
the expected and unavoidable dissolution of a person I admired. But to find
myself dangerously close to my own shortly thereafter.
I know the passage struck me because when I went to type it up for this
epilogue, I found in my original copy pages covered in my own handwriting,
written years before, detailing my reaction, right before I had set out into the
world. Clearly I had understood Schulberg’s words intellectually, even
emotionally—but I had made the wrong choices anyway. I had swept once and
thought it was enough.
Ten years after first reading it and writing down my thoughts, I was ready
once more. Those lessons came home to me in exactly the way I needed them to.
There’s a quote from Bismarck that says, in effect, any fool can learn from
experience. The trick is to learn from other people’s experience. This book
started around the latter idea and to my surprise ended up with a painful amount
of the former as well. I set out to study ego and came crashing into my own—
and to those of the people I had long since looked up to.
It may be that you’ll need to experience some of that on your own too.
Perhaps it is like Plutarch’s reflection that we don’t “so much gain the
knowledge of things by the words, as words by the experience [we have] of
things.”
In any case, I want to conclude this book with the idea that has underpinned
all of what you’ve just read. That it’s admirable to want to be better businessmen
or businesswomen, better athletes, better conquerors. We should want to be
better informed, better off financially . . . We should want, as I’ve said a few
times in this book, to do great things. I know that I do.
But no less impressive an accomplishment: being better people, being happier
people, being balanced people, being content people, being humble and selfless
people. Or better yet, all of these traits together. And what is most obvious but
most ignored is that perfecting the personal regularly leads to success as a
professional, but rarely the other way around. Working to refine our habitual
thoughts, working to clamp down on destructive impulses, these are not simply
the moral requirements of any decent person. They will make us more
successful; they will help us navigate the treacherous waters that ambition will
require us to travel. And they are also their own reward.
So here you are, at the end of this book about ego, having seen as much as
one can be shown about the problems of ego from other people’s experiences

and my own.
What is left?
Your choices. What will you do with this information? Not just now, but
going forward?
Every day for the rest of your life you will find yourself at one of three
phases: aspiration, success, failure. You will battle the ego in each of them. You
will make mistakes in each of them.
You must sweep the floor every minute of every day. And then sweep again.

WHAT SHOULD YOU READ NEXT?

For most people, bibliographies are boring. For those of us who love to read,
they can be the best part of an entire book. As one of those people, I have
prepared for you—my book-loving reader—a full guide to every single book and
source I used in this study of ego. I wanted to show you not just which books
deserved citation but what I got out of them, and which ones I strongly
recommend you read next. In doing this, I got so carried away that my publisher
informed me what I had prepared was too big to fit in the book. So I’d like to
send it to you directly—in fully clickable and searchable form.
If you’d like these recommendations, all you have to do is e-mail
EgoIsTheEnemy@gmail.com or visit www.EgoIsTheEnemy.com/books. I’ll also
send you a collection of my favorite quotes and observations about ego—many
of which I couldn’t fit in this book.
CAN I GET EVEN MORE BOOK RECOMMENDATIONS?

You can also sign up for my monthly book recommendation e-mail. The list of
recipients has grown to more than fifty thousand rabid, curious readers like
yourself. You’ll get one e-mail per month, with recommendations from me based
on my own personal reading. It kicks off with ten of my favorite books of all
time. Just e-mail ryanholiday@gmail.com with “Reading List E-mail” in the
subject line or sign up at ryanholiday.net/reading-newsletter.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aristotle. trans. Terence Irwin. Nicomachean Ethics. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett
Publishing, 1999.
Barlett, Donald L., and James B. Steele. Howard Hughes: His Life and Madness.
London: Andre Deutsch, 2003.
Bly, Robert. Iron John: A Book About Men. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo, 2004.
Bolelli, Daniele. On the Warrior’s Path: Fighting, Philosophy, and Martial Arts
Mythology. Berkeley, CA: Frog, 2003.
Brady, Frank. Citizen Welles: A Biography of Orson Welles. New York: Scribner,
1988.
Brown, Peter H., and Pat H. Broeske. Howard Hughes: The Untold Story. Da
Capo, 2004.
C., Chuck. A New Pair of Glasses. Irvine, CA: New-Look Publishing, 1984.
Chernow, Ron. Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr. New York: Vintage,
2004.
Cook, Blanche Wiesen. Eleanor Roosevelt: The Defining Years. New York:
Penguin, 2000.
Coram, Robert. Boyd: The Fighter Pilot Who Changed the Art of War. Boston:
Little, Brown, 2002.
Cray, Ed. General of the Army: George C. Marshall, Soldier and Statesman.
New York: Cooper Square, 2000.
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery
and Invention. New York: Harper Collins, 1996.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo. Representative Men: Seven Lectures. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1987.
Geneen, Harold. Managing. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1984.
Graham, Katharine. Personal History. New York: Knopf, 1997.
Grant, Ulysses S. Personal Memoirs of U.S. Grant, Selected Letters 1839–1865.
New York: Library of America, 1990.
Halberstam, David. The Education of a Coach. New York: Hachette, 2006.

Henry, Philip, and J. C. Coulston. The Life of Belisarius: The Last Great General
of Rome. Yardley, Penn.: Westholme, 2006.
Herodotus, trans. Aubrey De Sélincourt, rev. John Marincola. The Histories.
London: Penguin, 2003.
Hesiod, Theogony and Works and Days and Theognis, Elegies. Trans, Dorothea
Wender. Harmondsworth, U.K.: Penguin, 1973.
Isaacson, Walter. Benjamin Franklin: An American Life. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 2003.
Lamott, Anne. Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on Writing and Life. New York:
Anchor, 1995.
Levin, Hillel. Grand Delusions: The Cosmic Career of John DeLorean. New
York: Viking, 1983.
Liddell Hart, B. H. Sherman: Soldier, Realist, American. New York: Da Capo,
1993.
Malcolm X, and Alex Haley. The Autobiography of Malcolm X. New York:
Ballantine, 1992.
Marcus Aurelius, trans. Gregory Hays. Meditations. New York: Modern Library,
2002.
Martial, trans. Craig A. Williams. Epigrams. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2004.
McPhee, John. A Sense of Where You Are: A Profile of Bill Bradley at Princeton.
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999.
McWilliams, Carey. The Education of Carey McWilliams. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1979.
Mosley, Leonard. Marshall: Hero for Our Times. New York: Hearst, 1982.
Muir, John. Wilderness Essays. Salt Lake City: Peregrine Smith, 1980.
Nixon by Nixon: In His Own Words. Directed by Peter W. Kunhardt. HBO
documentary, 2014.
Orth, Maureen. “Angela’s Assets.” Vanity Fair, January 2015.
Packer, George. “The Quiet German.” New Yorker, December 1, 2014.
Palahniuk, Chuck. Fight Club. New York: W. W. Norton, 1996.
Plutarch, trans. Ian Scott-Kilvert. The Rise and Fall of Athens: Nine Greek Lives.
Harmondsworth, U.K: Penguin, 1960.
Pressfield, Steven. Tides of War: A Novel of Alcibiades and the Peloponnesian
War. New York: Bantam, 2001.
Rampersad, Arnold. Jackie Robinson: A Biography. New York: Knopf, 1997.

Riley, Pat. The Winner Within: A Life Plan for Team Players. New York:
Putnam, 1993.
Roberts, Russ. How Adam Smith Can Change Your Life. New York: Portfolio /
Penguin, 2015.
Schulberg, Budd. What Makes Sammy Run? New York: Vintage, 1993.
Sears, Stephen W. George B. McClellan: The Young Napoleon. New York:
Ticknor & Fields, 1988.
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus, trans. C.D.N. Costa. On the Shortness of Life. New
York: Penguin, 2005.
Shamrock, Frank. Uncaged: My Life as a Champion MMA Fighter. Chicago:
Chicago Review Press, 2012.
Sheridan, Sam. The Fighter’s Mind: Inside the Mental Game. New York:
Atlantic Monthly, 2010.
Sherman, William T. Memoirs of General W. T. Sherman. New York: Literary
Classics of the United States, 1990.
Smith, Adam. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. New York: Penguin, 2009.
Smith, Jean Edward. Eisenhower: In War and Peace. New York: Random
House, 2012.
Stevenson, Robert Louis. An Apology for Idlers. London: Penguin, 2009.
Walsh, Bill. The Score Takes Care of Itself: My Philosophy of Leadership. New
York: Portfolio / Penguin, 2009.
Washington, Booker T. Up from Slavery. New York: Dover, 1995.
Weatherford, J. Genghis Khan and the Making of the Modern World. New York:
Three Rivers, 2005.
Wooden, John. Coach Wooden’s Leadership Game Plan for Success: 12 Lessons
for Extraordinary Performance and Personal Excellence. New York:
McGraw-Hill Education, 2009.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

In my previous books, I’ve tried to make a point of thanking not only the people
and mentors who have helped with the book, but also to make it clear how
indebted I am to the many authors and thinkers I have relied on over the years.
This book would not only not be possible without them, but I also feel incredibly
guilty that readers might credit me for insights that originated with other, wiser
writers. Anything valuable in this book came from them and not me.
This book would not be what it is without the editing and valuable advice of
my editors Nils Parker and Niki Papadopoulos. Steven Pressfield, Tom Bilyeu,
and Joey Roth provided critical notes early on that I am very grateful for.
I want to thank my wife, who not only helped me personally during the
writing of this book, but was my most dedicated reader. I want to thank my
agent, Steve Hanselman, who has represented me from day one. Thanks to
Michael Tunney for his help with the proposal, Kevin Currie for his help, and
Hristo Vassilev for his excellent research work and assistance. Thanks to Mike
Lombardi at the Patriots for his support and insight. Also I owe a debt of
gratitude to Tim Ferriss, whose support of my last book made this one possible,
and the same goes to Robert Greene, who helped make me a writer, and Dr.
Drew, who introduced me to philosophy. I want to thank John Luttrell and
Tobias Keller for their guidance and conversations with me during the chaos at
American Apparel. I’m not sure if I would have made it, period, were it not for
Workaholics Anonymous, both their meeting in Los Angeles and weekly calls.
In terms of places, the University of Texas at Austin Library, the University
of California Riverside Library, various running trails (and my shoes), and my
home away from home, the Los Angeles Athletic Club, facilitated the actual
writing in this book.
Finally, would it be wrong to thank my pet goats too? If not, thanks to
Biscuit, Bucket, and Watermelon for keeping things entertaining.

*I was there and saw all of it. It broke my heart.

Looking for more?
Visit Penguin.com for more about this author and a
complete list of their books.
Discover your next great read!

