Jean-Paul Sartre

NAUSEA
Tra,u/atedf,wn
LLOYD

w Frad 6,-

ALEXANDER

INTRODUCTION BY HAYDEN CARRUTH

A New DirectionsPaper/xx,/c

moment I stopped, dropped the stone and left. Probably I
looked somewhat foolish or absent-minded, because the
children laughed behind my back.
So much for external things. What has happened inside of
me has not left any dear traces. I saw something which disgusted
me, but I no longer know whether it was tht- sea or the stone.
The stone was flat and dry, especially on one side, damp and
muddy on the other. I held it by the edges with my fingers wide
apart so as not to get them dirty.
Day before yesterday was much more complicated. And
there was also this series of coincidences, of pid-pr<HJUOS
that
I can't explain to myself. But I'm not going to spend my time
putting all that down on paper. Anyhow, it was certain that I
was afraid or had some other feeling of that sort. If I had only
known what I was afraid of, I would have made a great step
forward.
The strangest thing is that I am not at all inclined to call
myself insane, I clearly see that I am not : all these changes
concern objects. At least, that is what I'd like to be sure of.
10.JOl

Perhaps it was a passing moment of madness after all. There
is no trace of it any more. My odd feelings of the other week
seem to me quite ridiculous today : I can no longer enter into
them. I am quite at ease this evening, quite solidly terre-tlterre in the world. Here is my room facing north-east. Below
the Rue des Mutiles and the construction-yard of the new
station. From my window I see the red and white flame of the
~ des C!aemint,u
at the comer of the Boulevard Victor1 Evidendy in the evening. The followingparagraph
la much laterthanthe
precedingones. We are inclined 10 bclicvcit - written thefollowiuaday at
the earliest.

8

DIARY

Monday,29 Janua,y,1932:
Something has happened to me, I can't doubt it any more.
It came as an illness does, not like an ordinary certainty, not
like anything evident. It came cunningly, little by little; I felt
a little strange, a little put out, that's all. Once established it
never moved, it stayed quiet, and I was able to persuade myself
that nothing was the matter with me, that it was a false alarm.
And now, it's blossoming.
I don't think the historian's trade is much given to
psychological analysis.In our work we have to do only with
sentiments in the whole to which we give generic titles such as
Ambition and Interest. And yet if I had even a shadow of selfk.nowledge,I could put it to good use now.
For instance, there is something new about my hands, a
certain way of pi~
up my ~ or fork. Or else it's the
fork which now has a certain way of having itself picked up,
I don't know. A little while ago, just as I was coming into my
room, I stopped short because I felt in my hand a cold object
which held my attention through a sort of personality. I opened
my hand, looked : I was simply holding the door-knob. This
morning in the library, when the Self-Taught Man1 came to say
good morning to me, it took me ten~ize
him.
I saw an unknown face, barely a face. Then there was his hand
like a fat white worm in my own hand. I dropped it almost
immediately and the arm fell back flabbily.
There are a great number of suspiciousnoisesin the streets, too.
1 ()pr P ... , who will be often mentionedin this jourml. He wu a baillil"1
clerk. Roquenlinmet him in 1930 in the Douvillelibrvy.

II

So a change !cu taken place during these last few weeks.
But where? It i,!_an.i.bstractchan&e
withoutq~. Am I the
one who has changed ? If not, then it is this room, this city and
this nature ; I must choose.

•

•

•

•

•

I think I'm the one who has changed : that's the simplest
solution. Also tnemost unp easant.' 1JuiI must finally realize
that I am subject to these sudden transformations. The thing is
th.-t I rarely think ; a crowd of small metamorphosesaccumulate
in me without my noticing it, and then, one fine day, a veritable
revolution takes place. This is what has given my life such a
jerky, incoherent aspect. For instance, when I left France, there
were a lot of people who said I left for a whim. And when I
suddenly car.le back after six years of travelling, they still could
call it a whim. I see myself with Mercier again in the office of
that French functionary who resigned after the Petrou business
last year. Mercier was going to Bengal on an archeological
mission. I always wanted to go to Bengal and he pressed me
to go with him. Now I wonder why. I don't think he was too
sure of Portal and was counting on me to keep an eye on him.
I saw no reason to refuse. And even if I had suspected that
little deal with Portal, it would have been one more reason to
accept with enthusiasm. Well, I was paralysed, I couldn't say
a word. I was staring at a little Khmer statuette on a green carpet,
next to a telephone. I seemed to be full of lymph or warm milk.
With angelic patience veiling a slight irritation, Mercier tpld
me:
" Now look, I have to be officially fixed up. I know you'll
end up by saying yes, so you might as well accept right away."
He had a reddish-black beard, heavily scented. I got a waft
of perfumeat each movement of his head. And thefu suddenly,
I woke from a six-year slumber.

u.

The statue seemed to me unpleasant and stupid and I felt
terribly, deeply bored. I couldn't understand why I was in
Indo-Cfilna. Wliatwas I doing there ? Why was I talking to
these people ? Why was I dressed so oddly ? }br passion was
dead. For years it bad rolled over and submerged me ; now I
Teft empty. But that wasn't the worst: before me, posedwith a
sort of indolence, was a voluminous, insipid idea. I did not see
clearly what it was, but it sickened me so much I couldn't look
at it. Allthat was confused with the perfumeof Mercier's beard.
I pulled myself together, convulsed with anger, and answered
dryly:
" Thank. you, but I believe ve travelled enough, I must go
back to France now." Two days later I took the boat for
Marseilles.
Ifl am not mistaken, if all the signs which have beenamassed
are precursors of a new overthrow in my life, well then I am
terrified. It isn't that my life is rich, or -weighty or piecious:
But Tu afraid of what will be born and take possession of
me-and drag me-where ? Shall I have to go off again, leaving
my research,my book and everything else unfinished ? Shall I
awake in a few months, in a few years, broken, deceived, in
the midst of new ruins ? I would like to see the truth clearly
before it is too late.

r

Tuesday,30 Jamuuy:
Nothing new.
I worked from nine till one in the library. I got Chapter XII
started and all that concerns Rollebon's stay in Russia up to
the death of Paul I. This work is finished : nothing more to do
with it until the final revision.
It is one-thirty. I am eating a sandwich in the Caf~ Mably,
everything is more or less normal. Anyway, everything is
13

always normal in caf& and especially the Cafe Mably, because
of the manager, M. Fasquelle, who has a raffish look which is
positively reassuring. It will soon be time for his nap and his
eyes are pink already, but he stays quick and decisive. He strolls
among the tables and speaks confidently to the customers.
" Is everything all right, Monsieur ? "
I smile at seeing him thus ; when his place empties his head
empties too. From two to four the cafe is deserted, then M.
Fasquelle takes a few daud steps, the waiters tum out the lights
and he slips into unconsciousness: when this man is lonely he
sleeps.
1bere are still about twenty customers left, bachelon, smalltime engineers, officeemployees.They eat hurriedly in boardinghouses which they call their "popotu " and, since they need
a little luxury, they come here after their meals. They drink a
cup of coffee and play poker dice ; they make a little noise,
an inconsistent noise which doesn't bother me. In order to
exist, they also must consort with others.
I live alone. entirely_.ikmc,..l never $peaktQ i!_lyone,never ;
I receive nothing. I giv~ nothing. The Self-Taught Man doesn't
count. Thereis Fran501~ the woman who runs the~
du Cl,emi,,ou.'llut do I speak to her ? Sometimes after dinner,
when she brings my beer, I ask her :
" Have you time this evening ? "
She never says no and I follow her into one of the big rooms
on the second floor she rents by the hour or by the day. I do
not pay her: our need is mutual. She takes pleasure in it (she
has to have a man a day and she has many more besides me)
and thus I purge myself of a certain nostalgia the cause of
which I know too well. But we hardly speak. What good is
it? Every man for himself: besides, as far as she's concerned,
I am pre-eminently a customer in her cafe. Taking off' her
dress, she tells me :

"Say, haveyou ever heard of that aperitif, Bri&ot? Because
there are two customers who asked for some this week. The
girl didn't know and she came to ask me. 11iey were commercial travellers,they must have drunkthat in Paris. But I
don't like to buy without knowing.I'll keep my stockings on
if you don't mind."
In the past-even a long while aftershe left me-I thought
about Anny. Now I think of no one any more. I don't even
bother looking for words.It flows in me, more or less quickly.
I fix nothing, I let it go. Through the lack of attaching mytelf
to words, my thoughts remain nebulous most of the time. They
sketch vague, pleasant shapes and then are swallowed up : I
forget them almost immediately.
I marvel at these young people : drinking their coffee, they
tell clear, plausible stories. If they are asked what they did
yesterday, they aren't embarrassed: they bring you up to date
in a few words. If I were in their place, I'd fall over myself.
It's true that no one has bothered about bow I spend my time
~ live alone you no longer know
for a long while. Wbco.
what it is to tell something : the plaus• e disappears at the same
time as the friends.
You let events flow past; suddenly you see people pop up
who speak and who go away, you plunge into stories without
beginning or end: you'd make a terrible witness. But in compensation, one misses nothing, no improbability or story too
tall to be believed in ca£&.For example, Saturday, about four
in the afternoon, on the end of the timbered sidewalk of the
new station yard, a little woman in sky blue was running backwards, laughing, waving a handkerchief. At the same time, a
negro in a cream-coloured raincoat, yellow shoes and a green
hat, turned the comer of the street and whistled. Still going
backwards, the woman bumped into him, underneath a lantern
which hangs on a paling and which is lit at night. All at once

IS

there was the paling smelling suongly of wet wood, this
lantern and this little blonde woman in the negro's arms under
a sky the colour of fire. If there had been four or five of us, I
suppose we would have noticed the jolt, the soft colours, the
beautiful blue coat that looked like an eiderdown quilt, the
light raincoat, the red panes of the lantern ; we would have
laughed at the stupefaction which appeared on those two
childish faces.
A man rarely feels like laughing alone : the whole thing was
animated enough for me,.but it was a strong, even a fierce, yet
pure sensation. Then everything came asunder, there was
nothing left but the lantern, the palisade and the sky ; it was still
rather beautiful. An hour later the lantern was lit, the wind
blew, the sky was black ; nothing at all was left.
All that is nothing new ; I have never resisted these harmless
emotions ; far from it. You must be just a little bit lonely in
order to feel them, just_lonely .m_ou~ to get rid of plausibility
at the proper time. But I remain cfose to people, on the
surface of solitu<k. quite resolved to take refuge in their
miast in case of emergency. Up to now I was an amateur at
heart.
Everywhere, now, there are objects like this glass of beer
on the table there. When I see it, I feel like saying:" Enough.''
I realize quite well that I have gone too far. I don't suppose you
can " take sides " with solitude. That doesn't mean that I look
under my bed before going to sleep, or think I see the door
of my room open suddenly in the middle of the night. Still,
somehow I am not at peace : I have been ~ looking at
this glass of beer for half an hour. I look above, below, right
and left ; but I don't want to see it. And I know very well that
all these bachelors around me can be of no help : it is too late,
I can no longer take refuge among them. They could come
and tap me on the shoulder and say," Well, what's the matter

with that glass of beer?" It's just like all the others. It's bevelled
on the edges, has a handle, a little coat of arms with a spade
on it and on the coat of arms is written " S...fL..1.rau
" , I know
~)-'IIU
all that, but I know there is something else-:Almost nothing.
But I can't explain what I see. To anyone. There: I am quietly
slippinginto the water's depthsJ.towards fear.
I am alone in the midst of these happy, reasonable voices.
All these creatures spend their time explaining, realizing happily
that they agree with each other. In Heaven's name, why is it
so i~~rtant to think the same thin_gsall together. lt'S enough
to see the face tneymale when one of these fishy-eyed men
with an inward look and with whom no agreement is possible,
passes them. When I was eight years old and used to play in
the Luxembourg gardens there was a man who came and sat
in a sentry-box,against the iron fence which runs along the
Rue Auguste-Comte. He did not speak but from time to time
litretched out his leg and looked at his foot fearfully. The foot
was encased in a boot, but the other one was in a slipper. The
guard told my uncle that the man was a former proctor. They
retired him because he used to come, dressed up as an academician, to read the school term marks. We had a horrible fear of
him because we sensed he was alone. One day he smiled at
Robert, holding out his arms to him from a distance : Robert
almost fainted. It wasn't this creature's poverty-stricken look
which frightened us, nor the tumour he had on his neck that
rubbed against the edge of his collar : but we felt that he was
shaping thoughts of crab or lobster in his head. And that terrified
us, the fact that one could conjure thoughts of lobsters on the
aentry-box,on our hoops, on the bushes.
Is that what awaits me then? For the first time I am disturbed at being alone. I would like to tell someone what is
happening to me before it is too late and before I start frightening
little boys. I wish Anny were here.

16

17

This is odd : I have just filled up ten pages and I haven't told
the ttuth--«t least, not the whole ttuth. I was~"
thing
new .. with a bad conscience: as a matter orfact I boggled at
bringing out a quite lwmless little incident. "Nothing new...
I admire the way we can lie, putting reason on our side.
Evidently, nothing new has happened, if you c.are to put it
that way : .ibis mornin__g
at ~fteen,
just as I was leaving
the Hotel Printania to go to the rary, I wanted to and could
not pick u_p_
a pa_eer!n!tg on the eund. This is all and it is
not even an event. Yes-but, to tell the whole ttuth, I was
deeply impressed by it: I felt I was no longer free. I tried unsuc:c:essfullyto get rid of this idea at the library. I wanted to
escape from it at the Caf4!Mably. I hoped it would disappear
in the bright light. But it stayed there, like a dead weight inside
me. It is responsible for the preceding pages.
Why didn't I mention it ? It must be out of pride, and then,
too, a little out of awkwardness. I am not in the habit of telling
myself what happens to me, so I cannot quite recapture the
succession of events, I cannot distinguish what is important.
But now it is finished: I have re-read what I wrote in the Caf4!
Mably and I am ashamed; I want no secrets or soul-states,
nothing ineffable; I am neither virgin nor priest enough to play
with the inner life.
There is nothing much to say : I could not pick up the paper,
that's all.
I very much like to pick up ,chestnuts/~ld rags and especially
papers. It is pleasant to me to pick them up, to close my hand
on them ; with a little encouragement I would carry them to
my mouth the way children do. Anny went into a white rage
when I picked up the comers of heavy, sumptuous papers,
probably soiled by excrement. In summer or the beginning of
autumn, you can find remnants of sun-baked newspapers in
gardens, dry and fragile as dead leaves, so yellow you might
18

think they had been washed with picric acid. In winter, some
pages are pounded to pulp; aushed, stained, they retum to the
earth. Others quite new when covered with ice, all white, all
throbbing, are like swans about to fly, but the earth has alttady
caught them from below. They twist and tear themselves from
the mud, only to be finally flattened out a little further on. It
is good to pick up all that. SometimesI simply feel them, looking
at them closely ; other times I tear them to hear their drawnout aackling, or, if they are damp, I light them, not without
difficulty; then I wipe my muddy hands on a wall or tree trunk.
So, today, I was watching the riding boots of a cavalry officer
who was leaving his barracks. As I followed them with my eyes,
I saw a piece of paper lying beside a puddle. I thought the
officer was going to aush the paper into the mud with his heel,
but no : he straddled paper and puddle in a single step. I went
up to it : it was a lined page, undoubtedly tom from a school
notebook. The rain had drenched and twisted it, it was covered
with blisters and swellings like a burned hand. The red line of
the margin was smeared into a pink splotch ; the ink had run
in places. The bottom of the page disappeared beneath a crust
of mud. I bent down, alttady rejoicing at the touch of this
pulp, fresh and tender, which I should roll in my fingers into
greyish balls ... I was unable.
I stayed bent down for a second, I read " Dictation : The
White Owl", then I straightened up, empty-handed.
I am no
longer free, I can no longer do what I will.
~ sfioula not tou&X
cause tliey are not alive. You
use them, put them back in place, you live among them : they
are useful, nothing more. But they~touchJ!le, it is unbearable.
I am afraid of being in contact with them as though they were
living beasts.
Now I see : I recall better what I felt the other day at the
seashore when I held the pebble. It was a son of sweetish
19

sickness. How unpleasant it was! It came from the stone, I'm
sure of it, it passed from the stone to my hand. Yes, that's it,
that's just it-e sort of nausea in the hands.

Tluusday"'°fNIIIin tAelihrary:
A little while ago, going down the hotel stairs, I heard Lucic,
who, for the hundredth time, was complaining to the landlady,
while polishing the steps. The proprietress spoke with difficulty,
using short sentences,becauseshe had not put in her false teeth ;
she was almost naked, in a pink dressing-gown and Turkish
slippers. Lucywas dirty, as usual; from time to time she stopped
rubbing and straightened up on her knees to look at die proprietress. She spoke without pausing, reasonably :
"I'd like it a hundred times better if he went with other
women,'' she said, " it wouldn't make the slightest difference
to me, so long as it didn't do him any harm."
She was talking about her husband: at forty this swarthy
little woman had offered herself and her savings to a handsome
young man, a fitter in the Usines Lecointc. She has an unhappy
home life. Her husband docs not beat her, is not unfaithful to
her, but he drinks, he comes home drunk every evening. He's
burning his candle at both ends ; in three months I have seen
him tum yellow and melt away.Lucic thinks it is drink. I believe
he is tubercular.
" You have to take the upper hand,'' Lucic said.
It gnaws at her, I'm sure of it, but slowly, patiendy: she
takes the upper hand, she is able neither to console herself nor
abandon herself to her suffering. She thinks about it a little bit,
a very little bit, now and again she passesit on. Especiallywhen
she is with people, because they console her and also because
it comforts her a little to talk about it with poise, with an air
of giving advice. When she is alone in the rooms I bear her
20

they do not seem to be about the same person. And yet other
historians work from the same sources of information. How do
they do it ? Am I more scrupulous or less intelligent ? In any
case, the question leaves me completely cold. In truth, what
am I looking for ? I don't know. For a long time, Rollebon
the man has intereSted me more than the book to be written.
But now, the man ... the man begins to bore me. It is the book
which attracts me. I feel more and more need to write--in the
same proportion as I grow old, you might say.
Evidently it must be admitted that Rollebon took an active
part in the assassination of Paul I, that he then acceptedan
extremely important espionage mission to the Orient from the
Cr.ar and constantly betrayed Alexander to the advantage of
Napoleon. At the same time he was able to carry on an active
correspondence with the Comte d'Artois and send him unimportant information in order to convince him of his fidelity :
none of all that is improbable ; Fouch~ at the same time, was
playing a comedy much more dangerous and complex. Perhaps
the Marquis also carried on a rifle-supplying business with the
Asiatic principalities for his own profit.
Well,~:
he could have done all that, but it is not proved:
I am beginning to believe that nothin_gcan ever be proved.
These are honest ~eses
which take the facts into account :
but I sense so definitely that they come from me, and that they
are !_im__pln_
way of unifying my own ~glimmer
comes fmlJl Rolle~n•s side. Slow, lazy, sulky, the facts adapt
themselves to the rigour of the order I wish to give them; but
it remains outside of them. I have the feeling of doing a work of
pure imagination. And I am certain that the characten in a
novel would have a more genuine appearance, or, in any case,
would be more agreeable.

he bored me beyond all possible limits.He spoke a little in the
way Ab~ Mably used to write."
And this is the man who, by his talent for mimicry ? . . .
But then how was he able to charmwomen ? Then there is this
curious story ~ reports and which seems true to me.
" In 1787, at an inn near Moulins, an old man was dying, a
friend of Diderot, trained by the philosophers. The priests of
the neighbourhood were nonplussed : they had tried everything in vain ; the good man would have no last rites, he was a
pantheist. M. de Rollebon, who was passing by and who believed
in nothing, bet the C~ of Moulins that he would need less
than two hours to bring the sick man back to Christian sentiments. The C~ took the bet and lost : Rollebon began at
three in the morning, the sick man confessed at five and died at
seven. " Are you so forceful in argument ? " asked the C~
"You outdo even us."" I did not~•
answed M. .de
R:_ollebon_,_
" I made him fear Hell."
How did he take an eilective part in the assassination? That
evening,one of his officer friends conducted him to his door.
If he had gone out again, how could he have crossed St. Petenberg without trouble ? Paul, half-insane, had given the order
that after nine o'clock at night, all passers except Inid-wives
and doctors were to be arrested. Can we believe the absurd
legend that Rollebon disguisedhimself as a Inidwife to get as
far as the palace ? After all, he was quite capable of it. In any
case, he was not at home on the night of the assassination, that
seems proved. Alexander must have suspectedhim strongly,
since one of his official acts was to send the Marquis away on
the vague pretext of a Inission to the Far East.
M. de Rollebon bores me to tears. I get up. I move through
this pale light ; I see it change beneath my hands and on the
sleeves of my coat : I cannot describe how much it disgusts
me. I yawn. I light the lamp on the table : perhaps its light will
26

STEVENSON
Ll8AAAY BARDCOLLEGE

Annanda!Hn-HudsonN

12504

he shaved himself, not being at all expert. It was his custom to
wash his face with white lead, in the manner of Grimm. M. de
Dangeville said that with all this white and all this blue he looked
like a Roquefort cheese...
It seems to me he must have been quite pleasing. But, after
all, this is not the way he appeared to Mme de Charrittes. I
believe she found him rather wom. Perhaps it is impossible to
understand one's own face. Or perhaps it is because I am a
single man ? People who live in society have learned how to
see themselves in mirrors as they appear to their friends. I have
no mends. Is that w11r
niy Resh is so naked ? You mi_g!it_
say-1
yes you might say, nature witnout hwr!!nitX!.
I have no taste for work any longer, I can do nothing more
except wait for night.

,.30:
Things arc bad I Things arc very bad : I have it, the filth,
the Nau.Ka,.And this time it is new : it caught me in a caf4!.
Until now caf4!swere my only refuge because they were full
of people and well lighted: now there won't even be that any
more ; when I am run to eanh in my room, I shan't know where
to go.
I was coming to make love but no sooner had I opened the
door than Madeleine, the waitress, called to me :
" The patronnc isn't here, she's in town shopping."
I felt a sharp disappointment in the sexual parts, a long, disagreeable tickling. At the same time I felt my shirt rubbing
against my breasts and I was surrounded, seized by a slow,
coloured mist, and a whirlpool of lights in the smoke, in the
mirrors, in the booths glowing at the back of the cafi, and I
couldn't see why it was there or why it was like that. I was
on the doorstep, I hesitated to go in and then there was a
29

The cousin has got up, and taken a few steps, put his hands
behind his back,smiling, raising his head and leaning back on
his heels. He goes to sleep in this position. He is thett, oscillating,
always smiling : his cheeks tremble. He is going to fall. He
bends backwards, bends, bends, the face turned completely up
to the ceiling, then just as he is about to fall, he catches himself
adroitly on the ledge of the bar and regains his balance. After
which, he starts again. I have enough, I call the waitress :
.. Madeleine,if you please, play something on the phonograph.
The one I like, you know: Sotn6of tlaue days."
.. Yes, but maybe that•ll bother these gentlemen ; these
gentlemen don•t like music when theyre playing. But ru ask

them:·
I make a great effort and tum my head. There are four of
them. She bends over a congested old man who wears blackrimmed eyeglasses on the end of his nose. He hides his cards
against his chest and glances at me from under the glasses.
.. Go ahead, Monsieur."
Smiles. His teeth are rotten. The red hand does not belong
to him, it is his neighbour•s, a fellow with a black moustache.
This fellow with the moustache has enormous nostrils that
could pump air for a whole family and that eat up half his face,
but in spite of that, he breathes through his mouth, gasping a
little. With them there is also a young man with a face like a
dog. I cannot make out the fourth player.
The cards fall on the woollen doth, spinning. Then hands
with ringed fingers come and pick them up, saatching the cloth
with their nails. The hands make white splotches on the cloth,
they look puffed up and dusty. Other cards fall, the hands go
and come. What an odd occupation : it doesn't look like a game
or a rite, or a habit. I think they do it to pass the time, nothing
more. But time is too large, it can't be filled up. Everything
you plunge into it is stretched and disintegrates. That gesture,
32

•• Monsieur Randu plays hearts ... and you place the shackle."
The voice dies away and disappears. Nothing bites on the
ribbon of steel, neither the opening door, nor the breath of cold
air Bowing over my knees, nor the arrival of the veterinary
surgeon and his little girl : the music transpierces these vague
figures and passesthrough them. Barely seated, the girl has been
seized by it : she holds herself stiffly, her eyes wide open ; she
listens, rubbing the table with her fist.
A few seconds more and the negress will sing. It seems
inevitable, so strong is the necessity of this music : nothing can
interrupt it, nothing which comes from this time in which the
world has fallen ; it will stop of itself, as if by order. If I love
this beautiful voice it is especially because of that : it is neither
for its fulness nor its sadness, rather because it is the event for
which so many notes have been preparing, from so far away,
dying that it might be born. And yet I am troubled ; it would
take so little to make the record stop : a broken spring, the
whim of Cousin Adolphe. How strange it is, how moving, that
this hardness should be so fragile. othing can interrupt it yet
aJIcan break it.
The last chord has died away. In the brief silence which
follows I feel strongly that there it is, that sometNll8luultapJNIMtl.
Silence.
Some of tl,ue tlays
You'Umusme!o,uy

What has just happened is that die ausea has disappeared.
When the voice was heard in the sifence, I left my bod~
and the Nausea vanish. Suddenly: it was aJmost unbearable to
become so hard, so brilliant. At the same time the music was
drawn out, dilated, swelled like a waterspout. It filled the room
with its metallic tranSparency, crushing our miserable time
against the waJls. I am ;,. the music. Globes of fire tum in the
34

Yes, it'sJ,.uci~. But transfigured,beside herself, suffering with
a frenzied generosity. I envy her. There she is, standing straight,
1ioiding out her arms as if awaiting the stigmata ; she opens her
mouth, she is suffocating. I feel as though the walls have grown
higher, on each side of the street, that they have come closer
together, that she is at the bottom of a well. I wait a few moments :
I am afraid she will fall : she is too sickly to stand this unwonted
sorrow. But she does not move, she seems turned to stone,
like everything around her. One moment I wonder if I have
not been mistaken about her, if this is not her true nature which
has suddenly been revealed to me.
Lucie gives a little groan. Her hand goes to her throat and
she opens wide, astonished eyes. No, it is not from herself that
she draws strength to suffer. It comes to her from the outside
... from the boulevatd. She should be taken by the arm, led
back to the lights, in the midst of people, into quiet, pink streets :
down there one cannot suffer so acutely ; she would be mollified,
she would find her positive look again and the usual level of
her sufferings.
I tum my back on her. After
alLshe-ialudcy. I have been much
too calm these past three years. I can receive nothing more
from these tragic solitudes than a little empty purity. I leave.

TAursday,11.30
I have worked two hours in the reading-room. I went down
to the Cour des Hypoth~es to smoke a pipe. A square paved
with pinkish bricks. The people of Douville are proud of it
because it dates from the eighteenth century. At the entrance
to the Rue Chamade and the Rue Suspedard, old chains bar the
way to vehicles. Women in black who come to exercise their
dogs glide beneath the arcades, along the walls. They rarely
come out into the full light, but they cast ingmue glances from
41

a delicate touch of horror. It comes from ~ fd1aw u_pthere
on !!iipedesp.L When they cast this scholar in bronze they
'"iisoturned out a sorcerer.
I look at lm¢traz full in the face. He has no eyes, hardly any
nose, and beard eaten away by that strange leprosy which
sometimes descends, like an epidemic, on all the statues in one
neighbourhood. He bows; on the left hand side near his heart
his waistooat is soiled with a light green stain. He looks. He
does not live, but neither is he inanimate. A mute power emanates
from him : like a wind driving me backwards : lm¢traz would
like to chaseme out of the Cour des Hypoth~es. But I shall
not leave before I finish this pipe.
A great, gaunt shadow 11.lddenlysprings up behind me. I
jump.
.. Excuse me, Monsieur, I didn't mean to disturb you. I
saw your lips moving. You were undoub~ly repeating
passages from your book.11 He laughs. .. You were hunting
Alexandrines."
I look at the lSdf:_Taught Man ;.,ith stupor. But he seems
surprised at my surprise :
"Should we not, Monsieur, carefully avoid Alexandrines
in prose? 11
I have beenslightly lowered in his estimation. I ask him what
he's doing here at this hour. He explains that his boss has given
him the day off and he came straight to the library ; that he is
not going to eat lunch, that he is going to read till closing time.
I am not listening to him any more, but he must havestrayed
from his original subject because I suddenly hear :
" ... to have, as you, the good fortune of writing a book."
I have to say something.
..Good fortune II I say, dubiously.
He mistakes the sense of my answer and rapidly corrects
himself:

"Monsieur, I should have said: •merit'."
We go ~p the steps. I don't fee) Jike working. Someone has
Je~ ~ Grande,on the table, the book is open at page 27.
I pick It up, mechanically,and begin to read page 27, then page
28 : I haven't the courage to begin at the begiMing. The SelfT~ught Man has gone quickly to the shelves along the wall ; he
bnngs back two boob which he places on the table looking
like a dog who has found a bone.
'
" What are you reading P"
~e sees reluctant to teH me: he hesitates, rolJs his great,
rovmg eyes, then stiffly holds out the boob. Peat-Mossesa,uJ
Wl,ereto Fuul Tliemby I.arbaJt!trier,and Hitopadua, or. Useful
l111tru&tw11
by l.astex. So PI don't know what's both~
him:
the boob are definitely decent. Out of conscience I thumb
~gh
Hitopadua and see nothing but the highest types of

sentunent.

3,oop.m.
I have given up Euglnu Grantkt and begun work without
any heart in it•.The Self-Taught Man, seeing that I am writing,
observ~ me with res~l
Just. From time to time I raise my
~ead a J1tdeand see the unmense, stiff coJlar and the chicken~e n~ co~g out of it. His clothes are shabby but his shirt
IS dazzling white. He has just taken another book from the same
ahdf, I can make out the tide upside-down : Tiu Arrow of
Caudd,«, A Norman Chronicleby Mlle Julie Lavergne. The
Self-Taught Man's choice of reading always disconcerts me.
Suddenly the names of the authors he last read come back
to 1:11Y
mind: Lambert, Langlois, I.arbaJmer, 1.astex,Lavergne.
It 1s a revelation; I have understood the Self-Taught Man's
method; he.~ biroadf .i!PhabeticaJly.
I study him with a sort of admiration. What will-power he
44

must have to carry through, slowly, obstinately, a plan on such
a vast scale. One day, seven years ago (he told me he had been
a student for seven years) he came pompously into this readingroom. He scanned the iMumerabJe boob which lined the walls
and he must have said, something like Rastignac," Science( It
is up to us." Then he went and took the first book from the
first shelf on the far right ; he opened to the first page, with a
feeling of respect and fear mixed with an unshakable decision.
Today he has reached" L .._ •• K "after" J "," L "after" K ".
He has passed brutally from the study of coleopterae to the
quantum theory, from a work on TamerJaine to a Catholic
pamphlet against Darwinism, he has never been disconcerted
for an instant. He has read everything ; he has stored up in his
head most of what anyone knows about parthenogenesis, and
half the arguments against vivisection. There is a universe behind
and before him. And the day is approaching..lmffl~osing the
last book on the last shelf on the far left : he will say to himself,
"Now what?"
This is his Junch time; innocently he eats a slice of bread and a
bar of Gala Peter. His eyes are lowered and I can study at leisure
his fine, curved lashes, like a woman's. When he breathes he
gives off an aroma of old tobacco mixed with the sweet scent of
chocolate.

Friday,3.00 p.m.
A little more and I would have falleninto the lure of the mirror..
I avoid it only to fall into that of the window : indolent, arms
dangling, I go to the window. The Building Yard, the Fence,
the Old Station-the Old Station, the Fence, the Building
Yard. I give such a big yawn that tears come into my eyes. I
hold my pipe in my right hand and my tobacco in my left. I
should fill this pipe. But I don't have the heart to do it. My arms
◄S

hang loosely, I lean my forehead against the windowpane.
That old woman annoys me. She trots along obstinately, with
unseeing eyes. Sometimes she stops, frightened, as if an invisible fear had brushed against her. There she is under my window, the wind blows her skirts against her knees. She stops,
straightens her kerchief. Her hands tremble. She is off again :
now I can see her from the back. Old wood louse! I suppose
she's going to turn right, into the Boulevard Victor-Noir. That
giva her a hundred yards to go: it will take her ten minutes at
the rate she's going, ten minutes during which time I shall
stay like this, watching her, my forehead glued against the
window. She is going to stop twenty times, start again, stop
again ...
I seethe future. It is there, poised over the street, hardly more
dim than the present. What advantage will accrue from its
realisation? The old woman stumps further and further away,
she stops, pulls at a grey lock of hair which escapes from her
kerchief. She walks, she was there,now she is here ... I don't
or dQl.Jilry_,;
know_where I am any more: .do.I "4 .herPlOtJQns_.
them ? I can no Ion er distinguish present from future and yet
it lasts, it happens little by littl~e
old woman advances in the
deserted street, shuffling her heavy, mannish brogues. This is
time, time laid _!>are,
coming slowly into existence, keeping us
waiting, and wnen it does come making us sick because we
realise it's been there for a long time. The old woman reaches
the corner of the street, no more than a bundle of black clothes.
All right then, it's new, she wasn't there a little while ago. But
it's a tarnished deflowered newness, which can never surprise.
She is going to turn the comer, she turns-during an eternity.
I tear myself from the window and stumble across the room •
I glue myself against the looking glass. I stare at myself, I disgus;
myself: one more eternity. Fmally I flee from my image and fall
on the bed. I watch the ceiling, I'd like to sleep.
,46
t
I

Calm. Calm. I can no longer feel the slipping, the rustling of

time.I see pictures on the ceiling. First rings of light, then crosses.
They flutter. And now another picture is forming, at the bottom
of my eyes this time. It is a great, kneeling animal. I see its
front paws and packsaddle. The rest is in fog. But I recogni7.e
it :
it is a camel I saw at Marrakesh, tethered to a stone. He knelt
and srood up six times running; the urchins laughed and shouted
at him.
It was wonderful two year ago: all I had to do was closetQ my
eyes and my head would start buzzing like a bee-hive : I could
conjure faces,trees, houses, a Japanese girl in Kamaishikiwashing
herself naked in a wooden tub, a dead Russian, emptied of blood
by a great, gaping wound, all his blood in a pool beside him.
I could recapture the taste of kouskouss, the smell of olive oil
which fills the streets of Burgos at noon, the scent of fennel
floating through the Tetuan streets, the piping of Greek shepherds ; I was touched. This joy was used up a long time ago.
Will it be reborn today ?
A torrid sun moves stiffly in my head like a magic lantern
slide. A fragment of blue sky follows ; after a few jolts it becomes
motionless. I am all golden within. From what Moroccan (or
Algerian or Syrian) day did this flash suddenly detach itself?
I let myself flow into the past.
Meknes. What was that man from the hills lik.e---theone who
frightened us in the narrow street between the Berdaine mosque
and that charming square shaded by a mulberry tree ? He came
towards us, Anny was on my right. Or on my left ?
This sun and blue sky were only a snare. This is the hundredth
time I've let myself be caught. My memories are like coins in the
devil's purse : when you open it you find only dead leaves.
Now I can only see the great, empty eye sock.et of the hill
tribesman. Is this eye really his ? The doetor at Baku who explained the principle of state abortions to me was also blind

47

of one eye, and the white empty socket appears every time I
want to remember his face. Like the Noms these two men
have only one eye between them with which they take turns.
k. for the square at Meknes,where I used to go every day, it's
even simpler : I do not see it at all any more. All that remains
is the vague feeling that it was charming, and these five words
are indivisibly bound together : a charming square at Meknes.
Undoubtedly, if I close my eyes or stare vaguely at the ceiling
I can re-create the scene: a tree in the distance, a short dingy
figure run towards me. But I am inventing all this to make out a
case. lbat Moroccan was big and weather-beaten, besides,
I only saw him after he had touched me. So I still know he was
big and weather-beaten : certain details, somewhat curtailed,
live in my memory. But I don't su anything any more: I can
search the past in vain, I can only find these scraps of images and
I am not sure what they represent, whether they are memories
or just fiction.
There are many cases where even these saaps have disappeared : nothing is left but words : I could still tell stories,
tell them too well (as far as anecdotes are concerned, I can stand
up to anyone except ship's officers and professional people)
but these are only the skeletons. There's the story of a person
who does this, does that, but it isn't I, I have nothing in common
with him. He travels through countries I know no more about
than ifl had never been there. Sometimes,in my story, it happens
that I pronounce these fine names you read in atlases, Aranjuez
or Canterbury. New images are born in me, images such as
people create from books who have never travelled. My words
are dreams, that is all.
For a hundred dead stories there still remain one o.rtwo..loong
ones. I evoke these with caution, occasionally, not too often,
for fear of wearing them out, I fish one out, again I see the
scenery, the characters, the attitudes. I stop suddenly: there is

a ftaw, I have seen a word pierce through the web of sensations.
I suppose that this word will soon take the place of several
images I love. I must stop quickly and think of something else ;
I don't want to tire my memories. In vain ; the next time I evoke
them a good part will be congealed.
I make a pretence of getting up, going to look for my photos
of Meknesin the chest I pushed under my table. What good would
it do ? These aphrodisiacs scarcely affect my memory any more.
I found a faded little photo under my blotter the other day. A
woman was smiling, near a tank. I studied this person for a
moment without recognizing her. Then on the other side I
read," Anny, Ponsmouth, April 7, '27 ".
I have never before had such a strong feeling that I was
devoid of secret dimensions, confined within the limits of my
body, from which airy thoughts ftoat up like bubbles. I build
memories with my present self. I am cast out, forsaken in the
present : I vainly try to rejoin the past : I cannot escape.
Man: I had forgotten
Someone knocks. It's the Self-Ta~
him. I had promised to show him the pliotographs of my
travels. He can go to Hell.
He sits down on a chair ; his extended bunocks touch the back
of it and his stiff torso leans forward. I jump from the end of my
bed and turn on the light.
..Oh, do we really need that ? We were quite comfortable."
"Not for looking at pictureS•••• "
I relieve him of his hat.
•'True, Monsieur ? Do you really want to show me your
pictures? ..
..Of course."
This is a plot : I hope he will keep quiet while he looks at
them. I dive under the table and push the chest against his patent
leather shoes, I put an armload of post cards and photoS on his
lap : Spain and Spanish Morocco.

48

49

like to make some new acquaintances,.. he says unctuously.
11
To speak frankly, I would also like something unexpected
to happen to me, something new, adventures...
He has loweredhis voiceand his facehas taken on a roguish look.
11
What sort of adventures ? " I ask him, astonished.
11
All sorts, Monsieur. Getting on the wrong train. Stopping
in an unknown city. Losing your briefcase, being arrested by
mistake, spending the night in prison. Monsieur, I believed the
word adventure could be defined : an event out of the ordinary
without being necessarilyextraordinary.
People speak of the
magic of adventures. Does this expression seem correct to you ?
I would like to ask you a question, Monsieur."
11
What is it ? "
He blushes and smiles.
11
Possibly it is indiscreetI "
11
Ask me, anyway."
He leans towards me, his eyes half-closed, and asks :
11
Have you had many -adventures,
Monsieur ? "
.. A few,"I answer mechanically, throwing myself back to
avoid his tainted breath. Yes. I said that mechanically, without
thinking. In facti I am generally proud of having had so many
adventures.But today, I had barely pan~unced the words
than I was seized with contrition ; it seems as though I am
lying, that I have never had the slightest adventure in my life,
or rather,that I don't even know what the word means any
more. At the same time, I am weighed down by the same discouragement I had in Hanoi-four years ago when Mercier
pressed me to join him and I stared at a Khmer statuette without
answering. And the IDEA is there, this great white mass which
so disgusted me then : I hadn't seen it for four years.
.. Could I ask you ... " the Self-Taught Man begins ..•
By Jovel To tell him one of those famous tales. But I won't
say another word on the subject.
s2

11

There," I say, bending down over his narrow shoulders,
putting my finger on a photograph, 11 there, that's Santillana,
the prettiest town in Spain."
.. The Santillana of Gil Blas ? I didn't believe it existed.
Ah, Monsieur, how profitable your conversation is. One can
tell you've travelled."
I put out the Self-Taught Man after filling his pockets with
post cards, prints and photos. He left enchanted and I switched
off the light. I am alone now. Not quite alone. Hovering in
front of me is still this idea. It has rolled itself into a ball, it
stays there like a large cat ; it explains nothing, it does not move,
and contents itself with saying no. No, I haven't had any
adventures.
I fill my pipe, light it and stretch out on the bed, throwing
a coat over my legs. What astonishes me is to feel so sad and
exhausted. Even ifit were true--that I never had any_advennu:es
--what difference would that make to me ? First, it seems to
~ a pure ~estion of words. This business at Melmes, for
example, I was thinking about a little while ago : a Moroccan
jumped on me and wanted to stab me with an enormous knife.
But I hit him just below the temple ... then he began shouting
in Arabic and a swarm of lousy beggars came up and chased
us all the way to Souk Attarin. Well, you can call that by any
name you like, in any case, it was an event which luzppawdto
ME,

It is completely dark and I can't tell whether my pipe is lit.
A trolley passes : red light on the ceiling. Then a heavy truck
which makes the house tremble. It must be six o'clock.
I have never had adventures. Things have happened to me,
events, incidents, anything you like. But no adventures. lt
isn't a question of words; I am beginning to understand. There
is something to which I clung more than all the rest-without
completely realizing it. It wasn't love. Heaven forbid, not glory,
S3

not money. It was ••. I had imagined that at certain times my
life could take on a rare and precious quality. There was no
need for extraordinary circumstances: all I asked for was a linle
precision. There is nothing brilliant about my life now : but
from time to time, for example, when they play music in the
caf~ I look back and tell myself: in old days, in London,
Meknes, Tokyo, I have known great moments, I have had
adventures. Now I am deprived of this. I have suddenly learned,
without any apparent reason, that I have been lying to myself
for ten years. And naturally, everything they tell about in
books can happen in real life, but not in the same way. It is
to this way of happening that I clung so tightly.
The beginnings would have had to be real beginnings.
Alas! Now I see so clearly what I wanted. Real beginnings
are like a fanfare of trumpets, like the first noteS of a jazz tune,
cutting shon tedium, making for continuity : then you say
about these evenings within evenings : " I was out for a walk,
it was an evening in May." You walk, the moon has just risen,
you feel lazy, vacant, a little empty. And then suddenly you
think: "Something has ha2J>Clled."
No matter what: a slight
rustling in theshadow, a thin silhouette aossing the street.
But this paltry event is not like the others : suddenly you see
that it is the beginning of a great shape whose outlines are
lost in mist and you tell younelf, "Something_ is beginning."
Something is beginning in order to end : adventure does not
let itself be drawn out ; it only makes sense when dead. I am
drawn, irrevocably, towards this death which is perhaps mine
as well. Each instant appears only as pan of a sequence. I cling
to each instant with all my heart : I know that it is unique,
irreplaceable-and yet I would not raise a finger to stop it
from being annihilated. This last moment I am spending-in
Berlin, in London-in the arms of a woman casually met twO
days ago-moment I love passionately, woman I may adore14

all is going to end, I know it. Soon I shall leave for another
country. I shall never rediscover either this woman or this
night. I grasp at each second, trying to suck it dry : nothing
happens which I do not seize, which I do not fix forever in
myself, nothing, neither the fugitive tenderness of those lovely
eyes, nor the noises of the street, nor the false dawn of early
morning : and even so the minute passes and I do not hold it
back, I like to see it pass.
All of a sudden something breaks off sharply. The adventure
is over, time resumes its daily routine. I tum; behind me, this
beautiful melodious form sinks entirely into the past It grows
smaller, contracts as it declines, and now the end makes one
with the beginning. Following this gold spot with my eye. I
think I would accept~en if I had to risk death, lose a fonune,
a friend-to live it all over again, in the same circumstances,
from end to end. But an adventure never returns nor is prolonged.
Yes, it's what I wanted-what I still want. I am so happy
when a negress sings : what summits would I not reach if "!)'
own/;.fi_madethe sube of the melodj,.
The idea is still there, unnameable. It waits, peacefully. Now
it seems to say :
"Yes? Is tluu what you wanted? Well, that's exactly what
you've never had (remember you fooled yourself with words,
you called the glitter of travel, the love of women, quarrels,
and trinkets adventure} and this is ~·hat you'll never haveand no one other than yourself."
But Why? WHY?

SaturdayMOn:
The Self-Taught Man did not see me come into the reading~
room. He was sitting at the end of a table in the back ; he had

n

set his book down in front of him but he was not reading. He
was smiling at a seedy-looking student who often comes to
the library. The student allowed himself to be looked at for
a moment, then suddenly stuck his tongue out and made a
horrible face. The Self-Taught Manblushed, hurriedly plunged
his nose into his book and became absorbed by his reading.
I have reconsidered my thoughts of yesterday. I was completely dry : it made no difference to me whethet there had
beenno adventure&.I was only curious to know whether there
could ne,,er 1Many.
This is what I thought: for the most banaleven to become
an adventure, you must (and this is enough) begin to recount it.
This is what fools people : a man is alwa.ysa teller of tales, he
lives surrounded by his stories and the stories of oth~ he
sees everything that happena to him duough them;. and.he
tries to live his own life as if he were taling..a.story.
But you have to choose: live or tal. For example, when I
was in Hamburg, with that Ema girl I didn't trust and who
was afraid of me, I led a funny sort of life. But I was in the
middle of it, I didn't think about it. And then one evening,
in a little caf~in San Pauli, she left me to go to the ladies' room.
I stayed alone, there was a phonograph playing" Blue Skies ...
I began to tell myself what had happened since I landed. I told
myself," The third evening, as I was going into a dance hall
called La Grotu Bku.e,I noticed a large woman, half seas over.
And that woman is the one I am waiting for now, listening to
• Blue Skies •, the woman who is going to come backand sit
down at my right and put her arms around my neck.,. Then I
felt violently that I was having an adventure. But Ema came
back and sat down beside me, she wound her arms around my
neck and I hated her without knowing why. I understand
now : one had to begin living again and the adventure was
fading out.

~gthing haJ>l?SQS
u.ik ¥Ou.live.The scenery changes, people
come in and go out, that's all. There are no be&innin~. Daya
are tacked on to days without rhyme or reason, an interniliiable,
monotonous add.itign. From time to time you make a semitotal : you say : I've been travelling for three years, I've been
in Douvillefor three years. Neither is there any end : you never
leave a woman, a friend, a city in one go. And then everything
looks alike : Shanghai, Moscow, Algiers, everything is the
same after two weeks. There are moment&-rarely-'When you
make a landmark, you realiu that you're going with a woman,
in some messy business. The time of a flash. After that, the
procession starts again, you begin to add up hours and days :
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. April, May, June. 1924, 192s,
•?26.
That's living. But everything changes when you tell about
life; it's a change no one notices: the p,oof is that people talk
about true stories. As if there could _possibl>:be true jto.rio ;
things happen one way and we tell about them in the opposite
sense. You seem to start at the beginning : "It was a fine autumn
evening in 1922. I was a notary's clerk in Marommes." And
in reality you have started at the end. It was there, invisible
and present, it is the one which gives to words the pomp and
value of a beginning. " I was out walking, I had left the town
without realizing it, I was thinking about my money troubles...
This sentence, taken simply for what it is, means that the man
was absorbed, morose, a hundred leagues from an adventure,
exactly in the mood to let things happen without noticing
them. But the end is there, transforming everything. For us,
the man is already the hero of the story. His moroseness, his
money troubles are much more precious than ours, they are
all gilded by the light of future passions. And the story goes
on in the reverse : instants have Stopped piling themselves in a
lighthearted way one on top of the other, they are snapped up
S7

I tum left and, through the Rue des Voiliers, rejoin the Little
Prado. The iron shutters have been lowered on all the shop
windows. The Rue Tournebride is light but deserted, it has
lost its brief glory of the morning ; nothing distinguishes it
any longer from the neighbouring streets. A fairly strong wind
has come up. I hear the archbishop's metal hat creaking.
I am alone, most of the people have gone back home, they
are reading the evening paper, listening to the radio. Sunday
has left them with a taste of ashes and their thoughts are already
turning towards Monday. But for me there is neither Monday
nor Sunday: there are days which pass in disorder, and then,
sudden lighming like this one.
Nothing has changed and yet everything is different. I can't
describe it; it's like the Nausea and yet u's ~t the o~:
at last an~dventure ppens to me and when I question myself
~at
1t ha
m ~and
tluit I am/ur, ;Jam_
the one w o splits the night, I am as happy as the hero of a
novel.
Something is ~ing to happen : something is waiting for me
in the shadow of the Rue Basse-de-Vieille, it is over there,
just at the comer of this calm street that my life is going to
begin. I see myself advancing with a sense of fatality. There
is a sort of white milestone at the comer of the street. From
far away, it seemed black and, at each stride, it takes on a whiter
colour. This dark body which grows lighter little by little makes
an extraordinary ihlpression on me: when it becomes entirely
dear, entirely white, I shall stop just beside it and the adventure
will begin. It is so close now, this white beacon which comes
out of the shadows, that I am almost afraid : for a moment I
think of turning back. But it is impossible to break the spell.
I advance,I stretch out my hand and touch the stone.
Here is the Rue Basse-de-Vieilleand the enormous mass of
Sainte-C«ile crouching in the shadow, its windows glowing.

76

The Place Ducoton is empty. Am I mistaken? I don't think
I could stand it. WjJl ~ mll;y ~ ? I go towards the
lights of the Caf~ Mably. I am lost, I don't know whether I'm
going in : I glance through the large, steamed windows.
The place is full. The air is blue with cigarette smoke and
steam rising from damp clothing. The cashier is at her counter.
I know her well : she's red haired, as I am ; she has some son
~ under her skirts .lrith
of stomach trouble. She is rottiJ.!g_
a melancholy smile,Te the odour of violets given off by a
decomposing body. A shudder goes through me : she ... she
is the one who waii waitin&..forme. She was there, standing
erect above the counter, smiling. From the far end of the cafe
something returnS which helps to link the scattered moments
of that Sunday and solder them together and which gives them
a meaning. I have spent the whole day only to end there, with
my nose glued against the window, to gaze at this delicate
face blossoming against the red curtain. All has stopped ; my
life has stopped: this wide window,this heavyair, blue as
water, this fleshy white plant at the bottom of the water,and
I myself, we form a complete and static whole : I am happ}.
When I found myself on the Boulevard de la Redoute agam
nothing was left but bitter regret. I said to myself: Perhaps
there is nothing in the world I cling to as much as this feeling
of adventure ; but it comes when it pleases; it is gone so quickly
and how empty I am once it has left. Does it, ironically, pay
me these shon visits in order to show me that I have wasted
my life?
Behind me, in the town, along the great, straight streets lit
up by the cold reflection from the lamp posts, a formidable
social event was dissolving. Sunday was at an end.

Monday:
How could I have written that pom_p<>J.14
absurd sentence
yt$terday:
" I was alone but I marched like a regiment descending on
a city.''
1 cfo not need to make phrases. I write to bring certain circumstancesto lignt.13ewareof literature. I must follow the pen,
without looking rdrwords.
At heart,what disgusts me is having been so sublime last
evening. When I was twenty I used to get drunk and then
explain that I was a fellow in the style of Descartes. I knew
I was inflating myself with heroism, but I let myself go, it
pleased me. After that, the next morning I felt as sick as if
I had awakened in a bed full of vomit. I never vomit when
I'm drunk but that would really be better. Yesterday I didn't
even have the excuse of drunkenness. I got excited like an
imbecile. I must wash myself clean with abstract thoughts,
transparent as water.
This feeling of adventure definitely does not come from
events : I have proved it. It's rather the way in which the
moments are linked together. I think this is what happens :
you suddenly feel that time is passing, that each instant leads
to another, this one to another one, and so on; that each instant
is annihilated, and that it isn't wonh while to hold it back, etc.,
etc. And then you attribute this property to events which
appear to you in the instants ; what belongs to the form you
carry over to the content. You talk a lot about this amazing
flow of time but you hardly see it. You see a woman, you think
that one clay she'll be old, only you don't see her grow old.
But there are moments when you think you su her grow old
and feel yourself growing old with her : this is the feeling of
adventure.
79

If I remember conectly, they call that the irreversibility of
time. The fcding of adventure would simply be that o(.Jbe
kro'mibiljty o( time. But why don't we always have it ? Is
it that time is not always irreversible? There are moments
when you have the impression that you can do what you want,
go forward or backward, that it has no importance ; and then
other times when you might say that the links have been
tightened and, in that case, it's not a question of missing your
tum because you could never start again.
Anny made the most of time. When she was in Djibouti
and I was in Aden, and I used to go and see her for twentyfour hours, she managed to multiply the misunderstandings
between us until there were only euctly sixty minutes before
I had to leave ; sixty minutes, just long enough to make you
feel the seconds p:issing one by one. I remember one of those
terrible evenings. I was supposed to leave at midnight. We
went to an open-air movie ; we were despera~, she as much
as I. Only she led the game. At eleven o'clock, at the beginning
of the main picture, she took my hand and held it in hers without a word. I was flooded with a bitter joy and I understood,
without having to look at my watch, that it was eleven o'clock.
From that time on we began to feel the minutes passing. That
time we were leaving each other for three months. At one
moment they threw a completely blank image on the saeen,
the darkness lifted, and I saw Anny was crying. Then, at midnight, she let go of my hand, after pressing it violently ; I got
up and left without saying a word to her. That was a good job.

7.oop.m.
Work today. It didn't go too badly; I wrote six pages with
a certain amount of pleasure. The more so since it was a question
of abstract considerations on the reign of Paul I. After last
8o

slice of toaSt, the kind you put under roast pigeons ; they
walked sideways with legs like a aab. The larger leaves were
black with beasts. Behind the cactus and the Barbary fig trees,
the Vclleda of the public park pointed a finger at her sex. " This
park smells of vomit," I shouted.
" I didn't want to wake you up," the woman said, " but
the sheet got folded under my back and besides I have to go
down and look after the customers from the Paris train."

SnroveTuesday:
I gave Maurice Barresa spanking. We were three soldiers
and one of us had a hole in the middle of his face. Maurice
Barres came up to us and said, "That's fine!" and he gave
each one of us a small bouquet of violets. " I don't know where
to put them," said the soldier with the hole in his head. Then
Maurice Barressaid, " Put them in the· hole you have in your
head." The soldier answered," I'm going to stick them up
your ass." And we turned over Maurice Barres and took his
pants oft'. He had a cardinal's red robe on under his trousers.
We lifted up the robe and Maurice Barresbegan to shout:
" Look out! I've got on trousers with foot-straps." But we
spanked him until he bled and then we took the pews of violets
and drew the face of Deroul~e on his backside.
For some time now I have been remembering my dreams
much too often. Moreover, I must toss quite a bit because
every morning I find the blankets on the Boor. Today is Shrove
Tuesday but that means very little in Bouvillc; in the whole
town there arc hardly a hundred people to dress up.
& I was going down the stairs the landlady called me :
" There's a letter for you."
A letter : the last one I got was from the curator of the
Roucn public library, last May. The landlady leads me to her
office and holds out a long thick yellow envelope : Anny had
83

even now they have the powerto give us joy and pain. Not
a memory : an implacable, torrid love, without shadow, without escape, without shelter. Three years rolled into one. Tiiat
is why we parted : we did not have enough strength to bear
this burden. And then, when Anny left me, all of a sudden,
all at once, the three years crumbled into the past. I didn't even
suffer, I felt emptied out. Then time began to Row again and
the em~
gr.aZJarger.Then, in Saigon when I decided
to go back to France, all that was still left-strange faces,
places, quays on the banks of long rivers-all was wiped out.
Now my past is nothing more than an enormous vacuum.
My present : this waitresS in the black blouse dreaming ntar
the counter, this man. It seems as though I have learned all I
know of life in books. 'The palaces of Benares, the terrace of
the Leper King, the temples of Java with their great broken
steps, are reftected in my eyes for an instant, but they have
remained there, on the spot. The tmnway that passes in
&ont of the Hotel Printania in the evening does not catch the
reflection of the neon sign-board ; it flames up for an instant,
then goes on with black windows.
This little man has not stopped lookiJtg at me : he bothers
me. He tries to give himself importance. The waitress baa
finally decided •to serve him. She raises her great black arm
lazily, ttaches the bottle, and brings it to him with a ·glass.
.. Hereyou are, Monsieur...
.. Monsieur Achille,.. he says with urbanity.
She pours without answering ; all of a sudden he takes his
finger from his nose, places both hands flat on the table. He
throws his head back and his eyes shine. He says in a cold
voice:
.. Poor girl."
The waitresS gives a start and I start too : he has an indefinable expression, perhaps one of amazement, as if it were

89

stuffs, old clothes, newspapers ; they have kept everything
The past is a landlord's luxury.
Where shall I keep mine? You don't put your past in your
pocket; you have to have a house. I have only my body : a
man entirely -~on~ with his lonely body, cannot indulge in
memories ; they pass through him. I shouldn't complain : all
I wanted was to be free.
The little man stirs and sighs. He is all wrapped in his overcoat but from time to time he straightens up and puts on a
haughty look. He has no past either. Looking closely, you
would undoubtedly find in a cousin's house a photograph
showing him at a wedding,with a wing collar, stiff shirt and
a slight, young man's moustache. Of myself I don't think that
even that is left.
Here he is looking at me again. This time he's going to
speak to me, and I feel ali taut inside. There is no sympathy
between us : we are alike, that's all. He is alone, as I am, but
more sunken into solitude than I. He must be waitingfor his
own Nausea .or something
of that sort. Now there are still
people who r«o81Uf•me, who see me and think: " He's one
of us." So ? What does he want ? He must know that we can
do nothing for one another. The families are in their houses,
in the midst of their memories. And here we are.Ltwowanc!_erers,
without ~If he were suddenly to stand up and speak
to me, I'd jump into the air.
The door opens with a great to-do : it is Doctor R~.
" Good day everybody."
He comes in, ferocious and suspicious, swaying, swaying a
little on his long legs which can barely support his body. I
see him often, on Sundays, at the Brasserie Vezelise, but he
doesn't know me. He is built like the old monitors at Joinville,
arms like thighs, a chest measurement of 110, and he can't
stand up straight.

" He's aazy as a loon, that's that..,
He doesn't even take the trouble to let on that he's joking.
He knows that the loony won't be angry, that he's going to
smile. And there it is : the man smiles with humility. A aazy
loon : he relaxes, he feels protected against himself: nothing
will happen to him today. I am reassured too. A aazy old
loon : so that was it, so that was all.
The doctor laughs, he gives me an engaging, conspiratorial
glance : because of my size, undoubtedly-and besides, I have
a clean shirt on-he wants to let me in on his joke.
I do not laugh, I do not respond to his advances : then,
without stopping to laugh, he turns the terrible fire of his eyes
on me. We look at each other in silence for several seconds:
he sizes me up, looking at me with half-dosed eyes, up and
down he places me. In the aazy loon category ? In the tramp
category?
Still, he is the one who rums his face away : allows himself
to deflate before one lone wretch, without social importance,
it isn't worth talking about-you can forget it right away.
He rolls a cigarette and lights it, then stays motionless with
his eyes hard and staring like an old man's.
The finewrinkles ; he has all of them : horizontal ones running
across his forehead, aow'a feet, bitter lines at each comer of
the mouth, without counting the yellow cords depending
from his chin. There's a J.w;kyman : as soon as you perceive
him, you can tell he must have suffered,.that t-: is SOJneOne
who has lived. He deserves his face for he has never, for one
inStant, lost an occ:asionof utilizing his past to the best of his
ability : he has stuffed it full, used his experience on women
and children, exploited them.
M. Achille is probably happier than he has ever been. He
is agape with admiration ; he drinks his Byrrh in small mouth.
fuls and ~lls his chtek.s out with it. 1ne doctor knew how to
93

squat to pass water ; instead of ergot, Hindu midwives
use ground glass in cow dung ; in Borneo when a woman
has her period she spends three days and nights on the roof
of her house. In Venice I saw burials in gondolas, Holy Week
festivals in Seville, I saw the Passion Play at Oberammergau.
Naturally, that's just a small sample of all I know: I could
lean back in a chair and begin with amusement :
.. Do you know Jihlava, Madame? It's a curious little town
in Moravia where I sta~ in •9"'4·"
And the judge who has seen so many cases would add at
the end of my story :
.. How true it is, Monsieur, how human it is. I had a case
just like that at the beginning of my career. It was in 1901. I
was deputy judge in Limoges ... "
But I was bothered too much by that when I was young.
Yet I didn't belong to a professional family. There are also
amateurs. These are secretaries, office workers, shopkeepers,
people who listen to others in cafes : around fony they feel
swollen, with an experience they can't get rid of. Luckily
they've made children on whom they can pass it off. They
would like to make us believe that !Jlgr past is not lost, that
their memones are conclenRa, gently transformed into Wisdom.
Convenient past! Past handed out of a pocket! little gilt boob
full of fine sayings. " Believe me, I'm telling you from experience, all I know I've learned from life." Has life taken charge
the new by. .the old--::ilndrbe
of their thoughts ?_1Jiq .cxplaiD.
old they explain b~ the older still,. like those historians who
~ a Leoin .into a RUS$ianl\Q._bes.J!ierre1.
and a ~ierre
into a French Crom~ll : when all is said and cf~~
have
never understood ~ng
at all.... You can imagine a morose
fclfcnessbehind their importance : they see the long parade of
pretences, they yawn, they think there's nothing new under
the sun.'' Cnzy as a loon ''-and Doctor Rogi vaguely recalls
9S

~ther crazy loons, ?ot remembering any one of them in parucular. Now, nothing M. Achille can do will surprise us:
/J«aiu, he's a crazy loon!
He is not one : he is afraid. What is he a&aid of? When
you wan.t to understand something you stand in front of it,
alone, Wtthout help : all the past in the world is of no use
Then it disappears and what you wanted to understand di~
appears with it.
General ideas are more flattering. And then professionals
and even amateurs alwaysend up by being right. Their wisdom
prompts them to make the least possible noise, to live as little
as possible, to let themselves be forgotten. Their best stories
are about the rash and the original, who were chastised. Yes
that's how it happens and no one wilJ say the contrary. Perha~
M. Achille's conscience is not easy. Perhaps he tells himself
he wouldn't be there if he had heeded his father's advice or his
elder sister's. The doctor has the right to speak: he has not
wasted his life ; he has known how to make himself useful.
He rises calm and powerful, above this flotsam and jetsam .
1
he is a rock.
Doctor R~ has finished his calvados. His great body
relaxes and his eyelids droop heavily. For the first time I see
his face without the eyes: like a cardboard mask the kind
they're selling in the shops today. His cheeks hav~ a horrid
pink colour•••• The truth stares me in the face : this man is
going to die soon. He surely knows ; he need only look in the
glass : each day he looks a little more like the corpse he will
become. That's what their experience leads to, that's why I
tell myself so often that they smell of death : it is their last
defence. The doctor would like to believe he would like to
hide out ~e star~ real~; that fie is ~ope, without gain, with-out
~ ~~, Wt..!!1
....
an mtc;lligenc:e.
which is clouded, a bocfywhich
is dJSmtegranng. For this reason he has carefully built up,

96
/

f9

furnished, and padded his nightmare compensation : he says
he is making progress. Has he vacuums in his thoughts, moments
when everything spins round in his head? It's because his
judgment no longer has the impulse of youth. He no longer
understands what he reads in books? It's because he's so far
away from books now. He can't make love any more P But
he has made love in the past. Having made love is much better
than still making it : looking back, he compares, ponders. And
this terrible corpse's facet To be able to stand the sight of it
in the glass he makes himself believe that the lessons of experience are graven on it.
The doctor turns his head a little. His eyelids are half-open
and he watches me with the red eyes of sleep. I smile at him.
I would like this smile to reveal all that he is trying to hide
from himself. That would give him a jolt if he could say to
himself: "There's someone who lmow1I'm ~ing_ to die!"
But his eyelids droop : he sleeps. I leave, letting M: Aclillle
watch over his slumber.
The rain has stopped, the air is mild, the sky slowly rolls
up fine black images : it is more than enough to frame a perfect
moment ; to reflect these images, Anny would cause dark little
tides to be born in our hearts. I don"t know how to take advantage of the occasion: I walk at random, calm and empty, under
this wasted sky.

Wednesday:
I must not 6, afraid.
Tlwrsday:
Four pages written. Then a long moment of happiness.Must
not think too much about the value of History. You run the
91

When I entered the reading•room, the Self.Taught Manwas

jmt coming out. He threw himself on

d:

" I have to thank you, Monsieur. Your photographs have
allowed me to spend many unforgettable hours."
I had a ray of hope when I saw him ; it might be easier to
get through this day together. But, with the Self.Taught Man,
you only appear to be two.
He rapped on an in.quarto volume. It was a History of
Religion.
Cl Monsieur,
no one was better qualified than Nousa~ to
attempt this vast synthesis. Isn't that true?"
He seemed weary and his hands were trembling.
" You look ill," I said.
.. Ah, Monsieur, I should think sol Something abominable
has happenedto me.''
Tiie guardiancame towards us : a peevishlittle Corsican with
moustacheslike a drum major. He walks for whole hours among
the tables, clacking his heels. In winter he spits in his handkerchiefs then dries them on the stove.
The Self.Taught Mancame close enough to breathe in my
face.
" I won't tell you anything in front of this man," he said
in confidence. " If you would, Monsieur . • .''
.. Would what? "
He blushed and his lips swayed gracefully.
"Monsieur, ah, Monsieur: all right, Pll lay my cards on the
table. Will you do me the honour of lunching with me on
Wednesday ? "
"With pleasure."
I had as much desire to eat with him as I had to hang

my.ell
" I'm so glad," the Self.Taught Mansaid. He added rapidly,
" I'll pick you up at your hotel, it you like," then disappeared,
Jo.f

he Boats ten inches above the floor, his bleeding neck will be
just at the level of the third shelf of books. Thus these objectS
serve at least to 6x the limits of probability.
Today they fixed nothing at all: it seemed that their very
existence was subject to doubt, that they had the greatest
difficulty in passing from one instant to the next. I held the
book I was reading tightly in my hands : but the most violent
sensations went dead. Nothing seemed true ; I felt surrounded
by cardboard scenery which could quickly be removed. The
world was waiting, holding its breath, making itself smallit was waiting for its convulsion, its Nausea, just like M. Achille
the other day.
I got up. I could no longer keep my place in the midst of
these unnatural objects. I went to the window and glanced
out at the skull of Impetraz. I murmured : A~ing can
~ llltJ'fMIIK·
But evidently, it would be nothing hom1>1e,
such as humans might invent. Im~traz was not going to
stan dancing on his pedestal : it would be something else
entirely.
which, in an
Frightened, I looked at these u.nuabk JM:io&1
hour, in a minute, were perhaps~.ta
.cwmble: yes, I was
there, living in the midst of these books full of knowledge
describing the immutable forms of die animal species, explaining
that the right quantity of energy is kept integral in the universe ;
I was there, standing in front of a window whose panes had
a definite refraction index. But what feeble barriers! I suppose
it is out of laziness that die world is the same day after day.
Today it seemed to want to change. And then, anytlaing,an,,_
t~
~qld bappai,-1 had no time to lose : the Caf~ Mably affair was at the root
of this uneasiness. I must go back there, see M. Fasquelle alive,
touch his beard or his hands if needbe. Then, perhaps, I would
be free.

I seized my overcoat and threw it round my shoulders ; I
fted. Crossing the Public Gardens I saw once more the man
in the blue cape. He had the same ghastly white face with two
scarlet ears sticking out on either side.
The Caf~ Mably sparkled in the distance : this time the
twelve lights must have been lit. I hurried : I had to get it over.
First I glanced in through the big window, the place was
deserted. The cashier was not there,nor the waiter-nor M.
Fasquelle.
I had to make a great effon to go in ; I did not sit down.
I shouted "Waiter!" No one answered. An empty cup on a
table. A lump of sugar on the saucer.
" Anyone here ? ••
An overcoat hung from a peg. Magazines were piled up in
black cardboard boxes on a low table. I was on the alen for
die slightest sound, holding my breath. The private stairway
creaked slightly. I heard a foghorn outside. I walkedout backwards, my eyes never leaving the stairway.
I know : customers are rare at two in the afternoon. M.
Fasquelle had influenza; he must have sent the waiter out on
an errand-maybe to get a doctor. Yes, but I needed to see
M. Fasquelle. At the Rue Tournebride I turned back, I studied
the garish, deserted caf~with disgust. The blinds on the second
floor were drawn.
A real panic took hold of me. I didn't know where I was
going. I ran along the docks, turned into the dese~ s~ts
in the Beauvoisis district ; the houses watched my flight with
their mournful eyes. I repeated with anguish : Where shall I
go ? where shall I go ? An,YtMl!JI.
can h~.
Sometimes, my
hean pounding, I made a sudden right-about-tum : what ~
happening behind my back ? Maybe it would stan behind
me and when I would tum around, suddenly, it would be too
late. As long as I could stare at things nothing would happen :

•rn

But suddenly freed, the little girl shook her head and began
to run. The man in the cloak had seen me : that was what
stoppedhim. For a second he stayed motionless in the middle
of the path, then went of£,his back hunched. The cloak flapped
against his calves.
I pushed open the gate and was next to him in one bound.
" Heyl .. I shouted.
He beganto tremble.
"A great menace w~hs over ~gq.,;.• I said politely, and
went on.
I went into the reading-room and took the Cliartreusede
Partn4from a table. I tried to absorb myself in reading, to find
a refugein the lucid Italy of Stendhal. Sometimes I succeeded,
in spurts, in short hallucinations, then fell back again into this
day of menace; opposite an old man who was clearing his
throat, a young man, dreaming, leaning back in his chair.
Hours passed, the windows had turned black. There were
four of us, not counting the Corsican who was in the office,
stampingthe latest acquisitions of the library. There was the
little old man, the blond young man, a girl working for her
degree and I. From time to time one of us would look up,
glance rapidly and scornfully at the other three as if he were
afraid of them. Once the old man started to laugh : I saw the
girl tremble from head to foot. But I had deciphered from
upside down the title of the book she was reading : it was a
light novel.
Ten minutes to seven. I suddenly realized that the library
closed at seven. Once again I was going to be cast out into the
town. Where would I go ? What would I do ?
The old man had finished his book. But he did not leave.
He tapped his finger on the table with sharp, regularbeats.
" Qoaing time soon," the Corsican said.
no

Saturdaymo"""8:
A charming sun with a light mist which promises a clear
day. I had breakfast at the Caf~ Mably.
Mme Florent, the cashier, smiled graciously at me. I caJled
to her from my table :
"Is M. Fasquelle sick? ..
.. Yes ; a bad go of flu : he'll have to stay in bed a few days.
His daughter came from Dunkirk this morning. She's going to
stay here and take care of him."
For the first time since I got her letter I am definitely happy
at the idea of seeing Anny again. What has she been doing for
six years ? Shall we feel strange when we see each other ? Anny
doesn't know what it is to feel awkward. She'll greet me as if
I had left her yesterday. I hope I shan't make a fool of myself,
and put her off at the beginning. I must remember not to offer
her my hand when I get there : she hates that.
How many days shall we stay together ? Perhaps I could
bring her back to Douville. It would be enough if she would
live here only for a few hours ; if she would sleep at the Hotel
Printania for one night It would never be the same after that ;
I shouldn't be afraid any more.

Afumoon:
When I paid my first visit to the_B.awdllemuseum last year
I was struck by the portrait of Olivier Blmgne. Faulty proportion ? Perspective ? I couldn't tell, but something bothered
me : this deputy didn't seem plumb on his canvas.
I have gone back several times since then. But my worry
persisted. I didn't want to admit that Bordurin, Prix de Rome,
had made a mistake in his drawing.
But this afternoon, turning the pages of an old collection of
112

the ~ BormUJJis,
a blackmail-sheet whose owner was
accused of high treason during the war, I caught a glimpae of
the truth. I went to the museum as soon as I left the library.
I aossed the shadow of the vestibule quickly. My steps made
no sound on the black and white tiles. A whole race of plaster
folk twisted their arms. In passing I glanced, through two
great openings, and saw cracked vases, plates, and a blue and
yellow satyr on a pedestal. It was the Bernard Palissy Room,
devoted to ceramics and minor ans. But ceramics do not amuse
me. A lady and gentleman in mourning were rcspeafully contemplating the baked objects.
Above the entrance to the main hall-the Salon BordurinRcnaudas---5omeonehad hung, undoubtedly only a little while
ago, a large canvas which I did not recogni7.e.It was signed by
Richard ~d
and entitled .. The Bachelor's Death." It
was a gift of the State.
Naked to the waist, his body a little green, like that of a
dead man, the bachelor was lying on an unmade bed. The
disorder of sheets and blankets attested to a long death agony.
I smiled, thinking about M. Fasquelle. But he wasn't alone:
his daughter was taking care of him. On the canvas, the maid,
his mistress, her features marked by vice, had already opened
a bureau drawer and was counting the money. An open door
disclosed a man in a cap, a cigarette stuck to his lower lip,
waiting in the shadows. Near the wall a cat lapped milk in- j
differently.
This man had lived only for big.elf. By a harsh and welldeserved punishment, no one had come to his bedside to close
his eyes. This painting gave me a last warning : there was .still
time, I could retrace my ste~. But if I were to tum a deaf ear,
badbeen orewarned : more than a hundred and fifty portraits
were hanging on the wall of the room I was about to enter ;
with the exception of a few young people, prematurely taken
II)

from their families, and the Mother Superior of a boarding
school, none of those ~ted had died a b;lchelor,none of them
had di chilaless or intestate, none without the last rites. Their
souls at peace that day as on other days, with God and the
world, these men had slipped quietly into death, to claim their
share of eternal life to which they had a right.
For they had a right to everything : to life, to wor:k. to
m!!hito comman~ nr respect, aii~ finali.Y.to i~ty.
I took a moment to compose myself and entered. A guardian
was sleeping near the window. A pale light, falling from the
windows, made ftecks on the paintings. Nothing alive in this
great rectangular room, except a cat who was frightened at
my approach and fled. But I felt the loob of a hundred and
fifty pairs of eyes on me.
All who belonged to the Douville ~lite between 187s and
1910 were there, men and women, sciupulously painted by
Renaudas and Bordurin.
The men had built Sainte-Cecile-de-la-Mer. In 1881., they
founded the Federation of Shipowners and Merchants of Douville .. to group in one powerful entity all men of good will,
to co-operate in national recovery and to hold in check the
parties of disorder.... " They made Douville the best equipped
port in Franee for unloading coal and wood. The lengthening
and widening of the quays were their work. They extended
the Marine Terminal and, by constant dredging, brought the
low-tide depth of anchorage to 10.7 meters. In twenty years,
the catch of the fishing fteet which was s,ooo barrels in 1869,
rose, thanks to them, to 18,000 barrels. Stopping at no sacrifice
to assist the improllcmcot of .the best elements in the -w9rkingclass,they aeated, on their own initiative, various centres for
technical and professional study which prospemi under their
lofty protection. They broke the famous shipping strike in
1898 and gave their sons to their counb)' in 1914-

The women, worthy helpmates of these strugglers, founded
most of the town's charitable and philanthropic organizations.
But above all, they were wives and mothers. Thel raised fine
children, taught them rights and duties, religion~and a respect
for the traditions wbicli made France great.
The general compleiion o{ these portraits bordered on dark
brown. Lively colours had been banished, out of decency. However, in the portraits of Renaudas, who showed a partiality
towards old men, the snowy hair and sidewhiskers showed up
well against deep black backgrounds ; he excelled in painting
hands. Bordurin, who was a little weak on theory, sacrificed
the hands somewhat but the collars shone like white marble.
It was very hot; the guardian was snoring gently. I glanced
around the walls : I saw handsand eyes ; here and there a spot
of light obliterated a face. As I began walking towards the
portrait of Olivier 1!Jtvigne,something held me back : from the
moulding, P~6me 1 thernm;hant, cast a bright look down on me.
He was standing there, his head thrown slightly back ; in
one hand he held a top hat and gloves against his pearl-grey
trousers. I could not keep myself from a certain admiration :
I saw nothing mediocre in him, nothing which allowed of
criticism : small feet, slender hands, wide wrestler's shoulders,
a hint of whimsy. He courteously offered visitors the unwrinkled purity of his face ; the shadow of a smile played on
the lips. But his grey eyes were not smiling. He must have
been about fifty: but he was as young and fresh as a man of
thirty. He was beautiful.
I gave up finding fault with him. But he did not let go of
me. I read a calm and implacable judgment in his eyes.
Then I realii.ed what separa~ us : what I thought about
him could not reach him; it was psychology,die Kiffitiliey
write a&>utin books. But his judgment went throud) me like
a sword and questioned my very n~t l(? exist. And it was true,

114

IIS

always realized it; I hadn't the right to. .mst. I had
I existed.like. ~,
a _plantOI.~ microbe.
Myli{eput out feelers towards small pleasures in every direction.
Sometimesit sent out vague signals ; at other times I felt nothing
more than a harmless buzzing.
But for this handsome faultless mani now ~ead, for Jean
Pac:c,me,
son of the Pacame of the D~fence Nationale, it had
been an entirel different matter : the beating of his heart and
tlie mute ru
ings of his organs, in his case, assumed the
form of rights to be instantly obeyed. For sixty years, without
a halt, he had used his right to live. The slightest doubt had
never crossed those magnificent grey eyes. Pacame had never
made a mistake. He had alwap done his ilwy, all his duty,
his duty as son, husliancf,father, leader. He had never weakened
in his demands for his due : as a child, the right to be well
brought up, in a united family, the ris!!t to inherit a spotless
name, a prosperous business ; as a liiisband, the..ri&ht to be
cared for, surrounded with tender affection; as a father, the
ri_ghtto be venerated; as a leader, the right to be obeyed without a murmur. For a right is nothing more than the other
aspect of duty. His extraordinary success (today the Pacames
are the richest family in Douville) could never have surprised
him. He never told himself he was happy, and while he was
enjoying himself he must have done so with moderation,
saying : .. This is my refreshment." Thus pleasure itself, also
becoming a right, lost its aggressive futility. On the left, a little
above his bluish-grey hair, I noticed a shelf of books. The
bindings were handsome ; they were surely classics. Every
evening before going to sleep, Pac:&oeundoubtedly read over
a few pages of .. his old Montaigne " or one of Horace's odes
in the Latin text. 'Sometimes,
too, he must have read a contemporary work to keep up to date. Thus he knew Barres and
Bourget. He would put his book down after a moment. He

would smile. His look, losing its admirable circumspection,
became almost dreamy. He would say: .. How easy and how
difficult it is to do one's duty."
He had never looked any further into himself: he was a
leader.
There were other leaders on the walls : noihing but leaders.
He was a leader-this tall, 'fler-de-gru
maninliis armchair. His
white waistcoat was a happy reminder of his silver hair.
(Attention to artistry was not excluded from these portraias,
which were above all painted for moral edification, and exactitude was pushed to the furthest limit of sauple.) His long,
slender hand was placed on the head of a small boy. An open
book rested on his knees which were covered by a rug. But his
look had strayed into the distance. He was seeing all those
things which are invisible to young people. His name was
written on a plaque of gilded wood below his portrait : his
name must have been Pacamc or Parrottin, or Chaigneau. I
had not thought of looking : for his close relatives, for this
child, for himself, he was simply the grandfather ; soon, if he
deemed the time fitting to instruct his grandson about the
scope of his future duties, he would speak of himself in the
third person :
.. You're going to promise your grandfather to be good,
my boy, to work hard next year. Perhaps Grandfather won't
be here any more next year."
In the evening of his life, he scattered his indulgent goodness
over everyone. Even if he were to see me-though to him I
was transparent-I would find grace in his eyes : he would
think that I, too, had granc!parentsonce. He demandeclnothing :
~no
more cfesiresat that age. othing except for people
to lower their voices slightly when he entered, nothing except
a touch of tenderness and smiling respect when he passed,
nothing except for his daughter-in-law to say sometimes :

116

117

.#had

r~~ b_y.ce,

.. Father is amazing; he•s younger than all of us .. ; nothing
except to be the only one able to calmthe temper of his grandson by putting his hands on the boys head and saying : " Grandfather knows how to take care of all those troubles ,. ; nothing
except for his son, several times a year, to come asking his
advice on delicate matters, finally, nothing more than to feel
himself serene, ap~~
and iD6Ditdyw_ise. The old gentleman's hand barely v.-eighed on his grandson's curls: it was
almost a benediction. What could he be thinking of? Of his
honourable past which conferred on him the right to speak
on everything and to have the last word on everything. I had
not gone far enough the other day : experience was much more
than a defence against death ; it was a right ; the right of old
men.
General Aubry, hanging against the moulding, with his
greatabre;;;sa leader. Another leader : President H~
well read, friend of Im~traz. His face was long and symmetnc:al
with an interminable chin, punctuated, just under the lip, by
a goatee: he thrust out his jaw slightly, with the amused air
of being distinguished, of rolling out an objection on principles
like a faint belch. He dreamed, he held a quill pen : he was
taking his relaxation too, by Heaven, and it was writing verses.
But he had the eagle eye of a leader.
And soldiers ? I was in the centre of the room, the cynosure
1. wasneithtt father nor ~dfather,
of all these grave eyes_,_
not even a husband. I did not have a vote, I hardly paid any
taxes: I could not boast of being a taxpayer, an elector, nor
even of having the humble right to honour which twenty
years of obedience confers on an employee. M_y_
existence began
to ViQ!!Y. me seriously. Was l not a ~le
spcgre r w Heyl "
I suddenly told myself;"/ am the soldier I ,. It really made
me laugh.
A portly quinquagenarian politely returned a handsome

smile. Renaudas had painted him with loving care, no touch
was too tender for those fteshy, fine"-chiselled little ears, especially for the hands,long, nervous, with loose fingers : the hands
of a real savant or artist. His face was unknown to me : I must
have passedbefore the canvas often without noticing it. I went
up to it and read: Rhrry Parrottin, &,,n in Bou,,i/u in 1849,
Profusor a, tlu &ok tk M"'4citu, Paris.
Parrottin: Doctor Wakefield had spoken to me of him:
" Once in my life I met a great man, Rhny Parrottin. I took
cou."SCSunder him during the winter of 1904 (you know I
spent two years in Paris studying obstetrics). He made me
realize what it was to be a leader. He had it in him, I swear he
did. He electrified us, he could have led us to the ends of the
earth. And with all that he was a gentleman : he had an immense
fortune---gave a good part of it to help poor students...
This is how this prince of science, the first time I heard him
spoken of, inspired strong feelings in me. Now I stood before
him and he was smiling at me. What intelligence and affability
in his smileI His plump body rested leisurely in the hollow of
a great leather armchair. This unpretentious wise man put
peopleat their ease immediately. If it hadn't been for the spirit
in his look you would have taken him for just anybody.
It did not take long to guess the reason for his prestige:
he was loved because he understood everything ; you could
tell him anything. He looked a little like Renan, all in all, with
more distinction. He was one of those who say :
.. Socialists? Wei~ I go further than ~ do! ,. When you
followed him down this perilous road you were soon to leave
behind, not without a shiver, family, country, private property
rights, and the most saaed values. You even doubted for a
second the right of the bourgeois ~lite to command. Another
step and suddenly everythillg was rc-cstablishedfmiraculo~
founded on solid reason, good old reasons. You turned around

118

119

and saw the Socialists,already far behind you, all tiny, waving
.
their handkerchiefs and shouting: "Wait for usl"
Through WakefieldI knew that the Master liked, as ~e hunself said with a smile, " to deliver sours:"To prolong his own,
he surrounded himself with youth : he often received young
men of good family who were studying medicine. Wakefield
had often been to his house for luncheon. After the meal they
retired to the smoking-room. The Master treated these students
who were at their first cigarettes like men : he offered them
cigars. He stretched out on a divan and discoursed at great
by an eag~r aowd of
length, his eyes half-closed, ~unded
disciE,.les.He evoked memories, tolo stones, clrawing a sharp
and profound moral from each. And if there were among those
well-bred young men one who seemed especially headstro~,
Parrottin would take a special intereSt in him. He made _hun
to him attentively, gave him ideas and subJectS
~stened
for meditation. It usually happened that one day the young
man full of generous ideas, excited by the hostility of his
~ man,
par~ts, wary of thinking alone, his hand ~t
asked to visit the Master privately, and, swnmenng with shyness confided in him his most intimate thoughts, his indighis hopes. Parrottin embraced him. He said : " I
nati~
undcrs.:md you. I understood you from the first day." 'They
talked on. Parrottin went far, still farther, so far that the young
man followed him with great difficulty. After a few conversations of this sort one could detect a ~voura.ble ~ in the
;ebel. He saw clearly within himself, ~ learn~ to ~ow
.l!S2Wli
the deep bor1dswhich attached him to his family, to h1Senvi~nmcnt • at last he understood the admirable role of the ~ltte.
And finally as if by magic, found himself once again, cnlighttned, ~pentant. "He cured more souls," concluded Wakefield "than I've cured bodies."
Rfmy Parrottin smiled affably at me. He hesitated, tried to
uo

undentand my position, to tum gently and lead me back to
the fold. But I wasn't afraid of him : I was no Iamb.I Ioofed
at his fine forehead, calm and unwrinkled, his small belly, his
hand set flat against his knee. I returned his smile and left.
JeanParrottin, his brother, president of the S.A.B., leaned
both hands on the edge of a table loaded with papers ; his
whole attitude signified to the visitor that the audience was
over. His look was extraordinary ; although abstracted yet
shining with high endeavour. His dazzling eyes devoured his
whole face. Behind this glow I noticed the thin, tight lips of a
mystic. "It's odd," I said, "he looks like Rbny Parrottin."
I turned to the Great Master : examining him in the light of
this resemblance, a sense of aridity and desolation, a family
resemblance took possession of his face. I went back to Jean
Parrottin.
This man was one-idcaed. Nothing more was left in him but
I
bones, dead flesh and ~ IUwt. A real case of ~ion,
thought. Once Right has taken hold of a man exorcism cannot
drive it out ; JeanParrottin had consecrated his whole life to
thinking about his Right : nothing else. Instead of the slight
headache I feel coming on each time I visit a museum, he would
have felt the painful right of having his temples cared for. It
never did to make him think too much, or attract his attention
to unpleasant realities, to his possible death, to the suff'ering'I
of others. Undoubtedly. on his d.eath bed, at that moment
when, ever sinoe ~ it has been proper to pronounce
certain elcvatea words, he told his wife, as one of my uncles
told his, wlio liao watched beside him for twelve nights, .. I
your tluty."
j, l.QJt bavcooJJl--4GAedo not thank ~ Thettse
'When a man gets that far, you have to take your hat off to
him.
His eyes, which I stared at in wonderment, indicated that I
must leave. I did not leave. I was resolutely indiscreet. I knew,
Ul

as a resu1t of studying at great length a ceruin portrait of
Philip II in the library of the Escurial, that when one is confronted with a face sparkling with righteousness, aftera moment
this sparkle dies away, and o;Iy an ashy residue remains : this
residue interested me.
Parrottin put up a good fight. But suddenly his look burned
out, the picture grew dim. What was left? Blind eyes, the thin
ni.outh of ulcad snake and cneeks.
The pale, round cheeb of
a child : they spread over the canvas. The employees of the
S.A.B. never suspected it : they never stayed in Parrottin's
office long enough. When they went in, they came up against
that terrible look like a wall. From behind it, the cheeks were
in shelter, white and flabby. How long did it take his wife to
notice them? Two years? Five years? One day, I imagine,
as her husband was sleeping, on his side with a ray of light
caressing his nose, or else on a hot day, while he was having
trouble with his digestion, sunk into an armchair, his eyes halfclosed, with a splash of sunlight on his chin, she dared to look
him in the face: all this fleshappeared to her defenceless,bloated,
slobbering, vaguely obscene. From that day on, Mme Parrottin undoubtedly took command.
I took a few steps backward and in one glance covered all
these ~ ~~es
: Pac6me, President Hibert, both
Parrottins, and General Aubry. They had worn top hau;
"er/ Sunday on the Rue Tournebride they met Mme Gratien,
the mayor's wife, who saw Sainte Ckile in a dream. 1ney
greeted her with great ceremonious salutes, the secret of which
is now lost.
They had been paintedvery minutely ; yet, under the brush,
their countenances had been stripped of the mysterious weakness of men's faces. Their faces, even the least powerful, were
clearas porcelain : in vain I looked for some relation they could
bear to trees and animals, to thoughu of earth or water. In
JU

life they evidently did not require it But, at the moment of
passing on to posterity, they had confided themselves to a
renowned painter in order that he should discreetly carry out
on their faces the system of dredgings, drillings, and irrigations
by which, all around Douville, they had transformed the sea
and the land. Thus, with the help of Rcnaudas and Bordurin,
they had enslaved Nature : without tbcrnv:lycs_and within
themselves. What these sombre canvases offered to me was
man reconsidered by man, with, as sole adornment, the finest
conquest of man : a bouquet of the Rights of Manand Citizen.
Without mental reservation, I aclmittd the ttigii' or man.
A woman and a man came in: Tney were dressed in black
and tried to make themselves inconspicuous. 1ney stopped,
enchanted, on the doorstep and the man automatically took off
his hat
" Ahl " the lady said, deeply touched.
The gentleman quickly regained his sang-froid. He said
respectfully :
"It's a whole eral"
" es," e lady said, •c this is in the time of my grandmother."
They took a few steps and met the look of Jean Parrottin.
The woman stood gaping, but the man was not proud : he
looked humble, he must have known intimidating looks and
brief interviews well. He tugged gently at the woman's arm.
" Look at that one," he said.
Rmiy Parrottin's smile had always put the humble at ease.
The woman went forward and read studiously:
" Portrait of Rmiy Parrottin, born in Douville in 18-49.
Professor of the Ecole de M&lecine,Paris, by Renaudas."
cc Parrottin, of the Acadany of Science," her husband said,
" by Rcnaudas of the Institute. That's History! "
The lady nodded, then looked at the Great Master.
U)

" How handsome he is," she said, " how intelligent he
looks!"
The husband made an expansive gesture.
" They're the ones who made Bouville what it is," he said
with simplicity:
"It's right to have had them put here, all together," the
woman said tenderly.
We were three soldiers manC2Uvringin this immense hall.
The husband who laughed with respect, silently, shot me a
troubled glance and suddenly stopped laughing. A sweet joy
flooded over me: well, I was right! It was really too funny.
The woman came near me.
"Gaston," she said, suddenly bold, "come here!"
The husband came towards us.
" Look," she went on, " he has a street named after him :
Olivier Blmgnc. You know, the little street that goes up the
Coteau Vert just before you get to Jouxtebouville."
After an instant, she added :
"He doesn't look exactly easy."
" No. Some people must have found him a pretty awkward
customer."
These words were addressed to me. The man, watching me
out of the comer of his eye, began to laugh softly, this time
with a conceited air, a busy-body, as ifhe were Olivier Blmgnc
himself.
Olivier Bl~igne did not laugh. He thrust his compact jaw
towards. us and his Adam's apple jutted out.
There was a moment of ecstatic silence.
"You'd think he was going to move,'' the lady said.
The husband explained obligingly :
" He was a great cotton merchant. Then he went into
a aeputy."
politics; he
I knew it. Two years ago I had looked him up in the P,tit
~

was

12.4

Di&tionnairedu Grands Hommu th Bouvi/k by Ab~ Morellet.
I copied the article.
" Bllvigne, 0/iviu-Martial, son of tAe /au Oli11ur-Martial
Bllvigne, /,om and dud in BoU11ille(1849-19()8), snufud law in
Paru, passed Bar examinations in 187z. Deeply imprusd 6y
d,e Col1UflUlje insurrection, wluclaforced /aim, as it did so many
otAer Parisians---:-U,
tizke refo,e in Virsai//u under tAe prouctit,,,
of d,e National .Asnml,ly, lae swore, at an age wlaenyoung men
tl,inJr.only of pkan,re, • to consecratelaislife to tAe re-uta/Jislament
'?[_
or';{.' He hpt laisword: inuMdiatdy after laisretum to our
cuy,
fountkd tAefamous Clul, ck l'Ordre wluclawery wening
for many years united tAe principol husinessmen and slaipownas
of Bouvi/k. Tlais arutocratic circle, wlaiclaone miglat jolcingly
tlucrik as king mor, restri&ud tl,an tlu Jockey CW,, e,mud,
until 1908, a sabaary ueflume• on tAe t!estiny of our great comnvrcial port. In 188o, Oii,,ur Blbigne tnllrrud Maru-Louu,
Pac4nv,younger daugla#r of Claar/esPac4'M, husinusman (su
Pac4me) and at tAe ckatl, of th latter, founckd tlu company of
Pac8nv-Bllvig,u &, Son. SAortly tlureafm lu entered actwely
into polui,cs and placed lais candidature «fore tAe ckputation.
" • Tlae Ct1U11try,'
lu said in a cekhrated spucla, • is niffmll6
fiom a most serious malady : tlu ~ c/a.u.no longer wants to
ruk. And wlaotAen sluJJ ruk, pntkmai, if tMse wlao,6y tAeir
t;~O', tl,eir edu&ation,tl,eir uperi4Me, lacweken rentkred most
fit for tlu uercising of power, tum fiom it in resignationor weariness! I Ao, often said: to ruk_kna1. a ri.g/&t
qfw 1/ite.;.il is a
p_rj,naryduty of d,e i/iu. Gmtkmen, I heg of you : let us restoretlu
;;;,.c,p/i" o] aui1ioruy! '
.. Elected first on Octoher 4, 188S, /aewas constantly re-tl«#d
dweafttr. Of an energeticand 11irikdotpu,,u, lu Mli11,redmat!)'
/,ri/Jiantspucl,.u. He was in Paris in 1898 wlaentlu urril,k strih,
/,roke out. He re""71td to BoU11illeimlMdia#/y and /,eca,rvtlu
guiding spirit of tA, ruut<JMe.He took tlaeinitiati11eof tugotiatinf

ns

Lowe." Everything was explained from the first page on:
Olivier Blivigne was only five feet tall. They mocked his small
stature and squeaking voice which more than once threw the
whole Chamber into hysterics. They accused him of putting
rubber lifts in his shoes. On the other hand, Mme Blivigne,
nl!e Pacdme, was a horse. "Here we can well say," the paper
added, .. that his other half is his double.''
Five feet tall I Yes, Bordurin, with jealous care, had surrounded
him with objects which ran no risk of diminishing him ; a
hassock, a low armchair, a shelf with a few little books, a small
Persian table. Only he had given him the same stature as his
neighbour Jean Parrottin and both canvases had the same
dimensions. 1ne result was that the small table, in one picture,
was almost as large as the immense table in the other, and that
the hassock would have almost reached Parrottin's shoulder.
The eye instinctively made a comparison between the twO :
my discomfort had come from that.
Now I wanted to laugh. Five feet wt I If I had wanted to
talk to Blevigne I would have had to lean over or bend my
knees. I was no longer surprised that he held up his nose so
impetuously : the destiny of these small men is always working
itself out a few inches above their head.
Admirabl~~Wf:!. of art. From this shrill-voiced mannikin,
nothing wou d pass on to posterity save a threatening face, a
superb gesture and the bloodshot eyes of a bull. The student
terrorised by the Commune, the deputy, a bad-tempered
midget;
that was what death had taken.. But, thanks to Bordurin, the
President of the Club de l'Ordre, the orator of .. Forces
Morales," was immortal.
.. Oh, poor little Pipol"
The woman gave a stiffed cry : under the portrait of Octave
Blevigne " son of the late . . .'' a pious hand had traced these
words:

unceasingly of her suffering. But this pious woman had never
said: "It hurts." She took the upper hand: she made up bills
of fare and presided over welfare societies. Sometimes, she
would slowly close her eyes in the middle of a sentence and all
traces of life would leave her face. This fainting spell lasted
hardly more than a second ; shortly afterward, MmeThereson
would re-open her eyes and finish her sentence. And in the
work room they whispered : .. Poor Mme Th~on ! She never
complains."
I had crossed the whole length of the salon BordurinRenaudas. I turned back. Farewell, beautiful lilies, elegant in
your painted little sanctuaries, good-bye,lovely lilies, our pride
and reason for existing, good-bye you bastards I

Monday:
I'm not writing my book on Rollebon any more ; it's finished,
I can't write any more of it. What amT _goin_g_
to do with~
~
It was three o'clock. I was sitting at my table; I had set
beside me the file of letters I stole in Moscow ; I was writing :
" Care had been taken to spread the most sinister rumours.
M. de Rollebon must have let himself be taken in by this
manceuvresince he wrote to his nephew on the 13th of September
that he had just made his will."
The Marquis was there : waiting for the moment when I
should have definitively installed him in a niche in history,
I had loaned him my life. I fcit him like a glow in the pit of
my stomach.
I suddenly realil.ed an objection someone might raise :
Rollebon was far from ~.IIiDk
with his nephew, whom
he wanted to use, if the plot failed, as his defence witness with
Paul I. It was only too possible that he had made up the story
of the will to make himself appear completely innocent.
129
~

This was a minor objection; it wouldn't hold water. But it
was enough to plunge me into a brown study. Suddenly I saw
the fat waittesSat " Camille's .. again, the haggard face of M.
Achille, the room in which I had so clearly felt I was forgotten,
forsaken in the present. Wearily I told myself:
How can who have not the strength to hold to my own
_pas!,h<?Jito save .the~ of someone else 7
I picked up my pen and tried to get back to work ; I was up
to my neck in these reflections on the past, the present, the
world. I asked only one thing : to be allowed to finishmy book
in peace.
But as my eyes fell on the pad of white sheets, I was struck
by its look and I stayed, pen raised, studying this dazzling
paper : so hard and far seeing, so present. The letters I had
just insaibed on it were not even dry yet and already they
belonged to the past.
"Care had been taken to spread the mostsinister rumours .• :•
I had thoqgm out this.1C1Ltenc:e,
at first it had been a small
part of myself. Now it was ~ on the paper, it took sides
against me. I didn't recognize it any more. I courdn't conceive
it again. It was there, in front of me; in vain for me to trace
some sign of its origin. Anyone could have written it. But / •.•
/ wasn't sure I wrote it. The letters glistened no longer, they
weredry. That had disappeared too ; nothing was left but their
ephemeral spark.
I looked anxiously around me : the _p_resent,
nothjpg bYt the
_present.Furniture light and solid, rooted in its present, a table,
a bed, a closet with a mirror-end me. The true nature of the
present revealed itself: it was w.hat exists, and all that was not
present did not exist. Th$ past did not exist. Not at all. Not in
things, not even in my thoughts. It is true that I had rcaliz.ed
a long time ago that mine had escaped me. But until then I
believed that it had simply gone out of my range. For me the
130

past was only a pensioning off: it was another way of existing,
a state of vacation and inaction ; each event, when it had played
its part, put itself politely into a box and became an honorary
Now
event: we ~ so muc}ldjffi91byimagining noth~.
I knew : thin-8!_
are ~tittly what~
a_EPCar
to be and 6aiuia
iliem... there is noiliing.
This thought &rbed me a few minutes longer. Then I
violently moved my shoulders to free myself and pulled the
pad of paper towards me.
" ... that he had just made his will."
An immense sickness flooded over me suddenly and the pen
fell from my hand, spluttering ink. What happened ? Did I
have the Nausea ? No, it wasn't that, the room had its paternal,
everyday look. The table hardly seemed heavier and more
solid to me, nor my pen more compact. Only M. de Rollebon
had just died for the second time.
He was still there inside me a little while ago, quiet and
warm, and I could feel him stir from time to time. He was
quite alive, more alive to me than the Self-Taught Man or the
woman at the "Railwaymen's Rendezvous." He undoubtedly
had his whims, he could stay several days without showing
himself; but often, on a mysteriously fine day, like a weather
prophet, he put his nose out and I could see his pale face and
bluish cheeks. And even when he didn't show himself, he was
a weight on my heart and I felt full up.
Nothing more was left now. No more than, on these traces
of dry ink, is left the memory of their freshness. It was my
fault : I had spoken the only words I should not have said :
I had said that the past did not exist. And suddenly, noiseless,
M. de Rollebon had rerumed to his nothingness.
I held his letters in my hands, felt them with a kind of despair :
He is the one, I said, he is the one who made these
marks, one by one. He leaned on this paper, he put his hand
131

again on this page already started. Never again, following the
Rue des Muri)& and the Boulevard de la Redoute, shall I tum
into the library to look through their archives.
I want to get up and go out, do anything-no matter whatto stupefy myself. But if I move one finger, if I don't stay
absolutely still, I know what will happen. I don't want that to
happen to me yet. It will happen too soon as it is. I don't move ;
mechanically I read the paragraph I left unfinished on the pad
of paper:
" Care had beentaken to spread the most sinister rumours. M.
de Rollebon must have let himself be caught by this manceuvre
since he wrote to his nephew on the 13th of September that he
had just made his will."
The great Rollebon affair was over, like a great passion. I
must find something else. A few years ago, in Shanghai, in
Mercier's office, I suddenly woke from a dream. Then I had
another dream, I lived in the Tsar's court, in old palaces so
cold that the icicles formed above the doors in winter. Today
I wake up in front of a pad of white paper. The torches, the
ice carnivals, the unifonns, the lo,-ely cool shoulders have
disappeared. Som,tlw,g has stayed behind in this warm room,
something I don 1t want to sec.
M. de Rollebon was my partner ; he needed me in order to
exist and I needed him so as not to feel m~tence.
I furnished
the raw material, the material I had to re-41ell,which I didn't
know what to do with : existence, ~ existenC(. .His part was
to have an imposing l(:lpe!AOce.He stood in front of me, took
up my life to lay bare his own to me. I did not notice that I
existed any more, I no longer existed in myself, but in him ;
I ate for him, breathed for him, each of my movements had
its sense outside, there, just in front of me, in him ; I no longer
saw my hand writing letters on the paper,not even the senten~
I had written-but behind, beyond the paper,I saw the Marquia
1 )3

who had claimedthe gesture as his own, the gesture which
prolonged, consolidated his existence. I was only a means of
making him live, he was my reason for living, he had delivered
me from myself. What shall I do now ?
Above all, not move, not move ••. Ah I
I could not prevent this movement of the shoulders ...
The thing which was waiting was on the alert, it has pounced
on me, it flows through me, I am filled with it. It's nothing:
I am the 'Jh!!lg. Existence, liberated, detached, floods over
me. I exist.
I exist, It's sweet, so sweet, so slow. And light: you'd think
it float~ all by itself. It stirs. It brushes by me, melts and
vanishes. Gently, gently. There is bubbling water in my mouth.
I swallow. It slides down my throat, it caresses me-and now
it comes up again into my mouth. For ever I shall have a little
pool of whitish water in my mouth-lying low-grazing my
tongue. And this pool is still me. And the tongue. And the
throat is me.
I see my hand spread out on the table. It lives-it is me.
It opens, the fingers open and point. It is lying on its back.
It shows me its fat belly. It looks like an animalturned upside
down. The fingers are the paws. I amuse myself by moving
them very rapidly, like the claws of a crab which has fallen on
its back.
The crab is dead : the claws draw up and close over the belly
of my hand. I see the nails-the only part of me that doesn't
live. And once more. My hand turns over, spreads out flat on
its stomach, offers me the sight of its back. A silvery back,
shining a little-like a fish except for the red hairs on the
knuckles. I feel my hand. I am these two beasts struggling at
the end of my arms. My hand scratches one of its paws with
the nail of the other paw ; I feel its weight on the table which
is not me. It's long, long, this impression of weight, it doesn't
134

pass. There is no reason for it to pass. It becomes intolerable
... I draw back my hand and put it in my pocket ; but immediately I feel the warmth of my thigh through the stuff. I
pull my hand out of my pocket and let it hang against the back
of the chair. Now I feel a weight at the end of my arm. It pulls
a little, softly, insinuatingly it exists. I don't insist: no matter
where I put it it will go on existing ; I can't suppress it, nor
can I suppress the rest of my body, the sweaty warmth which
soils my shirt, nor all this warm obesity which turns lazily, as
if someone were stirring it with a spoon, nor all the sensations
going on inside, going, coming, mounting from my side to
my armpit or quietly vegetating from morning to night, in
their usual corner.
I jump up : it would be much better if I could only stop
thinking. Thoughts are the dullest things. Duller than flesh.
'fiieystretch out and there's no end to them and they leave a
funny taste in the mouth. Then there are words, inside the
thoughts, unfinished words, a sketchy sentence which constantly returns : " I have to ti. . . I ex. . . Dead . . . M. de
Roll is dead ... I am not ... I ex.•. " It goes, it goes •..
and there's no end to it. It's worse than the rest because I feel
responsible and have complicity in it. For example, this sort of
painful rumination : / uist, I am the one who keeps it up. L
The body lives by itself once it has begun. But thought-/
am the one who continues it, unrolls it. I exist. How serpentine
is this feeling of existing-I unwind it, slowly•... If I could
keep myself from thinking! I try, and succeed : my head seems
to 611with smoke . . . and then it starts again : " Smoke . . •
not to think ... don't want to think ... I think. I don't want
to think. I mustn't think that I don't ~t t<Ltbiii,Jc.nea-use
~till
a tlioughL'" Will theienever be an end to it ?
My.!!to~ is!!!!: that's why I can't stop. I exist because I
think... and I can't stop myself from thinking. At tJiis very

-

l)S

moment-it's frightful-if I exist, it is because l.Jm b.Qrri6ed
onewho pulls myself from .dienothingness
at existing. / am tl&e
: the hatred, the disgust of existing, there are
to which I !SJ>ire
as. many ways to -;;Je myself exist; to thrust myself into
exsstencc.Thoughts ace hoUlat the back of me, like sudden
giddiness,Tteel them being born beliind my &ad ... if I yield,
they're going to come round in front of me, ~ my
~ I alwaysyield, the thought grows and grows and
~e it is, immense, filling me completely and renewing my
existence.

My salivais sugary, my body warm: I feel neutral. My knife
is on the table.I open it. Why not ? It would be a changein
any case. I put my left hand on the pad and stab the knife into
the palm. The movement was too nervous ; the blade slipped
the wound is supcrticial. It bleeds. Then what ? What h~
changed ? S?II, I watch with satisfaction, on the white paper,
across the Imes I wrote a little while ago, this tiny pool of
blood which has at last stopped being me. Four lines on a
white pa~, a spot o~ bl~, that makes a beautiful memory.
Today I gave up writing my book
I must wnte beneath It:
on the Marquis de Rollebon."
Am I going to take care of my hand ? I wonder. I watch the
nail, monotonous trickle of blood. Now it is coagulating. It's
over. My skin looks rusty around the cut. Under the skin, the
is_a small sensation exactly like the others, perhaps
only thing I_eft_
even more ms1p1d.
Half-past five strikes. I get up, my cold shirt sticks to my
flesh. I go out. Why? Well, because I have no reason not to
Even if I stay, even if I crouch silently in a comer, I shall no;
forget myself. I will be th«:!_e,my wei~t on the ftoor. I am.
I buy a newspaper along my way. Sensational news. Little
Lucienne's body has been found! Smell of i~ the paper
aumples between my fingers. The ttiminal has fted. The child
136

was raped. They found her body, the fingers clawing at the
mud. I roll the paper into a ball, my fingers clutching at the
paper ; smell of ink; my God how strongly things exist today.
Little Lucienne was raped. Strangled. Her body still exists, her
flesh bleeding. Siu no longer exists. Her hands. She no longer
exists. The houses. I walk between the houses, I am between
the houses, on the pavement; the pavement under my feet
exists, the houses close around me, as the water closes over me,
on the paper the shape of a swan. I am. I am, I exist, I think,
therefore I am ; I am because I ~ why do I think ? I don't
want to think any more, I am because I think that I don't want
to ~ I think that I ... because . . . ugh I I flee. 1be aiminal
lw fled, the violated body. She felt this other flesh pushing into
her own. I .•. there I ... Raped.A soft, ttiminal desire to rape
catches me from behind, gently behind the ears, the ears race
behind me, the red hair, it is red on my head, the wet grass,
red grass, is it still I? Hold the paper,.cxis~~tSli~ce,
things exist one against the other, I drop the paper. The house
•prings up, If ams; bi front orme, along the wall I am passing,
along the wall I exist, in front of the wall, one step, the wall
exists in front of me, one, two, behind me, a finger saatching
at my pants, scratches, scratches and pulls at the little finger
soiled with mud, mud on my finger which came from the
muddy gutter and falls back slowly, softly, softening, saatching
less strongly than the fingers of the little girl the aiminal
strangled, saatching the mud, the earth less strong, the finger
slides slowly. the head falls first and rolling embraces my
thigh ; existence is soft, and rolls and tosses, I toss between
the houses, I am, I exist, I think therefore I toss, I am-1exiU:Jtce
is a fallen guue,will not fall, will fall, the finger saatcha at
the window, existence is an imperfection. The gentleman. The
handsome gentleman exists. The gentleman feels that he exists.
No, the handsome gentleman who passes, proud and gentle
137

as a convolvulus, does not feel that he exists. To expand; my
cut hand buns, exist, exist, exist. The handsome gentleman
exists, the Legion of Honour, the moustache exists, it is all ;
how haw one must be to be nothing more than a Legion of
Honour ancl a moustacne and no one sees the rest, he sees the
two pointed ends of his moustache on both sides of the nose ;
I dQ not rhink,.tbaefore I am a moustache. He sees neither
his gaunt body nor his big feet, if you looked in the aotch of
the trousers you would surely discover a pair of little balls.
He has the Legion of Honour, the bastards have the right to
exist : " I exist because it is my qgbt," I have the right
to exist, therefore I have the right not to think : the finger is
raised. Am I going to ..• caress in the opening of white sheets
the white ecstatic flesh which falls back gently, touch the
blossoming moisture of armpits, the elixirs and cordials and
florescenceof Besh,enter into the existence of another, into the
red mucus with the heavy, SWttt, sweet odour of existence,
feel myself exist between these soft, wet lips, the lips red with
pale blood, throbbing lips yawning, all wet with existence, all
wet with clear pus, between the wet sugary lips weeping like
eyes? My body of living flesh which murmurs and turns gently,
liquors which tum to cream, the flesh which turns, turns, the
sweet sugary water of my ftesh, the blood on my hand. I suffer
in my wounded flesh which turns, walks, I walk, I Bee,I am a
criminal with bleeding flesh, bleeding with existence to these
walls. I am cold, I take a step, I am cold, a step, I tum left, he
turns left, he thinks he turns left, mad, am I mad ? He says he
is afraid of ~oi~ ,!!!!_d,existence, do you see into existence,
he stops, inc "6ooy stops, he thinks he stops, where does he
come from ? What is he doing ? He starts off, he is a&aid,
terribly afraid, the criminal, desire like a fog, desire, disgust,
he says he is disgusted with existence, is he disgusted, weary
of being disgusted with existence? He runs. What does he hope
138

for ? He runs to flee to throw himself into the lake ? He runs,
the heart, the bean beats, it's a holiday, the bean exists, the legs
exist, the breath exists, they exist running, breathing, beating,
all soft, all gently breathless, leaving me breathless, he says he's
breathless ; existence takes my thoughts from behind and
gently expands them from klawl; someone takes me from
behind, they force me to think from behind, therefore to be
something, behind me, breathing in light bubbles of existence,
he is a bubble of fog and desire, he is pale as death in the glass,
Rollebon is dead, Antoine Roquentin is not dead, I'm fainting :
he says he would like to faint, he runs, he runs like a ferret,
" from behind " from behind from /JJund, little Lucienne
assaulted from behind, violated by existence_from Jdiipd, he
begs for mercy, he is ashimed of begging for mercy, pity, help,
help therefore I exist, he goes into the Bar de la Marine, the
little mirrors of the little brothel, he is pale in the little mirrors
of the little brothel the big redhead who drops onto a bench,
the gramophone plays, exists, all spins, the gramophone exists,
the heart beats : spin, spin, liquors of life, spin, jellies, sweet
sirops of my flesh, sweetness, the gramophone :
Wlam tluityd/aw moon6,gi,u to 6,am
Ew,y nig!t I dnam "!Ylittk dream.
The voice, deep and hoarse, suddenly appears and the world

vanishes,the world of existence. A woman in the flesh had this
voice, she sang in front of a record, in her finest get up, and
they recorded her voice. The woman : bah I she existed like
me, like Rollebon, I don't want to know her. But there it is.
You can't say it exists. The turning record exists, the air stn1ck
by the voice which vibrates, exists, the voice which made an
impression on the record existed. I who listen, I exist. All is
But, beyond
full, existenceeverywhere,.,!iense.~ and .&.weet.
139

all this sweetness, inaccessible,n~r and so far, young, merciless
and serene, there is this . . . this rigour.

Tuesday:
~oth.lr1g. Existed.

Wednuday:
There is a sunbeam on the papernapkin. In the sunbeam there
is a fly, dragging himself along, stupcficd, sunning himself
and rubbing his anteMz one against the other. I am going to
do him the favour of squashing him. He docs not see this giant
finger advancing with the gold hairs shining in the sun.
"Don't kill it, Monsieur!" the Self-Taught Man shouted.
"I did it a favour.''
Why am I here ?-end why shouldn't I be here? It is noon,
I am waiting for it to be time to sleep. (Fortunately sleep has
not fled from me.) In four days I shall see Anny again: for the
moment, l!!Y sole reason for living. Ancfafterwarcls ? When
Anny l~ves me ? I know 'what-I surreptitiously hope for : I
hope she will never leave me. Yet I should know that Anny
would never agree to grow old in front of me. I am weak and
lonely, I need her. I would have liked to see her again in
my strength : Anny is without pity for strayed sheep.
" Are you well, Monsieur ? Do you feel all right ? "
The Self-Taught Man looks at me out of the comer of his
eyes, laughing. He pants a little, his mouth open, like a dog. I
admit : this morning I was almost glad to see him, I needed
to talk.
" How glad I am to have you at my table," he says. " If
you're cold, we could go and sit next to the stove. These
gentlemen are leaving soon, they've asked for the bill."
140

The Self-Taught Manputs down the menu, breaks his bread
into small bits and rubs his knife and fork with his napkin.
He glances at the white-haired man reading the paper, then
smiles at me :
" I usually come here with a book, even though it's against
doctor's orders : one eats too quickly and doesn't chew. But
I have a stomach like an ostrich, I can swallow anything. During
the winter of 1917, when I was a prisoner, the food was so
bad that everyone got ill. Naturally, I went on the sick list
like everybody else: but nothing was the matter."
He had been a prisoner of war .••• This is the first time he
~
mentioned
it to me j can't get over it : I can't picture him as
anything other than the Self-Taught Man.
" Where were you a prisoner ? "
He doesn't answer. He puts down his fork and looks at me
with prodigious intensity. He is going to .tell me his troubles:
now I remember he said something was wrong, in the library.
I am all ears : I am only too glad to feel pity for other people's
troubles, that will make a change. I have no imuhlc:s.I bave
fl\Oneylike a ca~i~t., no ~ no wife.no ,;hi!dmi; laist,
that's all. And that trouble is so ~.,
so metaphysical that
~hamed
of it.
The Self-Taught Mandoesn't seem to want to talk. What a
curious look he gives me. It isn't a casual glance, but heart
searching. The soul of the Self-Taught Manis in his eyes, his
magnificent, blindman's eyes, where it blooms. Let mine do
the same, let it come and stick its nose against the windows :
they could exchange greetings.
I don't want any communion of souls, I haven't fallen so
low. I draw back. But the Self-Taught Man throws his chest
out above the table, his eyes never leaving mine. Fortunately
the waitress brings him his radishes. He drops back in his chair,
his soul leaves his eyes, and he docilely begins to eat.

---

r

1,43

zip. The waitress, a little disappointed, turns to the young
woman. But once more he is ahead of her and helps the girl
out of her coat with gentle, precise movements. They sit near
us, one against the other. They don't look as if they'd known
each other very long. The young woman has a weary face,
pure and a little sullen. She suddenly takes off her hat, shakes
her black hair and smiles.
The Self-Taught Man studies them at great length, with a
kindly eye ; then he turns to me and winks tenderly as if to
say : " How wonderful they are! "
They are not ugly. !heyare tc)iet, happy at being together,
happy at being seen together. ometimes when Anny and I
went into a restaurant in Piccadilly we felt ourselves the objects
of admiring attention. It annoyed Anny, but I must confess
that I was somewhat proud. Above all, amazed; I never had
the clean-cut look that goes so well with that young man and
no one could even say that my ugliness was touching. Only
we were young : now, I am at the age to be touched by the
youth of others. But I am not touched. The woman has dark,
gentle eyes ; the young man's skin has an orange hue, a
little leathery, and a charming, small, obstinate chin. They
are touching, but they also make me a little sick. I feel them
so far from me : the warmth makes them languid, they pursue
the same dream in their hearts, so low, so feeble. They are
comfortable, they look with assurance at the yellow walls,
the people, and they find the world pleasant as it is just as it
is, and each one of them, temporarily, draws life from the life
of the other. Soon the two of them will make a single life, a slow,
tepid life which will have no sense at all-but they won't notice it.
They look as though they frighten each other. Finally, the
young man, awkwardand resolute, takes the girl's hand with
the tips of his fingers. She breathes heavily and together they
lean over the menu. Yes, they're happy. So what.
•4S

•• You must have confidence in life," the young man says ;
.. the way you are this moment isn't living."
She sighs:
.. I know!"
.. Look at Jeannette."
.. Yes," she says, making a little grimace.
.. Well, I think what she did was splendid. She had courage."
.. You know," the young woman says, .. she rather jumped
at the opportunity. You must know that if I'd wanted, I could
have had a hundred opportunities like that. I pmerttd to wait."
.. You wCJCright," he says, tenderly, ••you were right in
waiting for me."
She laughs in tum :
.. Great stupid! I didn't say that."
I don't listen to them any more : they annoy me. They're
going to sleep together. They know it. Each one knows that
the other knows it. But since they are young, chaste and decent,
since each one wants to keep his self-respectand that of the other,
since love is a great poetic thing which you must not frighten
away, aeveral times a week they go to dances and restaurants,
offering the spectacle of their ritual, mechanical dances. • • •
After all, you have to kill time. They are young and well
built, they have enough to last them another thirty years. So
they're in no hurry, they delay and they are not wrong. Once
they have slept together they will have to find something else
to veil the eno~
ahsvmiqi of. rhdr..c:xisten&e,Still • • • is
it absol~
~ t'2 lie ?
I glance around the room. What a comedy! All these people
sitting there, looking serious, eating. No, they aren't eating:
they are recuperating in order to suc:oessfullyfinish their tasks.
Each one of them has his little personal difficulty which keeps
him from noticing that he exists ; there isn't one of them who
believes himself indispensable to something or someone. Didn't
ISO

the Self-Taught Man tell me the other day: .. No one better
qualified than Nous:api~ to undertake this vast synthesis ? "
Each one of them does one small thing and no one is better
qualified than he to do it. No one is better qualified than the
commercial traveller over there to sell Swan Toothpaste. No
one is better qualified than that interesting young man to put
his hand under his girl friend's skirts. And I am among them
and if they look at me they must think that no one is better
qualified than I to do what I'm doing. But / hiow.I don't look
like much, but I know I exist and that they exist. And if I knew
how to convince people I'd go and sit down next to that handsome white-haired gentleman and explain to him just what
existence means. I burst out laughing at the thought of the
face he would make. 1be Self-Taught Man looks at me with
surprise. I'd like to stop but I can't; I laugh until I cry.
••You are gay, Monsieur," the Self-Taught Man says to me
circumspectly.
.. I was just thinking," I tell him, laughing, .. that here we
sit, all of us, eating and drinking to preserve our precious
existence and really there is no~
no •
~ no
reason for existjpg."
11icSelf-Taught Man becomes serious, he makes an effort to
understand me. I laughed too loud : I saw several faces tum
towards me. Then I regrcttm having said so much. After all,
that's nobodys business.
He repeats slowly :
.. No reason for existing. . . . You undoubtedly mean,
~Jieur,
that life is without a ~?
Isn't that what one
t call ~imism ? "
He thinb or _; instant, then says gently :
.. A few years ago I tead a bookby an American author. It
was called Is Lift Wort/, Li,,ing! Isn't that the question you
are asking yourself? "
ISi

Certainly not, that is not the question I am asking myself.
But I have no desire to explain.
"His conclusion," the Self-Taught Man says, consolingly,
" is in favour Qf.volun~ o~m.
Life has a meanin..&.!f
we
choose to give it one. One must first act, throw one's self into
some ed1't'prise. nten, if one re.fleets,the die is already cast,
one is pledged. I don't know what you think about that,
Monsieur?"
I say.
••~ing,"
Rather I think that that is precisely the sort of lie that the
commercial traveller, the two young people and the man with
white hair tell themselves.
The Self-Taught Man smiles with a linle malice and much
solemnity.
" Neither is it my opinion. I do not think we need look so
far to know the direction our life should take.''
"Ah?"
" There is a goal, Monsieur, there is a goal . . . there is
humanity.''
That's right : I forgot he was a humanist. He remains silent
for a moment, long enough to make most of his spiced beef
and a whole slice of bread disappear cleanly and inexorably.
" There are people . . .'' He has just painted a whole picture
of himself, this philanthropist. Yes, but he doesn't know how
to express himself. His soul is in his eyes, unquestionably, but
soul is not enough. Before, when I used to hang around some
Parisian humanists, I would hear them say a hundred times :
" there are people," and it was quite another thing. Virgan
was without equal. He would take off his spectacles, as if to
show himself naked in his man's flesh, and stare at me with
eloquent eyes, with a weary, insistent look which seemed to
undress me, and drag out my human essence, then he would
murmur melodiously : " There are people, old man, there are
ISJ,

.. A little while ago I spoke of~ captivity in_9,:many. It
all started there. Before the War I was lonely and didn't realize
it; I lived with my parents, good people, but I didn't get on
with them. When I think of those years.... How could I have
lived that way? I was dead, Monsieur, and I didn•t know it;
I had a collection of postage stamps."•
He looks at me and interrUpts himself:
11
Monsieur, you are pale, you look fatigued. I hope I'm
not disturbing you ? ..
.. You interest me greatly."•
11
Then the War came and I enlisted without knowing why.
I spent two years without understanding, because life at the
front left little time for thought and besides, the soldiers were
too common. I was taken prisoner at the end of 1917. Since
then I have been told that many soldiers recovered their childhood faith while they were prisoners. Monsieur,.. the SelfTaught Man says, lowering his eyelids over bloodshot eyes, .. I
do not believe in God ; His existence is belied by science. But,
in the internment camp, I learned to believe in men."•
.. They bore their fate with courage ? ..
.. Yes;• he says vaguely, .. there was that, too. Besides, we
were well treated. But I wanted to speak of something else,;
the last months of the War, they hardly gave us any work
to do. When it rained they made us go into a big wooden
shed, about two hundred of us altogether, jammed in tightly.
They closed the door and left us there, pressedone against the
other, in almost total darkness...
He hesitated an instant.
.. I don't know how to explain it, Monsieur. All those men
were there, you could hardly see them but you could feel
them against you, you could hear the sound of their breathing.
... One of the first times they locked us in the shed, the aush
was so great that at first I thought I was going to suffocate,

then, suddenly, an overwhelming joy came over me, I almost
fainted : then I felt that I 12vN thc;sc
men like brothers, I wanted
to embrace all of them. Each time I went baci there I felt the
same joy."'
I have to eat my chicken which by now must be cold. The
Self-Taught Manhas been silent for a long time and the waitress
is waiting to change the plates.
.. That shed took on a sacred character in my eyes. Sometimes I managed to escape the watchfulness of my guards, I
slipped into it all alone and there, in the shadow, the memory
of the joys I had known, filled me with a sort of ecstasy. Hours
passedand I did not notice them. SometimesI wept. ..
I must be sick : there is no other way of explaining this
_!el'rlble5e which suddenly overwhelms~- Yes, the rage of
11ckman : my hands were shaking,the blood had rushed to
my face, and finally my lips began to tremble. All that simply
because the chicken was cold. I was cold too and that was the
worst : I mean that inside me I was cold, freezing, and had been
like that for thirty-six hours. Anger passedthrough me like a
whirlwind, my conscience, effort to react, to fight against this
lowered temperature caused something like a tremor to pass
through me. Vain effort: undoubtedly, for nothing. I would
have rained down blows and curses on the Self-Taught Man or
the waitress. But I should not have been in the spirit of it. My
rage and fury struggled to the surface and, for a moment, I
had the terrible impression of being turned into a block of ice
enveloped in fire, a kind of .. omelette surprise... This momentary agitation vanished and I heard the Self-Taught Man say:
.. Every Sunday I used to go to Mass. Monsieur, I have
never been a believer. But couJdn•t one say that the real mystery
of the Mass is the communion of souls? A French chaplain
who had only one arm, celebrated Jie lfass. We had a har~
monium. We listened, standing, our heads bare, and as the

If-4

ISS

so1mds of the harmonium carried me away, I felt myself at
one with all the men surroun~
me. Ah, ons1eur, 1iow1
loved those
. Even now, in memory of them, I sometimes go to church on Sunday morning. We have a remarkable
organist at Sainte-Cecile."
" You must have often missed that life ? ,.
" Yes, Monsieur, in I..2.!,9athe. year of my libcrarian,I ~t
many miserable months. I didn't know what to do with myself,
I was wasting away. Whenever I saw men together I would
11
insert myself into their group. It has happened to me, he
added smiling, " to follow the funeral procession of a stranger.
One day, in despair, I threw my stamp collection in the fire.
... But I found my vocation."
.. Really? ..
"Someone advised me ... Monsieur, I know that I can
count on your discretion. I am-perhaps these are not your
ideas, but you are so broad-minded--1.ilP a Socialist."
He lowered his eyes and his long lashes trembled :
"I have been a registered member of the Socialist Party,
S.F.I.O., since the month of September 1921. That is what I
wanted to tell you."
He is radiant with pride. He gazes at me, his head thrown
back, his eyes half-closed, mouth open, looking like a martyr.
"That's very fine," I say, "that's very fine."
"Monsieur, I knew that you would commend me. And how
could you blame someone who comes and tells you : I have
spent my life in such and such a way, I~ perfectly happy?"
He spreads his arms and presen~ h1S open palms to ~,
the fingers pointing to the ground, as 1fhe were ~ut to ~ve
the stigmata. His eyes are glassy, I see a dark pink mass rolling
in his mouth.
" Ah," I say, " as 1ong as you 're happy. • • •"
••Happy ? " His look is disconcerting, he has raised his
1s6

eyelids and stares harshly at me. " You will be able to judge,
Monsieur. Before taking this decision I felt myself in a solitude
~ frightM that I contemplated suicide. )¥hat
held me ~
was ilie idea that no on«;_i
absolutefy_JW.
.f2DCa.
W!)uldbe~
ex,.mf4eatlt, that I would be even more alone in death than
in life."
He straightens himself, his cheeks swell.
"I am no longer lonely, Monsieur. I shall never be so."
"Ah, you know a lot of people ? " I ask.
He smiles and I immediately reali7.emy mistake.
"I mean that I no longer feel alone. But naturally, Monsieur,
it is not necessary for me to be with anyone.''
" But," I say, " what about the Socialist section.... "
" Ah I I know everybody there. But most of them only by
name. Monsieur," he says mischievously, "is one obliged to
choose his friends so narrowly ? All men
my7-is. When
I go to the office in the morning, in front of me, behind me,
there are other men going to work. I see them, if I dared I
would smile at them, I think that I am a Socialist, that all of
them are my life's goal, the goal of my efforts and that they
don't know it ~- It's a holiday for me, Monsieur.''
His eyes question me ; I nod approval, but I feel he is a little
disappointed, that he would like more enthusiasm. What can
I do ? Is it my fault if, in all he tells me, I recognize the lack of
the enuine article ? Is it my fault ifa as he speaks, I sec a1fthe
umanists ave known rise up ? I've known so many of them!
'Mic radical humanist is the particular friend of officials.
The so-called " left " humanist's main worry is keeping human
values ; he belongs to no party because he does not want to
betray the human, but his sympathies go towards the humble ;
he consecrates his beautiful classic culture to the humble. He
is generally a widower with a fine eye always clouded with
tears : he weeps at anniversaries. He also loves cats, dogs, and
IS?

are

all the higher mammals.The Communist writer has been loving
men since the second Five-Year Plan ; he punishes because he
loves. Modest as all strong men, he knows how to hide his
feelings, but he also knows, bf a look, an inflection of his
voke, how to recognize, behind his rough and ready justicial
utterances, his passion for his brethren. The Catholic humanist,
the late-comer, the Benjamin,speaks of men with a marvellous
air. What a beautiful fairy tale, says he, is the humble life of a
London dockhand, the girl in the shoe factory! He has chosen
the humanism of the angels; he writes, for their edification,long,
sad and beautiful novels which frequently win the Prix Femina.
Those are the principal r6les. But there are others, a swarm
of others : the humanist philosopher who bends over his
brothers like a wise elder brother who has a sense of his responsibilities ; the humanist who loves men as they are, the humanist
who loves men as they ought to be, the one who wants to save
them with their consent and the one who will save them in
spite of themselves, the one who wants to aeate new myths,
and the one who is satisfied with the old ones, the one who
loves death in man, the one who loves life in man, the happy
humanist who always has the right word to make people laugh,
the sober humanist whom you meet especially at funerals or
wakes.~ aJIhate c:achother : as individuals, naturally not
as men. But the Self-Taught Mandoesn't know it: he has locked
mem up inside himself like cats in a bag and they are tearing
each other in piecieswithout his noticing it.
He is already looking at me with less confidence.
.. Don't you feel as I do, Monsieur?"
11
Gracious ... "
Under his troubled, somewhat spiteful glance, I regret disappointing him for a second. But he continues amiably :
.. I know: you have your research, your books, you serve
the same cause in your own way."

1sa

My books, "!Y research: the imbecile. He couldn't have
made a worse howler.
.. That's not why I'm writing."
At that instant the faceof the Self-Taught Manis transformed:
as if he had scented the enemy. I had never seen that expression
on his face before. Something has died between us.
Feigning surprise, he asks :
.. But ... if I'm not being indiscreet, why do you write,
Monsieur?"
.. I don't know : just to write."
He smiles, he thinks he has put me out :
11
Would you write on a desert island? Doesn't one always
write to be read ? "
He gave this sentence his usual interrogative tum. In reality,
he is affirming. His veneer of gentleness and timidity has peeled
off; I don't recognize him any more. His features assume an
air of heavy obstinacy ; a wall of sufficiency.I still haven't got
over my astonishment when I hear him say:
.. If someone tells me : I write for a certain social class, for
a group of friends. Good luck to them. Perha~u
write for
~ ... But, Monsieur, in spite ;f yo
, you write
1orsomeone."
He waits for an answer. When it doesn't come, he smiles
feebly.
.. Perhaps you are a misanthrope ? "
I know what this fallacious effort at conciliation hides. He
asks little from me : simply to accept a label. But it is a trap :
if I consent, the Self-Taught Manwins, I am immediatelyturned
round, reconstituted, overtaken, for humanism takes possession
and melts all human attitudes into one. If you oppose him
head on, you play his game ; he lives off his opponents. There
is a race of beings, limited and headstrong, who lose to hina
every time : he digests all their violences and worst excesses.
1 s9

he makes a white, frothy lymph of them. He has digested antiin~le~ism,
manicheism, mysticism, pessimism, anarchy
anca egotism.: they are nothing more than stages, unfinished
though~ which ~nd their justificationonly in him. Misanthropy,
also has tts place m the concert: it is only a dissonancenecesury
to the harmony of the whole. The misanthrope is a man :
theref2[e ~ humanist must .bemisanthropic 1:0 a c;nmn ~t.
But he must be a scientist as well to have teamed how to water
down his hatred, and hate men only to love them better afterwards.
I don't want to be integrated,I don't want my good red
blood to go and fatten this lymphatic beast : I will not be fool
enough to call myself" anti-humanist." I am not a humanist
that's all there is to it.
'
.. I believe," I tell the Self-Taught Man,.. that one cannot
hate a man more than one can love him."
The Self-Taught Manlooks at me pityingly and aloof. He
murmurs, as though he were paying no attention to his words :
.. You must love them, you must love them. . . ,''
.. Whom must you love ? The people here ? "
.. They too. All."
He turns toward, the radiant young couple : that's what
you must love. For a moment he contemplateS the man with
whi1':hair. Then his look returns to me: I read a mute question
on htS face. I shake my head : .. No.'' He seems to pity me.
.. You
.. you don't love
" don't either," I tell him, anno•...:a
7 .....,
them.
"Really, Monsieur? Would you allow me to differ?"
He has become respectful again, respectful to the tip of his
toes, but in his eyes he has the ironic look of someone who
is amusing himself enormously. He hates me. I should have
~ wrong to have any feeling for this maniac. I question him
m my tum.
16o

" So, those two young people behind you-you love
them?"
He looks at them again, ponders :
.. You want to make me say," he begins, suspiciously," that
I love them without knowing them. Well, Monsieur, I confess,
I don't know them.... Unless love is knowing," he adds with
a foolish laugh.
"But what do you love?"
.. I see they are young and I love the youth in them. Among
other things, Monsieur."
He intern1pts himself and listens :
.. Do you understand what they're saying ? "
Do I understand ? The young man, emboldened by the
sympathy which surrounds him, tells, in a loud voice, about a
football game his team won against a club from Le Havre last
year.
.. He's telling a story," I say to the Self-Taught Man.
.. Ah I I can't hear them very well. But I hear the voices, the
soft voice, the grave voice: they alternate. It's ... it's so
sympathetic."
.. Only I also hear what they're saying, unfortunately."
"Well?"
" Th~'re ~ a £2!!!t<ly."
.. Really ? Thecomedy of youth, perhaps ? " he asks ironically. "Allow me, Monsieur, to find that quite profitable. Is
playing it enough to make one young again ? "
I stay deaf to his irony ; I continue :
.. You tum your back on them, what they say escapes you.
•.. What colour is the woman's hair?"
He is worried :
.. Well, I . . .'' He glances quickly at the young couple an
regains his assurance. " Black! "
.. So you seeI "

11

See what?"
"You see that you don't love them. You wouldn't recogrme
them in the street. ~ only ~Is
in _n>~ ~You
are not at all touched by them: you're touched by the Youth
of the Man,the Love of Man and Woman, the Human Voice."
"Well? Doesn't that exist?"
" Certainly not, it doesn't exist! Neither Youth nor Maturity
nor Old Age nor Death .... "
The faceof the Self-Taught Man,hard and yellow as a quince,
has stiffenedinto a reproachful lockjaw. evertheless, I keep on:
" Just like that old man drinking Vichy water there behind
you. I suppose you love the Mature Man in him : Mature
Man going courageously towards his decline and who takes
care of himself because he doesn't want to let himself go ? "
11
Exactly,'' he says definitely.
11
And you don't think he's a hi&Wd? "
He laughs, he finds me frivolous, he glances quickly at the
handsome face framed in white hair :
" But Monsieur, admitting that he seems to be what you
say, how can you judge a man by his face? A face, Monsieur,
tells nothing when it is at rest."
Blind humanistsI This face is so outspoken, so frank-but
their tender, abstract soul will never let itself be touched by the
sense of a face.
" How can you," the Self-Taught Man says, " stop a man,
say he is this or that ? Who can empty a man I Who can know
the resources of a man ? "
Empty a man I I salute, in passing, the Catholic humanism
from which the Self-Taught Man borrowed this fonnula without
realizing it.
"I know,'' I tell him, "I know that all men are admirable.
You are admirable. I am admirable. In as far as we are creations
of God, naturally."

happy all the week imagining this luncheon, where he could
share his love of men with another man. He has so rarely the
opponunity to speak. And now I have spoiled his _pleasure.
At heart he is as lonely as I am : no one cares about ~- Only
he doesn't realii.e his solitude. Well,yes : but 1t wasn't up to
me to open his eyes. I feel very ill at ease : I'm furious, but
not against him, against Virgan and the others, all the ones
who have poisoned this poor brain. If I could have them here
in front of me I would have much to say to them. I shall say
nothing to the Self-Taught Man, I have only sympathy for him:
he is someone like M. Achille, someone on my side, but who
has been betrayed by ignorance and good will!
A burst of laughter from the Self-Taught Man pulls me out
of my sad reflections.
.. You will excuse me, but when I think of the depth of my
love for people, of the force which impels me towards them
and when I see us here, reasoning, arguing ... it makes me want
to laugh."
.
I keep quiet, I smile constrainedly. The waitress puts a plate
of chalky Camembert in front of me. I glance around the room
and a violent disgust floods me. What am I doing here ? Why
did I have to get mixed up in a discussion on humanism ?
Why are these people here? Why are they eating? It's true they
don't know they exist. I want to leave, go to some place where
I will be really in my own niche, where I will fit in. . . . But
my place is nowhere ; I am unwanted, de trop.
The Self-Taught Man grows softer. He expected more resistance on my part. He is ready to pass a sponge over all I have
said. He leans towards me confidentially:
.. You love them at heart, Monsieur, you love them as I
do : we are separated by words."
I can't speak any more, I bow my head. The Self-Taught
Man's face is close to mine. He smiles foolishly, all the while
164

close to my face, like a nightmare. With difficulty I chew a
piece of bread which I can't make up my mind to swallow.
People. You must love JlC(>ple.Men are admirable. l want to
vomit-and suddenly, there it is: the Nausea.
- A fine climax : it shakes me from top to bottom. I saw it
coming more than an hour ago, only I didn't want to admit it
This taste of cheese in my mouth .... The Self-Taught Man
is babbling and his voice buzzes gently in my ears. But I don't
know what he's talking about I nod my head mechanically.
My hand is clutching the handle of the dessert knife. I ftd
this black wooden handle. My hand holds it. My hand. Personally, I would rather let this knife alone : what good is it to be
always touching something ? Objects are not made to be
touched. It is better to slip between them, avoiding them as
much as possible. Sometimes you take one of them in your
hand and you have to drop it quickly. The knife falls on the
plate. The white-haired man starts and looks at me. I pick
up the knife again, I rest the blade against the table and
bend it.
So this is ausea : this blindirjg evidence ? I have saatched
my head over it! I've wntten aTioutit Now I know: I existthe world exists-and I know that the world exists. That's all.
It makes no differenceto me. It's strange that everything makes
so little difference to me: it frightens me. Ever since the day
I wanted to play ducks and drakes. I was going to throw that
pebble I looked at it and then it all began : I felt that it exisud.
Then ;fter that there were other Nauseas ; from time to rime
objects start existing in your hand. There was the Nausea of
the "Railwaymen's Rendezvous" and then another, before that,
the night I was looking out the window ; then another in the
park, one Sunday, then others. But it had never beenas strong
as today.
.. . . . Of ancient Rome, Monsieur ? "
16s

1ney don't answer. I leave. Now the colour will come back
to their cheeks, they'll begin to jabber.

I don't know where to go, I stay planted in &ont of the
cardboard chef. I don't need to tum around to know they are
watching me through the windows : they are watching my
back with surprise and disgust ; they thought I was like them,
that I was a man, and I deceived them. I suddenly lost the
appearance of a man and they saw a aab running backwards
out of this human room. Now the unmasked intruder bas fled :
the show goes on. It annoys me to feel on my back this stirring
of eyes and frightened thoughu. I aoss the street. 1ne other
pavement runs along the beach and the bath houses.
Many people arc walking along the shore, turning poetic
springtime faces towards the sea ; they're having a holiday
because of the sun. There are lightly dressed women who have
put on last spring's outfit; they pass, long and white as kid
gloves ; there are also big boys who go to high school and
the School of Commerce, old men with medals. 1ney don't
know each other but they look at each other with an air of
connivance because it's such a fine day and they are men.
Strangers embrace each other when war is declared; they
Siiiilc at eacli otnef every spnng. A priest advances slowly,
reading his breviary. Now and then he raises his head and looks
at the sea approvingly :-the sea is also a breviary, it speaks
of God. Delicate coloun, delicate perfumes, souls of spring.
" What a lovely day, the sea is grttn, I like this dry cold better
than the damp." Poets! If I grabbed one of them by the back
of the coat, if I told him: " Come, help me," he'd think,
"What's this aab doing here?" and would run oft', leaving
his coat in my hands.
I tum back, lean both hands on the balustrade. The tnl4 sea
is cold and black, full of animals ; it aawls under this thin
green filmmade to deceive human beings. The sylphs all round
167

rolling and jolting with its rattling windows, carrying this red
me have let themselves be taken in : they only see the thin
thing
in its bosom. I murmur : " It's a seat," a little like an
film, which proves the existence of God. I see beneath it I The '
exorcism.
But the word stays on my lips : it refuses to go and
veneer melts, the shining velvety scales, the scales of God's
put
itself
c:,n
the thing. It stays what it is, with its red plush,
catch explode everywhere at my look, they split and gape.
tfiousanas
of
little
red paws in the air, all still, little dead paws.
Here is the Saint-Elbnir tramway, I tum round and the objects
This
enormous
belly
turned upward, bleeding, inflated-bloated
tum with me, pale and green as oysters.
with
all
its
dead
paws,
this belly floating in this car, in this
Useless, it was useless to get in since I don't want to go
grey
sky,
is
not
a
seaL
It
could just as well be a dead donkey
anywhere.
tossed
about
in
the
water,
floating with the current, belly in
Bluish objects pass the windows. In jerks all stiff and brittle ;
the
air
in
a
great
grey
river,
a river of floods ; and I could be
~pie, walls ; a hou~ offers me its black heart through open
sitting
on
the
donkey's
belly,
my feet dangling in the clear
WU1dows; and the windows pale, all that is black becomes
water.
,Things
are
divorced
frgm~eir
names. Thu;~
th5",
blue, ~Jue this great yellow brick house advancing uncertainly,
grotesque,
headstrong,
gigagtic
and
it
seems
ridiculous
to
call
trembling, suddenly stopping and taking a nose dive. A man
tiiem
seats
or
say
anything
at
all
about
them
:
I
am
in
the
midst
gets on and sits down opposite to me. The yellow house starts
defouce.lcn
of things, nameless things. Alone, without warns.
up again, it leaps against the windows, it is so dose that you
they
surround
me,
are
beneath
me,
behi;;d
me,
above
me.
can only see part of it, it is obscured. The windows rattle. It
demand
nothing,
they
don't
impose
themselves
:
they are
rises, aushing, higher than you can see, with hundreds of
there.
Under
the
cushion
on
the
seat
there
is
a
thin
line of
wind~ws ?pened on black hearts ; n slides along the car brushing
shadow,
a
thin
black
line
running
along
the
seat,
mysteriously
past it ; night has come between the rattling windows. It slides
and mischievously, almost a smile. I know very well that it
interminably, yellow as mud, and the windows are sky blue.
isn't
a smile and yet it exists, it runs under the whitish windows,
Suddenly it is no longer there, it has stayed behind a sharp,
under
the jangle of glass, obstinately, obstinately behind the
grey illumination fills the car and spreads everywhere with
blue
images
which pass in a throng, like the inexact memory of
inexorable justice : it is the sky ; through the windows you can
a
smile,
like
a half forgotten word of which you can only
still see layer on layer of sky because we're going up Eliphar
remember
the
first syllable and the best thing you can do is
~ill and you can see clearly between the two slopes, on the
tum
your
eyes
away and think about something else, about
right as far as the sea, on the left as far as the airfield. No
that man half-lying down on the seat opposite me, there. His
smoking-not even a ,utlM·
blue-eyed, terra cotta face. The whole right si~ of his body has
I lean my hand on the seat but pull it back hurriedly : it
sunk, the right arm is stuck to the body, the right side hardy
exfm. This thing I'm sitting on, leaning my hand on, is called
lives, it lives with difficulty,with avarice, as if it were paralysed.
a seat. They made it purposely for people to sit on, they took
But on the whole left side there is a little parasitic existence
leather, springs and cloth, they went to work with the idea
which proliferates ; a chancre : the arm begins to tremble
of making a seat and when they finished, 1/,at W'dS what they
then is raised up and the hand at the end is stiff. Then the hand
had made. 1ney carried it here, into this car and the car is now
169
168

-nie;

and

begins to tremble too and when it reaches the height of the
skull, a finger stretches out and begins saatching the scalp
with a nail. A sort of voluptuous grimace comes to inhabit
the right side of the mouth and the left side stays dead. 1ne
windows rattle, the arm shakes, the nail saatches, scratches,
the mouth smiles under the staring eyes and the man tolerates,
hardly noticing it, this tiny existence which swells his right
side, which has borrowed his right arm and right cheek to
bring itself into being. The conductor blocks my path.
"Wait until the car stops.,.
But I push him aside and jump out of the tramway. I couldn't
stand any more. I could no longer stand thm_e ~ so close.
I push open a gate, go in, airy creatures are bounding and
leaping and perching on the peaks. Now I recognizemyself,
I know where I am : I'm in the park. I drop onto a bench between
great black tree-trunks, betweenthe black, knotty hands reaching
towards the sky. A tree scrapes at the earth under my feet with
a black nail. I would so like to let myself go, forget myself,
sleep. But I can't, I'm sufgcariug: existence penetrates me
everywhere, througli the eyes, the nose, the mouth....
And suddenly,.s\lddenly, the veil is tom 1.way,I have understood,I have seen.

I can't say I feel relieved or satisfied; just the opposite, I
am crushed.~nly my goal is reached : I know what I wanted
to know ; I vf! understood all that has happened to me since
January. The Nausea has not left me and I don't believe it will
leave me so soon ; but I no longer have to bear it, it is no longer
an illness or a passing fit : it is I.
So I was in the park just now. 1ne roots of the chestnut tree
were sunk in the ground just under my bench. I couldn't

remember it was a root any more. The words had vanished
and with them the significanceof things, their methods of use,
and the feeble points of reference which men have traced on
their surface. I was sitting, stooping forward, head bowed,
alone in front of this black, knotty mass, entirely beastly,
which frightened me. Then I had this vision.
It left me breathless. Never, until these last few days, had I
understood the meaning of " existen~ ... I was like the others,
like the ones walkingalong the seashore, all dressed in their
ulgreen ; that
spring finery. I said, like them, •• The oc:ean/
it existed
white speck up there u a seagull,,. but I didn't f~t
or that the seagull was an " existing seagull " ; usually existence
say
hides itself. It is there, around us, in us, it is w, e~•t
two words without m.entio~g_ !;_but ~u can never touch it.
When I believed I was thinking about it. I must believe tliat
I was !!linking nothi!ig, mylt~was
empty, or there was just
one wcmlin m~the
word to be!'--Or else I was thinking
... how can I explain it ? I was thinking of ~ I was
telling myself that the sea belongedtotlie Jass or green objects,
or that the green was a part of the quality of the sea. Even when
I looked at lhings, I was miles from dreaming that they existed :
they looked like scenery to me. I picked them up in my hands,
they served me as tools; I foresaw their resistance. But that all
happened on the surface. If anyone had asked me what.existence
was, I would have answered, in good faith, that it was nothing,
simply an em_p~ form which was added to extemaf &Js
wi~
changing anyiliing in their narure. And then all of a
sudden, there it was, cfear as day: existence had suddenly unlook.of an abstract~ry
:
veileditself. It had lost the harmless
it was the very paste of things, this root was kneaded into
existence. Or rather the root, the park gates, the bench, the
sparse grass, all that had vanished : the..div=si~ • lhmp,
their ipdividuality, were ~!YI.
an ap~~,
a veneer. This

170

171

6.oop.m.

t

veneer had melted, leaving soft, monstrous masses all in disorder-naked, in a frigJiffiir,'
Obscenenakedness. ::::J
I kept myself from making the slightest movement, but I
didn't need to move in order to see, behind the trees, the blue
columns and the lamp-posts of the bandstand and the Velleda,
in the midst of a mountain of laurel. All these objects ... how
can I explain ? They inconvenienced me ; I would have liked
th_emto exist less str0ngly, more dryly, in a more abstract way,
with more reserve. The chesmut tree pressed itself against my
eyes. Green rust covered it half-way up ; the bark, black and
swollen, looked like boiled leather. The sound of the water
Fountain sounded in my ears, made a nest
in the Masquer-et
there, filled them with signs ; my nostrils overflowed with a
green, putrid odour. All things, gently, tenderly, were letting
themselves drift into existence like those relaxed women who
b~t out laughing and say : " It's good to laugh," in a wet
vo~ce; they were parading, one in front of the other, exchanging
abJect secrets about their existence. I realiz.edthat there was no
half-way house between non-existence and this Aaunting
abundance_.If you existed, you had to exist all tlu way, as far
as mouldiness, bloatedness, obscenity were concerned. In
a_notherwort~, circl~ bars of ~usic keep their pure and rigid
lines. But existence 1s a deAect1on.Trees, night-blue pillars,
the happy bubbling of a fountain, vital smells, little heat-mists
Aoating in the cold air, a red-haired man digesting on a bench :
all ~is _somnolence,all these meals digested together, had its
coDllc~•de.... Comic ... no : it didn't go as far as that, nothing
that exists can be comic ; it was like a Aoating analogy, almost
entirely elusive, with certain aspects of vaudeville. We were
a...,heae,of livinR crea~
i~,
e~.it
~,
we hadn't ~ $1:ducsin:ason tQ Jx iliccc, ~e of us, each one,
c:oiilusea,
vaguely alarmed, felt in the way in relation to the
others. In du way : it was the only relationship I could establish
171

between these trees, these gates, these stones. In vain I tried
to countthe chestnut trees, to locau them by their relationship
to the Velleda, to compare their height with the height of the
plane trees : each of them escaped the relationship in which I
tried to encfose it, isolated itsel{, and overflowed. Of these
rdatio~s (wh.is;hI insisted on !!!Mfltainingjn ollkr. todeiay the
~lmL
of the hulll4Ul...m;wd, meas es, 91W1titi~, and
~-af9s}-I
felt myself to be the arbitrator; they no longer
d cir teeth into tnings. In du way, the chestnut tree there,
opposite me, a little to the left. In du way, the Velleda....
And I-soft, weak, obscene, digesting, juggling with dismal
thoughts-I, too, was In du way. Fortunately, I didn't feel
it, although I realiz.edit, but I was uncomfortable because I
was afraid of ~ling_it (even now I am afraid----Qfraidthat it
might catch me behind my head and lift me up like a wave).
I dreamed vaguely of killing myself to wipe out at least one
of !bcsesuperfluous .lives.But even my death would have been
In du way. In du wa1, my corpse, my blood on these stones,
bet'ftal these plants, at the back of this smiling garden. And
the decomposed flesh would have been In du way in the earth
which would receive my bones, at last, cleaned, stripped,
peeled, proper and clean as teeth, it would have been In tM
way: I was _{n du way;for eternity.
~e wo1,wug:luifis coming to life under my pen; a little
while ago, m the garden, I couldn't find it, but neither was I
looking for it, I didn't need it: I thought without words, on
things, wit/athings. Absurdity was not an idea in my head, or
the sound of a voice, only this long serpent dead at my feet
this wooden serpent. Serpent or claw or root or vulture's
what difference does it make. And without formulating anything clearly, I understood that I had found the key to Existaice,
the key to my a seas to my own life. In fact, all that I could
grasp beyond that returns to this fundamental absurdity.

won:

173

Absurdity : another word ; I struggle against words ; down
there I touched the thing. But I wanted to fix the absolute
character of this absurdity here. A movement, an event in the
tiny coloured world of men is only relatively absurd : by
relation to the accompanying circumstances. A madman'•
ravings, for example, are absurd in relation to the situation in
which he finds himself, but not in relation to his delirium. But
a little while ago I made an experiment with lhc absolute or
the ahs\lrd.Thisroot-there was notlifu&in relation to which
it was absurd. Oh, how can I put it in words ? Absurd : in
relation to the stones, the tufts of yellow grass, the dry mud,
the tree, the sky, the green benches. Absurd, irreducible;
nothing-not even .a profound, secret upheaval of nature-could explain it. Evidently I did not know everything, I had
not seen the seeds sprout, or the tree grow. But facedwith this
great wrinkled paw, neither ignorance nor knowledge was
important : th~ world of explanations and reasons is not the
it is clear y explained
world of existence. A !:ilcleis not .ahmrd,
oythe rotation o( a straight segment around one of its extremities. But neither does a circle qist. This root, on the other
hand, existe<fin such a way that I could not explain it. Knotty,
inert, nameless, it fascinated me, filled my eyes, brought me
back unceasingly to its own existence. In vain to repeat :
.. This is a root "-it didn't work any more. I saw clearly
that you could not pass from its function as a root, as a breathing
pump, to tAat,to this hard and compact skin of a sea lion, to
this oily, callous, headstrong look. The function explained
nothing : it allowed you to .wi.dmtand generally.!hat it was
a root, but not tluu o,u at all. This root, Wlttl its colour, shape,
its congealeo movement, was . . . below all explanation. Each
of its qualities escaped it a little, flowed out of it, half solidified,
almost became a thing ; each one was in w way in the root
and the whole stump now gave me the impression of un174

winding itself a little, denying its existence to lose itself in a
frenzied excess. I scraped my heel against this black claw : I
wanted to peel off some of the bark. For no reason at all, out
of defiance,to make the bare pink appear absurd on the tanned
leather : to play with the absurdity of the world. But, when I
drew my heel back, I saw that the bark was still black.
Black? I felt the word deflating, emptied of meaning with
extraordinary rapidity. Black? The root was not black, there
was no black on this piece of wood-there was •.. something
else : black, like 1he circl~ did not ai& I looked at the root :
was it more dum black or almostblack ? But I soon atopped
questioning myself because I had the feeling of knowing where
I was. Yes, I had already sautiniud innumerable objects, with
deep uneasiness. I had already tried-vainly-to
think somethem : and I had already felt their cold, inert qualities
thing a&,111
elude me, sfip through my fingers. Adolphe'• suspenders, the
other evening in the .. Railwaymen'• Rendezvous." They were
not purple. I saw the two inexplicable stains on the shirt. And
the stone--the well-known stone, the origin of this whole
business : it was not ..• I can't remember exactly juat what it
was that the stone refused to be. But I had not forgotten its
passiveresistance. And the hand of the Self-Taught Man; I held
it and shook it one day in the library and then I had the feeling
that it wasn't quite a hand. I had thought of a great white worm,
but that wasn't it either. And the suspidous transparency of
the glass of beer in the Caf~ Mably. Suspidous : that'a what
they were, the sounds, the smells, the tastes. When they ran
quickly under your nose like startled hares and you didn't pay
too much attention, you might believe them to be simple and
reassuring, you might believe that there was real blue in the
world, real red, a real perfumeof almonds or violets. But as
soon as you held on to them for an instant, this feeling of
comfort and aecurity gave way to a deep uneasiness: coloun,

•1s

tastes and smells were never real, never themselves and nothing
but themselves. The simplest, most indefinable quality had
too much content, in relation to itself, in its heart. That black
against my foot, it didn't look like black, but rather the confused
effort to imagine black by someone who had never seen black
and who wouldn't .lnow how to stop, who would have imagined
an ambiguous being beyond colours. It lookedlike a colour,
but also . . . like a bruise or a secretion, like an oozing-and
something else, an odour, for example, it melted into the odour
of wet earth, warm, moist wood, into a black odour that spread
like varnish over this sensitive wood, in a flavour of chewed,
sweet fibre. I did not simply see this black : sight is an abstract
invention, a simplified idea, one of man's ideas. That black,
amorphous, weakly presence, far surpassed sight, smell and
taste. But this richness was lost in confusion and finally was
no more because it was too much.
This moment was extraordinary. I was there, motionless
and icy, plunged in a horrible ecswy. But something fresh had
just appeared in the very heart of this ecstaSy; I understood
the Nausea, I possessed
it. To tell the truth, I did not formulate
my discoveries to myself. But I think ~t wo~ld ~ eas~ for me
to put them in words now. The essenttal thing 1s connngency.
I mean that one cannot defi_neexistence as necessi~ To exisr
is simply co he tlure ; those who exist fet inemselves be encountettd but you can never deduce anything from them. I
believe ~ are people who have understood this. Only they
tried to overcome this contingency by inventing a necessary,
causal being. But no nece$5acy~ can explain existence :
contingent)' is not a delusion, a probability which can be
dissipated ; it is the abM>lute,consequendy, the perfect free
gift. All is free, this park, tl1is city and myself. When ~ou
realize that, it turns your heart upside down and everything
begins to float, as the other evening at the .. Railwaymen~
1-,6

Rendezvous": here is Nausea; here there is what those bastards
-the ones on the Coteau Vert and oth~
to_hide trom
themselYCS.
lrith iheir idea of their right$. But what a poor
lie : no one has any rights ; they are entirely free, like od1er
men, they cannot i.ucceed in not feeling superfluous. And in
d~,
secredy, ~ are s,q,e,f/uou.s
1 that is to say~ amw:pnous.ivague, and sad.
llow ong will this fascination last ? I was the root of the
chestnut tree. Or rather I ·wasentirel conscious o tts existence.
Still detached from it-since
was conscious oi it-yet lost in
it, nothing but it. An uneasy consciencewhich, notwithstanding,
let itself fall with all its weight on this piece of dead wood.
Time had stopped : a small black pool at my feet ; it was
impossible for something to come after that moment. I would
have liked to tear myself from that atrocious joy, but I did not
even imagine it would be possible ; I was inside ; the black
stump did nor move, it stayed there, in my eyes, as a lump of
food stick.cin the windpipe. I could neid1er accept nor refuse
it. At what a cost did I raise my eyes ? Did I raise them ? Radier
did I not obliterate myself for an instant in order to be reborn
in die following instant with my head dirown back and my
eyes raised upward ? In fact, I was not even conscious of the
transformation. But suddenly it became impossible for me to
think of the existence of the root. It was wiped out, I could
repeat in vain : it exists, it is still there, under the bench, against
my right foot, it no longer meant anything. Existence is not
~which
lets itself be thought of from ulimrice dt.mu:;t
•nvade you suddenlx., m:LSteryou, weigh heavily on your heart
like a great motionless beast-or else d1ereis nothing more at all.
There was nod1ing more, my eyes were empty and I was
spellbound by my deliverance. 1nen suddenly it began to move
before my eyes in light, uncertain motions : the \\ind was
shaking the top of die tree.
171

It did not displease me to sec a movement, it was a change
from these motionless beings who watched me like staring
eyes. I told myself, as I followed the swinging of the branches:
movements never quite exist, they are passages, intermediaries
between two existences, moments of weakness, I expected
to sec them come out of nothingness, progressively ripen,
blossom : I was finally going to surprise beings in the process
of being bom.
No more than three seconds, and all my hopes were swept
away. I could not attribute the passage of time to these branches
groping around like blind men. This idea of passage was still
an invention of man. The idea was too transparent. All these
paltry agitations, drew in on themselves, isolated. They overflowed the leaves and branches everywhere. They whirled
about these empty hands, enveloped them with tiny whirlwinds. Of course a movement was something different from a
tree. But it was still an absolute. A thing. My eyes only encountered completion. The tips of the branches rustled with
existence which unceasingly renewed itself and which was
never born. The existing wind rested on the tree like a great
bluebottle, and the tree shuddered. But the shudder was not
a nascent quality, a passing from power to action ; it was a
thing ; a shudder-thing flowed into the trtt, took possession
of it, shook it and suddenly abandoned it, going funhcr on
to spin about itself. All was fullness and all was active, there
was no weakness in time, all, even the least pcn:eptiblc stirring,
was made of existence. And all these existrnts which bustled
about this tree came from nowhere and were going nowhere.
Suddenly they existed, then suddenly they existed no longer :
existence is without memozy ; of the vanished it retains nothing
infinitely, in
-not even a memory. ~ uccywh~
excess, for ever and everywhere ; cxistcncc-wliicli is limited
only li"yexistence. I sank down on the bench, stupefied, stunned

blossomby this profusion of beings without orig~: ~here
my very
ings hatchings out, my ears buzzed wtth CX1Stenc:e,
ftesh throbbed and opened, abandoned itself to the universal
I thought, why so
But V.:hY..
burgeoning. It was ~t.
good _areso
~t
?
alike
look.
all
they
since
many existences,
many duplicates of trees ? So many cxistencesmissed, obsnnatcly
begun again and again missed-like the awkward efforts of an
insect fallen on its back? (I was one of those efforts.) That
abundancedid not give the effect of generosity, just the opposite.
dismal, ailing, embarrassed at itself. Those trceS, those
lt
great clumsy bodies. . . . I beg~ to laugh_beca~ I suddenly
thought of the formidable spnngs described m books, full
of aackings burstings, gigantic explosions. There were
those idiots 'who came to tell you about will-power and
struggle for life. Hadn't they ever seen a beast or a tree ? This
plane-tree with its scaling bark, this half-rotten oak, they
wanted me to take them for rugged youthful endeavour surging
towards the sky. And tltat root ? I would have undoubtedly
had to represent it as a voracious claw tearing at the earth,
. .
devouring its food ?
Impossible to sec things that way. Weaknesses, fradnes, yes.
The trees floated. Gushing towards the sky ? Or rather a
collapse• at any instant I expected to see the tree-trunks shrivel
like we~ wands, crumple up, fall on the ground in a soft,
folded, black heap. Tliey did not want.to exist, _onlythey ,could
not help themselves.'Sothey quietly nunded thell' own business ;
the sap rose up slowly through the structure, half rel~ctant,
and the roots sank slowly into tl1e earth. But at each instant
they seemed on the verge of leaving everything the~ ~d
obliterating themselves. Tired and old, they kept on CXJSbng,
against the grain, simply because they were too weak to _die,
because death could only come to tl1em from the outside :
strains of music alone can proudly carry their own death within

178

179

was

d1emselves like an internal necessity : onJy they don't exist.
Every existing thing is born without reasQJlaJ?_~lon15
itself out
of weakness and dies by chance. I feanedback and closed my
eyes. But the Tniiges,orewarned, immediately leaped up and
filled my closed eyes with existences: existence is a fullness
'\!hich man can never abandon.
Strange images. They represented a multitude of things. Not
real things, other things which looked like them. Wooden
objects which looked like chairs, shoes, other objects which
looked like plants. And then two faces : the couple who were
eating opposite to me last Sunday in the Brasserie Vezelize.
Fat, hot, sensual, absurd, with red ears. I could see the woman's
neck and shoulders. Nude existence. Those twO-it suddenly
gave me a tum-those two were still existing somewhere in
Bouville ; somewhere-in the midst of smells ?-this soft
throat rubbing up luxuriously against smooth stuffs, nestling
in lace ; and the woman picturing her bosom under her blouse,
thinking : " My titties, my lovely fruits," smiling mysteriously,
attentive to the swelling of her breasts which tickled •.• then
I shouted and found myself with my eyes wide open.
Had I dreamed of this enormous presence ? It was there, in
the garden, toppled down into the trees, all soft, sticky, soiling
everything, all thick, a jelly. And I was inside, I with the
garden. I w-c1S frightened, furious, I thought it was so stupid,
so out of place, I hated this ignoble mess. Mounting up,
mounting up as high as the sky, spilling over, filling everything with its gelatinous slither, and I could see depths upon
depths of it reaching far beyond the limits of the garden, the
houses, and Douville, as far as the eye could reach. I was no
longer in Douville, I was nowhere, I was floating. I ·was not
surprised, I knew it was the World, d1e naked World suddenly
reveale· itself, and I choked with rage at this gross, absurd
being. You couldn't even wonder where all that sprang from,
18o

or how it was that a world came into.
ce ruw:t.rhan
~It didn't make sense, the World was everywhere,
m front, behind. There had been nothing kfon it. Nothing.
There had never been a moment in which it could not have
existed. That was what worried me : of course there was no
rtason for this flowing larva to exist. But it was ~sil,h
for
it not to exist. It was unthinkable: to imagine nomingness you
had to be there already; in the midst of the World, eyes wide
open and alive ; nothingness was onJy an idea in my head, an
existing idea floating in this immensity : this nothin.,gn~ had
not come kfore existence, it was an existence.likeaoy omer.and
appeared after many others. I shouted " filthI what rotten
filthI " and shook myself to get rid of this sticky filti!, but it
held fast and there was so much, tons anif tons of existence,
endless : I stifled at the depths of this immense wearines.,.And
men suddenly the p:ark emptied as through a gttat hole, the
World disappeared as it had come, or else I v.·okeup--in any
case, I saw no more of it ; nothing was left but the yellow earth
around me, out of which dead branches rose upward.
I got up and went out. Once at the gate, I turned back. Then
smiled at~- I leaned against the gate and watched
the _garden
ror a long time. The smile of the trees, of the laurel, meant
something ; dtat was the real secret of existence. I remembered
one Sunday, not more than three "·eeks ago, I had already
detected everywhere a sort of conspiratorial air. Was it in my
intention ? I felt with boredom that I had no v.-a_y
of understanding. No way. Yet ii was there, waiting, looking at one.
It was there on the trunk of the chesmut tree . • • it v..1sdu
chestnut tree. Things-you might have called them thoughts-which stopped halfway, which were forgotten, which forgot
what they wanted to think and which stayed like that, hanging
about with an odd little sense which was beyond them. 'That
little sense annoyed me : I co,Jd Mt understand it, even if I
181

could have stayed leaning against the gate for a century ; I
had learned all I could know about existence. I left, I went
back to the hotel and I wrote.

Nig!,t:
I have made my decision : I have no more reason for staying
in Bouville since I'm not writing my book any more; I'm
~ to live in Paris, I'll take the five o'clock train, on Sanmlay
I'll see Anny ; I think we'll spend a few days together. Then
I'll come back here to settle my accounts and pack my trunks.
By March 1, at the latest, I will be definitely installed in Paris.

Friday:
In the " Railwaymen's Rendezvous," My train leaves in
twenty minutes. The gramophone. Strong feelingof adventure.

Saturday:
Anny opens to me in a long black dress. aturally, she does
not put out her hand, she doesn't say hello. Sullenly and
quickly, to get the fonnalities over with, she says:
" Come in and sit down anywhere-except on the armchair
near the window!'
It's really she. She lets her arms hang, she has the morose
face which made her look like an awkward adolescent girl.
But she doesn't look like a little girl any more. She is fat, her
breasts are heavy.
She closes the door, and says meditatively to herself:
11
I don't know whether I'm going to sit on the bed... ,"
inally she drops on to a sort of chest covered with a carpet.
Her walk is no longer the same : she moves with a majestic
ib

" Tiiat's where you're mistaken."
" Not I. Anyhow, it doesn't matter. rm glad to know that
it exists, that it measuresthe exact ten-millionth part of a quarter
of a meridian. I think about it every time they start taking
measurements in an apartment or when people sell me doth
by the yard."
"Is that so?" I say coldly.
" But you know, I could vcr:I.well think of ,l'.OU only as an
~tract virtue, a sort oflimit. You should be grateful to me for
remembering your face each time."
Here we are back to these alexandrine discussions I had to
go through before when in my heart I had the simplest, commonest desires, such as telling her I loved her, taking her in
my arms. Today I have no such desire. Except perhapsa desire
to be quiet and to look at her, to realize in silence all the importance of this extraordinary event : the presence of Anny opposite
me. Is this day like any other day for her ? Her hands are not
trembling. She must have had something to tell me the day
she wrote-or perhaps it was only a whim. Now there has
been no question of it for a long time.
Anny suddenly smiles at me with a tenderness so apparent
that tears come to my eyes.
" I've thought about you much more often than that yard of
platinum. There hasn't beena day when I haven't thought of
you. And I remembered exactlywhat you looked like-every
detail."
She gets up, comes and rests her arms on my shoulders.
" You complain about me, but you daren't pretend you
remembered my face."
"That's not fair," I say," you know I have a bad memory."
"You admit it: you'd forgotten me completely. Would you
have known me in the street ? "
" aturally. It's not a question of that."
r8J

past resentments fully alive. Just the opposite for me, all is
drowned in poetic impression; I am lady for all concessions.
Suddenly she says in a toneless voice :
.. You see, I'm getting fat, I'm getting old. I have to take
care of myself.''
Yes. And how wearyshe looksI Just as I am about to speak,
she adds:
" I was in the theatre in London.''
" With Candler ? "
"No, of course not with Candler. How like you I You had
it in your head that I was going to act with Candler. How many
times must I tell you that Candler is the orchestra leader ?
No, in a little theatre, in Soho Square.We played Tll4Emperor
Jonu, some Synge and O'Casey, and Britannii:us.''
"Britannii:us?" I say, anwed .
.. Yes, Britannii:us.I quit because of that. I was the one
who gave them the idea of putting on Britanninu and they
wanted to make me play Junie.''
"Really?"
"Well, naturally I could only play Agrippine.''
.. And now what are you doing ? "
I was wrong in asking that. Life fades entirely from her
face.Still she answers at once :
" I'm not acting any more. I travel. I'm being kept."
She smiles:
"Oh, don't look at me in that solicitous way. I always told
you it didn't make any difference to me, beingkept. Besides,
he's an old man, he isn't any trouble.''
"English?"
"What does it matter to you?" she says, irritated. "We're
not going to talkabout him. He has no importance whatsoever
for you or me. Do you want some tea ? "
She goes into the bathroom. I hear her moving around, rattling
187

my shoulders, your mania for talking to yourself. You're still
reading Michelet's History. And a lot of other things.... "
This 20£yund interest which she btiD&lto ~.c.temal essence
and her to indifference to all
t can ha~
to me in this
li ~d
then this curious affectation, at once charming and
pedantic---end this way of suppressing from the very outset
all the mechanical formulas of politeness, friendship, all that
makes relationships between people easier, forever obliging
her partners to invent a r6le.
She shrugs:
"Yes, I have changed," she says dryly," I have changed in
every way. I'm not the same person any more. I thought you'd
notice it as soon as you saw me. Instead you talk to me about
Michelet's History.''
She comes and stands in front of me.
" We'll see whether this man is as strong as he pretends.
Guess : how have I changed ? "
I hesitate ; she taps her foot, still smiling, but sincerely

annoyed.

••Therewas so thing that tormented you before. Or at
least you pretended it did. And now it's gone, disappeared.
You should notice it. Don't you feel more comfortable?"
I dare only to answer no : I am, just as before, sitting on the
edge of the chair, careful to avoid ambushes, ready to conjure
away inexplicablerages.
She sits down again.
"Well," she says, nodding her head with conviction, "if
you don't understand, it's because you've forgotten things.
More than I thought. Come on, don't you remember your
misdeeds any more ? You came, you spoke, you went : all
contrarily. Supposing nothing had changed: you would have
come in, there'd have been masks and shawls on the wall, I'd
have been sitting on the bed and I'd have said (she throws her
190

Oh," she says with crushing scorn, " intellectual changesI
I've changed to the very whites of my eyes.''
To the very whites of her eyes.... What stanles me about
her voice 1 Anyhow, I suddenly give a jump. I stop looking
for an Anny who isn't there. This is the girl, here, this fat girl
with a ruined look who touches me and whom I love.
11
I have a sort of ... physical certainty. I feel there are no
I feel
more,perfectmoments. I feel it in my legs when I 11.-alk.
it all the time, even when I sleep. I can't forget it. There has
never been anything like a revelation ; I can't say : starting on
such and such a day, at such a time, my life has been transformed. But now I always feel a bit as if I'd suddenly seen it
yesterday. I'm dazzled, uncomfortable, I can't get used to it."
She says these words in a calm voice with a touch of pride
at having changed. She balances herself on the chest with
extraordinary grace. Not once since I came has she more
strongly resembled the Anny of before, the Anny of Marseilles.
She has caught me again, once more I have plunged into her
strange universe, beyond ridicule, affectation, subtlety. I have
even recovered the little fever that always stirred in me when
I was with her, and this bitter taste in the back of my moutl1.
Anny unclasps her hands and drops her knee. She is silent.
A concerted silence, as when, at the Opera, the stage is empty
for exactly seven measures of music. She drinks her tea. 1nen
she puts down her cup and holds herself stiffly, leaning her
claspedhands on the back of the chest.
Suddenly she puts on her superb look of Medusa, which I
loved so much, all swollen with hate, twisted, venomous.
Anny hardly changes expression ; she changes faces ; as the
actors of antiquity changed masks : suddenly. And each one
of the masks is destined to create atmosphere, to give tone to
what follows. It appears and stays without modification as she
speaks. Then it falls, detached from her.
193
11

She stareS at me without seeming to see me. She is going to

speak.
I expect a tragic speech, heightened to the dignity of
her mask, a funeral oration.
She does not say a single word.
•• I outlive mpf."
11ie tone does not correspond in any way to her face. It
is not tragic, it is ... horrible : it expresses a dry despair, without tears, without pity. Yes, something in her has irremediably
dried out.
The masks falls, she smiles.
•• rm not at all sad. I am often amazed at it, but I was wrong:
why should I be sad ? I used to be capable of rather splendid
,EY§ions..l hated my mother passionately. And you," she says
defiantly, '" I loved you passionately."
She waits for an answer. I say nothing.
.. All that is over, of course.,.
.. How can you tell ? ,.
.. , know. I know that I shall never again meet anything or
anybody who will inspire me with passion. You know, it's
quite a job starting to love somebody. You have to have
energy, generosity, blindness. There is even a moment, in the
very begiMing, when you have to jump across a precipice :
if you think about it you don't do it. I know I'll never jump
again.''
.. Why?"
She looks at me ironically and does not answer.
.. Now," she says,"'I live surrounded with my dead passions.
I try to recapture the fine fury that threw me off the founh
floor, when I was twelve, the day my mother whipped me."
She adds with apparent inconsequence, and a far-away look :
"'It isn't good for me to stare at things too long. I look at
them to find out what they are, then I haw to tum my eyes
away quickly...

.. Why?"
.. ~di~1Wst me."
It would ; most seem ... There are surely similarities, in any
case. It happened once in London, we had separately thought
the same things about the same subjectS, almost at the same
time. I'd like so much to ... But Anny's mind takes many
turnings, you can never be sure you've understood her completely. I must get to the heart of it.
•• Listen, I want to tell you something : you know, I never
quite knew what perfect moments were ; you never explained
them to me."
.. Yes, I know. You made absolutely no effort. You sat beside
me like a lump on a log."
.. , know what it cost me."
•• You deserved everything that happened to you, you were
very wicked ; you annoyed me with your stolid look. You
seemed to say : I'm normal ; and you practically breathed
health, you dripped with moral well-being."
.. Still, I must have asked you a hundred times at least what
a .....
.. Yes, but in what a tone of voice," she says, angrily ;
" you condescended to inform yourself, and that's the whole
truth. You were kindly and distrait,like the old ladies who used
to ask me what I was playing when I was little. At heart," she
says dreamily,•• 1 wonder if you weren't the one I hated most."
She makes a great effort to collect herself and smiles, her
cheeks still flaming. She is very beautiful•
" I want to explain what they are. I'm old enough now to
talk calmly to old women like you about my childhood games.
Go ahead, talk, what do you want to know ? "
.. What they were.''
.. I told you about the privileged situations ,?"
" I don't think so.''
19s

" Yes;• she says with assurance. " It was in Aix, in that
square, I don't remember the name any more. We were in the
courtyard of a caf~ in the sun, under orange parasols. You
don't remember : we drank lemonade and I found a dead fly
in the powdered sugar."
" Ah yes, maybe ... "
" Well, I talked to you about that in die caf~. I talked to yOll
about it 1 propos of the big edition of Michelet's His10ry,the
one I had when I was litde. It was a lot bigger than this one
and the pages were livid, like the inside of a mushroom. When
my father died, my Uncle Joseph got his hands on it and took
away all the volumes. Titat was the day I called him a dirty
pig and my mother whipped me and I jumped out the window.''
"Yes, yes ... you must have told me about that HislOryof
Franu. ... Didn't you read it in the attic l You see, I remember.
You see, you were unjust when you accused me of forgetting
everythinga litde while ago."
" Be quiet. Yes, as you remember so well, I carried those
enormous books to the attic. There were very few pictures in
them, maybethree or four in each volume. But each one had
a big page all to itself, and the other side of the page was blank.
Titat had much more effect on me than the other pages where
they'd arranged the text in two columns to save space. I had
an extraordinary love for those pictures ; I knew them all by
heart, and whenever I read one of Michelet's boob, I'd wait for
them fiftypages in advance ; it always seemed a miracle to find
them again. And then there was something better : the scene
they showed never had any relation to the text on the next page,
you had to go looking for the event thiny pages farther on."
"I beg you, tell me about the perfect moments."
" I'm talking about~vileged
situations.. They were the
ones the pictures told~
I called them privileged, I told
myself dley must havebeenterribly important to be made the
196

" So you realized that theft were always women in tears,
or a red-headed man, or something else to spoil your eft"ects? "
"Yes, naturally," she answers without enthusiasm.
" Isn't that it ? "
" Oh, you know, I might have resigned myself in the end
to the clumsiness of a red-headed man. After all, I was always
interested in the way other people played their pam . . . no,
it's that ... "
" That there are no more privileged situations ? "
" That's it. I used to think that hate or love or death descended
on us like tongues of fire on Good Friday. I thought one could
radiate hate or death. What a mistakeI Yes, I really thought
that ' Hate ' existed, that it came over people and raised them
above themselves. Naturally, I am the only one, I am the one
who hates, who loves. But it's always the same thing, a piece
of dough that gets longer and longer . . . everything loob so
muchalike d1atyou wonder how people got the idea ofinventing
names, to make distinctions."
She thinks as I do. It seems as though I had never left her.
" Listen carefully," I say, " for the past moment I've been
thinking of something that pleases me much more than the
r6le of a milestone you generously gave me to play : it's that
~•~ £,hangedto ether and in the same~I like that better,
you know, than to see you going farther and farther away
and being condemned to mark your point of departure forever.
All that you've told me-I came to tell you the same thingd10ugh with other vrords, of course. We meet at the arrival.
I can't tell you how pleased I am."
"Yes?" she says gently, but with an obstinate look." Well,
I'd still have liked it better if you hadn't changed ; it was more
convenient. I'm not like you, it rather displeases me to know
that someone has thought the same things I have. Besides, you
must be mistaken."
:lOI

I tell her my adventures, I tell her about existencc-perha
at too great length. She listens carefully, her eyes wide
and her eyebrows raised.
When I finish, she looks soothed.
"Well, you're not thinking like me at all. You complaia
because things don't arrange themselves around you like a
bouquet of flowers, without your taking the slightest trouble
to do anything. But I have never asked as much : wan
action. You know, when we played adventurer and adventuresa:
you were the one who had adventures, I was the one who
made them happen. I said : I'm a man of action. Rememberf
Well, now I simply say: one can't be a man of action."
I couldn't have looked convinced because she became
animated and began again, with more energy :
" Then there's a heap of things I haven't told you, because
it would take too long to explain. For example, I had to be
able to tell myself at the very moment I took action that what
I was doing would have ... fatal results. I can't explain that to
you very well. ... "
" It's quite useless," I say, somewhat pedantically, " I've
thought that too."
She looks at me with scorn.
"You'd like me to believe you've thought exactly the
same way I have: you really amaze me."
I can't convince her, all I do is irritate her. I keep quiet. I
want to take her in my arms.
Suddenly she looks at me anxiously :
"Well, if you've thought about all that, what can you
do?"
I bow my head.
" I ... I outlive myself," she repeats heavily.
What can I tell her ? Do I know any reasons for living ?
I'm not as desperate as she is because I didn't expect much.
.20.2

you rarely come across anydung more than minerals, the least
&ightening of all cxistants.
I am going back to BouviJlc. The vegetation has only surrounded three sides of it. On the founh aide there is a great
hole full of black water which moves all by itself. The wind
whistles between the houses. The odours stay less time there
than anywhere : chased out to sea by the wind, they race along
the surface of the black water like playful mists. It rains. They
let plants grow between the gratings. Castrated, domesticated,
so fat that they are harmless. They have enormous, whitish
leaves which hang like cars. When you touch them it fttls
like cartilage, everything is fat and white in Bouvillc because
of all the water that falls from the sky. I am going back to
Bouville. How horrible I
I wake up with a start. It is midnight. Anny left Paris six
hours ago. The boat is already at sea. She is sleeping in a cabin
and, up on deck, the handsome bronze man is smoking
cigarettes.

T11Uday,
in Douville:
Is that what freedom is 1 Below me, the gardens go limply
down towards the dty, and a house rises up from each garden. I
sec the ocean, heavy, motionless,I see Bouvillc.It is a lovely day.
I am free : there is absolute) no more rcaso1Lfodhiug, all
th~cs I liave tried have given way and-I can•t imagine any
more of them. I am still fairly young, I still have enough strength
to start again. But do I have to stan again ? How much, in the
strongest of my terrors, my disgusts, I had counted on Anny
to save me I realized only now. My past is dead. The Marquis
de Rollebon is dead, Anny ca'™: back mi1x,to take all hope
~way. I am alone in this white, garden-~.
Alone
and free. But this freedom is rather like death.

109

To4!y my life is ending. By tomorrow I will have left this
to~ which spreads outatmy feet, where I have lived so long.
It will be nothing more than a name, squat, bourgeois, quite
French, a name in my memory, not as rich as the names of
Florence or Bagdad. A time will come when I shall wonder:
whatever could I have done all day long when I was in Bouville ? Nothing will be left of this sunlight, this afternoon, not
even a memory.
,Mrwhole life is behind me. I see it completely, I see its shape
and the slow movements which have brought me this far.
'There is little to say about it : a lost .,pme.. th.au. .all,Three
years ago I came solemnly to Bou-;lUe.I had lost the first round.
I wanted to play the second and I lost again : I lost the whole
game. At the same time, I learned that you al~
lose.2!;!I
lhc..nsca1s thinkth~ win. Now I am going to be like
y,
I am going to outlive myself. Eat, sleep, sleep, eat. Exist slowly,
softly, like ·theseu-ees;ne a puddle of water, like the red bench
in the streetcar.
The ausea has given me a short breathing spell. But I know
it wffi come back again : it is my normal state. Only today my
body is too exhausted to stand tt. lnvalf<fsaJsohave happy
moments of weakness which take away the consciousness of
their illness for a few hours. I am bored, that's all. From time
to time I yawn so widely that tears roll down my cheek. It
is a profound boredom, profound, the profound heart of
existence, the very matter I am made of. I do not neglect myself,
quite the contrary : this morning I took a bath and shaved.
Only when I think back over those careful little actions, I
cannot understand how I was able to make them : they are so
vain. Habit, no doubt, made them for me. They aren't dead,
they keep on busying themselves, gendy, insidiously weaving
their webs, they wash me, dry me, dress me, like nurses. Did they
also lead me to this hill ? I can't remember how I came any
~10

their disposal and every morning it comes back exactly the
same. They scarceJy doll it up a bit on Sundays. Idiots. It is
~ugnant to me to think that I am going to see their thick, selfsausfied faces. They make Jaws, they write popular novels, they
get married, they are fools enough to have children. And all
~is time, great, vague nature has slipped into their city, it has
mfiltrated everywhere, in their house, in their office, in them~I~. It doesn't ~ve, it stays quietly and they are full of it
ms1de,~breathe•~
and they don't see it, they imagine it to
be outs1de, twenty miles from the city. I see it, I see this nature
•• • I know that its obedience is idleness, I know it has no laws :
what they take for constancy is only habit and it can change
tomorrow.
What if ~methi~ ":'ere t~
1 What if something
suddenly started throbbing 1 Then they would notice it was
there and they'd think their hearts were going to burst. Then
what good would their dykes, bulwarks, power houses, furnaces
~d pile drivers be to them 1 It can happen any time, perhaps
nght now: die omens are present. For example, the father of
a family might go out for a walk, and, across the street, he'll
see something like a red rag, blown towards him by the wind.
And when die rag has gotten close to him he'll see that it is a
side ~f rott~ ~t, ~y
with dust, dragging itself along by
aawling, skipping, a piece of writhing flesh rolling in the
gutter, spasmodicallyshooting out spurts of blood. Or a mother
might look at her child's cheek and ask him : " What's diata pimple l " and see the flesh puff' out a little, split, open, and
at the bo~m of the ~lit an eye, a laughing eye might appear.
they rrught feel things gendy brushing against their bodies,
like the caresses of reeds to swimmers in a river. And
they will reali7.ethat their clothing bas become living things.
And someone else might feel something saatching in his
mouth. He goes to die mirror, opens his mouth : and his tongue

?r

212

is an enormous, live centipede, rubbing its legs together and
scraping his palate. He'd like to spit it out, but the centipede
is a part of him and he will have to tear it out with his own
bands. And a crowd of things will appear for which people will
have to find new names-stone-eye, great three-cornered arm,
toe-crutch, spider-jaw. And someone might be sleeping in
his comfortable bed, in his quiet, warm room, and wake up
naked on a bluish earth, in a forest of rusding birch trees, rising
red and white towards the sky like the smokestacks of Jowcttbouville, with big bumps half-way out of the ground, hairy and
bulbous like onions. And birds will fty around these birch trees
and pick at them with their beaks and make them bleed. Sperm
will flow slowly, gendy, from these wounds,spermmixed with
blood, '\ll,-arm
and glassy with little bubbles. Or else.nothing like
that will happen, there will be no appreciab e 9!Jllge, but one
morning people wi open their blinds and i;-;urprised by a son
of frightful sixth sense,brooding heavily over things and seeming
to pause. },lathing more than that : but for the little time it lasts,
there will be hundreds of suitjslcs. Yes I Let it change just a
little, just to see, I don't ask for anythingbetter.Then you will
see other people,suddenly plunged into solitude. Men all alone,
completely alone with horrible monstrosities, will run through
the streets, pass heavily in front of me, their eyes staring, fleeing
their ills yet carrying them with them, open-mouthed, with
their insect-tongue flapping its wings. Then rn burst out
laughing even though my body may be covered with filthy, infected scabs which blossom into flowers of flesh, violets, buttercups. I'll lean against a wall and when they go by I'll shout :
.. What's the matter with your science ? What have you done
with your humanism 1 Where is your dignity ? " I will not be
afraid-or at least no more than now. Will it not still be
existence, variations on existence ? All these eyes which will
slowly devour a face-they will undoubtedly be too much,
2.1)

it hardly existed and that the Nausea had spared it. I went and
sat down near the stove. The Journal de Douvillewas lying on
the table. I r~ched out and took it.

" Sawd l,y His Dog.''
" Yuurday wmina, M. Dul,oscof &mired.on,wa.r~kJ'cUI
l,orM from 1/,e Nagis Fair .. .''
A fat woman sat down at my right. She put her felt hat beside
her. Her nose was planted on her face like a knife in an apple.
Under the nose, a small, obscene hole wrinkled disdainfully.
She took a bound book from her bag, leaned her elbows on
the table, resting her face against her fat hands. An old man
was sleeping opposite me. I knew him : he was in the library
the evening I was so frightened. I think he was afraid too. I
thought : how far away all that is.
At four-fifteen the Self-Taug!tt Man came in. I would have
liked to shake hanclsancl say good-bye to him. But I thought
our last meeting must have left him with unpleasa.u memories :
he nodded distantly to me and, far enough away, he set down
a small white package which probably contained, as usual, a
slice of bread and a piece of chocolate. After a moment, he
came back with an illustrated book which he placed near his
package. I thought: I am seeing him for the last time. Tomorrow evening, the evening after tomorrow, and all the
following evenings, he will return to read at this table, eating
his bread and chocolate, he will patiently keep on with his rat's
nibbling, he will read the works of Nabaud, Naudeau, odier,
Nys, interrupting himself from time to time to jot down a
maxim in his notebook. And I will be walking in Paris, in Paris
streets, I will be seeing new faces: Wliat coulcl'ha_EPento me
while he would still be here, with the lamp lighting up his
heavy pondering face. I felt myself drifting back to the mirage
:u6

my eye : it was a hand, the small white hand which slid along
the table a little while ago. Now it was resting on its back,
relaxed,soft and sensual, it had the indolent nudity of a woman
sunning herself after bathing. A brown hairy object approached
it, hesitant. It was a thick finger, yellowed by tobacco ; inside
this hand it had all the grossness of a male sex organ. It stopped
for an instant, rigid, pointing at the fragile palm, then suddenly,
it timidly began to stro~..it.. I was not surprised, I was only
furious at the Selr.taugltt Man ; couldn't he hold himself back,
the fool, didn't he realize the risk he was running ~ He still
had a chance, a small chance : if he were to put both hands on
the table, on either side of the book, if he stayed absolutely
still, perhaps he might be able to escape his destiny this time.
But I knew he was going to miss his chance : the finger passed
slowly, humbly, over the inert flesh, barely grazing it, without
daring to put any weighton it : you might have thought it was
conscious of its ugliness. I raised my head brusquely, I couldn't
stand this obstinate little back-and-fonh movement any more :
I tried to catch the Self-Taught Man's eye and I coughed loudly
to warn him. But he closed his eyes, he was.smiling. His other
hand had disappeared under the table. The boys '\\'ere not
laughing any more, they had both turned pale. The brownhaired one pinched his lips, he was afraid, he looked as though
what was happening had gone beyond his control. But he did
not draw his hand away, he left it on the table, motionless, a
little curled. His friend's mouth was open in a stupid, horrified
look.
Then the Corsican began to shout. He had come up without
anyone hearing him and placed himself behind the Self-Taught
Man's chair. He was crimson and looked as though he were
going to laugh, but his eyes were flashing. I started up from
my chair, but I felt almost relieved: the waiting was too
unbearable. I wanted it to be over as soon as possible. I wanted
221

herself.Even if she lovedhim with all her heart, it would still
be the love of a dead woman. I had her last living love. But
there is still somethinghe can give her : pleasure.And if she is
fainting and sinking into enjoyment, there is nothing more
which attaches her to me. She takes her pleasureand I am no
more for her than if I had never met her ; she has suddenly
emptiedherselfof me, and all other consciousnessin the world
has also emptieditself of me. It seems funny. Yet I know that
I exist, that / am here.
Now when I say" I", it seemshollow to me. I can't manage
to feel myselfvery well, I am so forgotten. The only real thing
left in me is existencewhich feels it exists. I yawn, lengthily.
No one. ~oine Roquentin exists for no one. That amusesme. And just what is Antoine""Roquentin
? An abstraction.A
pale reflection of myself wavers in my consciousness.
AntoineRoquentin... and suddenlythe " I " pales,pales,and
fades out.
Lucid, static, forlorn, consciousness is walled-up; it
perpetuates itself. obody lives there any more. A little
while ago someonesaid " me," said "!Y consciousness.Who ?
Outside there were streets, alive with known smells and
colours.Now nothing is left but anonymouswalls, anonymous
consciousness.This is what there is : walls, and between
the walls, a small transparency,alive and impersonal. Consciousnessexists as a tree, as a blade of grass. It slumbers,
it grows bored. Small fugitive presencespopulateit like birds
in the branches. Populate it and disappear.Consciousnessforgotten, forsakenbetweenthese walls, under this grey sky. And
here is the senseof its existence: it is consciousof being superfluous.It dilutes,scatten itself, tries to lose itself on the brown
wall, along the lamp-post or down there in the evening mist.
But it neverforgets itself.That is its lot. There is a stifledvoice
which tells it : " The train leaves in two hours," and there is
u7

I count my money to pass the time.
Twelve hundred francs a month isn't enormous. But if I
hold myself back a little it should be enough. A room for 300
francs, 1 s francs a day for food : that leaves ,no francs for
petty cash, laundry, and movies. I won't need underwear or
clothes for a long while. Both my suits are clean, even though
they shine at the elbows a little : they'll last me three or four
years if I take care of them.
Good God I Is it / who is going to lead this mushroom
existence? What will I do all day long ? I'll take walks. I'll
sit on a folding chair in the Tuileries-or rather on a bench,
out of economy. I'll read in the libraries. And then what ? A
movie once a week.And then what ? Can I smoke a Voltigeur
on Sunday ? Shall I play aoquet with the retired old men
in the Luxembourg ? Thirty yearsold I I pity myself. There
are times when I wonder if it wouldn't be better to spend all
my 300,000 francs in one ~ after that ... But what good
would that do me? New clothes? Women? Travel? I've had
all that and now it's over, I don't feel like it any more : for what
I'd get out of it! A year from now I'd find myself as empty as I
am today, without even a memory, and a coward facing death.
Thirty years! And I.ft.400 francs in the bank. Coupons to
cash every month. Yet I'm not an old man! Let them give me
something to do, no matter what ... I'd better think about
something else, because I'm playing a comedy now. I know
very well that I don't want to do anything: to do something
is to create existenc:e--«id there's quite enough existence as
it is.
The truth is that I can't put down my pen : I think I'm going
to have the Nausea and I feel as though I'm delaying it while
writing. So I write whatever comes into my mind.
Madeleine, who wants to please me, calls to me from the
distance, holding up a record :
2.31

" Your record, Monsieur Antoine, the one you like, do you
want to hear it for the last time ? .,
"Please.''
I said that out of politeness, but I don't feel too well disposed
to listen to jazz. Still, I'm going to pay attention because, as
Madeleine says, I'm hearing it for the last time : it is very old,
even too old for the provinces ; I will look for it in vain in
Paris. Madeleine goes and sets it on the gramophone, it is going
to spin ; in the grooves, the steel needle is going to start jumping
md grinding and when the grooves will have spiralled it into
the centre of the disc it will be finished and the hoarse voice
singing "Some of these days., will be silent forever.
It begins.
To think that dim..are.idiots. who gct.ammlitio.n .f.amuhe
~Like my Aunt Bigeois : " Chopin's Preludes were
such a help to me when your poor uncle died.'' And the concert
halls overflow with humiliat'ed, outraged people who close
their eyes and try to tum their pale faces into receiving antennz.
1ney imagine that the sounds flow into them, 8'Wlet,nourishing, and that their sufferings become music, like Werther; they
think that beauty is compassionate to them. Mugs.
I'd like them to tell me w~er
they find this music compassionate. A while ago I was certainly far from swimming in
beatitudes. On the surface I was counting my money, mechanically. Underneath stagnat'ed all those unpleasant thoughts which
took the form of unformulated questions, mute astonishments
and which leave me neither day nor night. Thoughts of Anny,
of my wasted life. And then, still further down, Nausea, timid
as dawn.But there was no music then, I was morose and calm.
All the things around me were made of the same material as
I, a sort of messy suffering. The world was so ugly, outside
of me, these dirty glasses on the table were so ugly, and the
brown stains on the mirror and Madeleine's apron and the
232

And I, toot wanted to k. That is all I wanted ; this is the
last worcf.
the liottom of' all these attempts which seemed
without bonds, I find the same desire again : to drive existence
out of me, to rid the passing moments of their fat, to twist
them, dry them, purify myself, harden myself, to give back at
last the sharp, precise sound of a saxophone note. 1nat could
even make an apologue : there was a poor man who got in the
wrong world. He existed, like other people, in a world of
public parks, bistros, commercial cities and he wanted to
persuade himself that he was living somewhere else, behind
the canvas of paintings, with the doges of Tintoretto, with
Gozzoli's Florentines, behind the pages of books, with Fabrico
de) Dongo and Julien Sorel, behind the phonograph records,
with the long dry laments of jazz. And then, after making a
complete fool of himself, he understood, he opened his eyes,
he saw that it was a misdeal : he was in a bistro, just in front of
a glass of warm beer. He stayed overwhelmed on the bench;
he thought : I am a fool. And at that very moment, on the
other side of existence, in this other world which you can see
in the distance, but without ever approaching it, a little melody
began to sing and dance : " You must be like me ; you must
suffer in rhythm."
The voice sings :

Sonv of tlwe days
YOll'IJmissnv, Mn')'
Someone must have saatched the record at that spot because
it makes an odd noise. And there is something that clutches the
heart : the melody is absolutely untouched by this tiny coughing
of the needle on the record. It is so far--10 far behind. I understand that too : the disc is scratched and is wearing out, perhaps
the singer is dead; I'm going to leave, I'm going to take my
train. But behind the existence which falls from one present to
234

drowned in existence. Yet no one could think of me as I
think of them, with such gentleness. No one, not even Anny.
They are a little like dead people for me, a little like the
heroes of a novel ; th~y 1rve washed themselves of the sin of
• • g. Not complete y, o course,but as much as any man can.
·s idea suddenly knocks me over, because I was not even
hoping for that any more. I feel something brush against me
lighdy and I dare not move because I am afraid it will go away.
Something I didn't know any more : a sort of~The negress sings. Can you justify your existencethen~ Just
a little ? I feel extraordinarily intimidated. It isn't because I
have much hope. But I am like a man completely frozen after
a trek through the snow and who suddenly comes into a warm
~m. I think he would stay motionless near the door, still
cold, and that slow shudders would go right through him.
SOll14of dwe

"4ys
You'llmiss me,Aoney

Couldn't I 111.... Naturally, it wouldn't be a question of a
tune ... but coul(ln't I, in another medium? ... It would have
to be a book: I don't know how to do anything else. But not
a history book : history talks about what has existed-an existant
can never justify the existence of another existant. My error,
I wanted to resuscitate the Marquis de Rollebon. Another type
of book. I don't quite know which kind-but you would have
to guess, behind the printed !i,IWls,behind the pages, at something which would not exist, which would .beabov.c.cmg:gce.
A story, for example, something that could never happen, an
adventure. It would have to be beautiful and hard as steel and
make people ashamed of their existence.
I must leave, I am vacillating. I dare not make a decision.
If I were sure I had talent.... But I have never-11ever written
anything of that son. Historical articles, ya-lots of them. A
2)7

book. A novel. And there would be people who would read this
book and say : .. Antoine Roquentin wrote it, a red-headed man
who hung around cafa," and they would think about my life as
I think about the negress's : as something precious and almost
legendary. A book. Naturally, at first it would only be a troublesome, tiring work, it wouldn't stop me from existing or feeling
that I exist. But a time would come when the book would be
written, when it would be behind me, and I think that a little
of its claritymight fall over my past. Then, perhaps, becauseof
it, I could remember my life without repugnance. Perhaps one
day, thinking precisely of this hour, of this gloomy hour in
which I wait, stooping, for it to be time to get on the train,
perhaps I shall feel my heart beat faster and say to myself:
.. Tiiat was the day, that was the hour, when it all started."
And I might succeed-in the past, nothing but the past-m
accepting myself.
Night falls. On the second floor of the Hotel Printania two
windows have just lighted up. The building-yard of the New
Station smells strongly of damp wood : tomorrow it will rain
in Bouville.

I

-

I
,__.

I

I

r..
f :>d

.,

"
<

.. ~

A

.,
1

I
7

/;
~

"

)t

I

'I:-

1,,..

_,
,/

I 1/;,

✓

(
~

> .. ,..

J

Arendt
Sartre,
Nausea;

'"
,.

PQ2637.A82
.Jean Paul,

.N33 1964
1905-

